T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
March 2015
Vol. 68   No. 7
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Amanda Cockrell, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Claudia Nelson, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
March 2015
Vol. 68 No. 7
343  the BIg PICture
 
  The War That Saved My Life  by Kimberly Brubaker Bradley
344  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
347 •  Bunnies!!!  written and illus. by Kevan Atteberry
351 •  Smick!  by Doreen Cronin; illus. by Juana Medina
352 •  Audacity  by Melanie Crowder
368 •  Echo by Pam Muñoz Ryan
376 •  This Side of Home  by Renée Watson
380  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
381  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $103.00 or electronic $115.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2015 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from The War That Saved My Life copyright ©2015 by Josie Portillo and used by per-
mission of Dial Books for Young Readers.
March 2015 • 343
the BIg PICture
The War That Saved My Life
by Kimberly Brubaker Bradley
Ten-year-old Ada has never been outside her tiny, dirty London flat, due to her 
clubfoot; her abusive mother is so shamed by it that she won’t let Ada be seen in 
public. Six-year-old Jamie, Ada’s brother, goes out, though, and it’s through him 
that Ada learns about the pending evacuation of the local London kids before the 
war with Germany begins. Mam has no intention of sending Ada away (“Who’d 
want you? Nobody, that’s who”) but Ada (who has secretly been practicing walking 
in the flat) and Jamie escape to the evacuation train. 
Their countryside host, Susan Smith, suffers from depression over the loss 
of her best friend and housemate and initially greets the children with reluctance, 
but she feeds and clothes them and gradually begins to care for them. Warped by 
ten years of abuse and believing herself to be “rubbish,” Ada is similarly wary of 
Susan, resisting both her kindness and her suggestions that Ada’s clubfoot can be 
at least partially healed (“I wanted Mam to be like Susan. I didn’t trust Susan not 
to be like Mam”). The irresistible lure for Ada isn’t human but animal: she warms 
up to Butter, the fat pony in Susan’s field, and through Butter she gradually makes 
some human friends in her new home. 
Eventually Ada overcomes much of her mental anguish (though nights in 
the Anderson shelter send her into panic attacks, as the space reminds her of the 
roach-infested cupboard in which Mam used to lock her), even becoming a village 
hero after discovering a German spy. She suspects it’s all too good to be true, though, 
and she’s proven right when Mam, perturbed at being told she’s supposed to pay 
for Susan’s care, shows up to take Ada and Jamie back to London. Ada has come 
too far and become too strong to regress now, however, and despite the bombing 
of their London neighborhood and Susan’s home, the children and Susan finally 
find their happy ending. 
Skillful, smooth writing and taut pacing enable Bradley’s compelling 
plot to take center stage, and Ada’s tough journey from brokenness to healing is 
poignantly credible in its development and emotionally satisfying in its outcome. 
Characterization is sympathetic and authentic: Ada’s limited exposure to the outside 
world, her poverty, and her disability believably make her bewildered and angry 
as she encounters many overwhelming new experiences. Susan too is effectively 
portrayed; refreshingly, she’s no saint but a realistic woman trying to do the right 
thing despite having her own sadness and shortcomings to overcome.
The feel-good appeal of the rescue fantasy combines with the increasingly 
tense World War II backdrop to make this an effective page-turner. The book 
successfully evokes the very real fear that gripped coastal villages such as Susan’s 
344 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
in the face of what seemed like imminent invasion, and the horrors of warfare are 
clearly communicated through Ada’s narration as she witnesses the arrival of soldier 
survivors of Dunkirk and experiences air raids and bombings. While there is no 
author’s note to explain or elaborate, children with access to the internet, a library, 
and/or a knowledgeable adult will easily be able to fill any gaps. 
Ada’s unique perspective on her world, her disability, and her danger-filled 
time period may particularly resonate with kids who have faced their own hardships, 
while giving more fortunate youth fresh insights and plenty to think about and 
discuss. Lovers of historical and personal dramas, and fans of Michelle Magorian’s 
similarly themed Goodnight, Mr. Tom (BCCB 3/82), or of Nina Bawden’s or Robert 
Westall’s World War II–era novels, will also find much to love here. (See p. 349 for 
publication information.)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer
AdriAn, SuSAn Tunnel Vision. Dunne/St. Martin’s Griffin, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-04792-2 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-04791-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr.10-12
Eighteen-year-old Jacob Lukin made one drunken mistake at a friend’s party: he 
revealed his ability to tunnel psychically into the minds of other people. Now a 
top-secret government agency has taken over his life, forcing him use his gift to 
find fugitives, terrorists, hostages, and anyone else they want, including his own 
similarly talented grandfather. When Jacob starts to resist, the agency moves 
quickly to make him a prisoner, and he soon finds himself the subject of dangerous 
scientific experiments. Then he learns that the government plans to develop him 
into a weapon, and he knows he has to escape, even if means being on the run for 
the rest of his life. An action thriller with a cinematic feel, this novel is at times an 
entertaining, if predictable, page-turner, but it suffers from uneven pacing. The 
long spate in an underground lab aims to increase tension but mostly just drags, 
while plot-heavy final chapters go almost too fast, with several new villains and a 
long-lost, presumed-dead father introduced and dealt with all in the novel’s last 
fifty pages. Jacob’s narration keeps readers close to the emotional core of the story, 
though, and the novel may ultimately make an engaging escape for those willing 
to sit back and enjoy the ride.  AM 
March 2015 • 345
Albee, SArAh Why’d They Wear That? National Geographic, 2015 192p il-
lus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-1920-4 $28.90
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-1919-8 $20.00  
R Gr. 5-9
Clothing history overviews are dependably entertaining, providing almost limitless 
opportunities to gawk and giggle at fashion missteps over millennia. Here Albee 
raises the bar, keeping the cruise appealingly light-hearted and brisk, while never 
losing sight of her promise to consider the whys as well as the whats of fashion. 
Entries are generally brief, introduced by pun-enriched captioning and accompa-
nied by color photos and illustrations, but most go beyond description to include 
historical context. Among the best are those that demonstrate connections: add-
ing mordants to dye in India led to washable cotton clothing in the West, which 
led to improvement of hygiene; bug spray cans for World War II soldiers led to 
aerosol hair spray cans, which led to beehive hairdos; the advent of smallpox vac-
cinations brought two centuries of whimsical stick-on facial patches to an end. It’s 
hard to turn a page without encountering a noteworthy bit of trivia of the clever 
(toddlers’ padded “pudding caps” look like forerunners of the bicycle helmet) or 
yucky (murdered Archbishop Thomas Becket’s legendary hairshirt was actually 
just one of many vermin-infested layers) variety. A glossary would have been a 
welcome addition, as some terms slip through undefined within the text, but an 
index, sources for quotations, bibliography, and suggestions for further print and 
online reading are included.  EB
Alko, SelinA The Case for Loving: The Fight for Interracial Marriage; illus. by 
Sean Qualls and Selina Alko. Levine/Scholastic, 2015 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-545-47853-3 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
Ranking high among the anxieties of American segregationists was “mixing of the 
races” and a concomitant dilution of white racial “purity.” It’s therefore not difficult 
to understand why a small town in 1958 Virginia was not about to tolerate the 
marriage of black Mildred Jeter and white Richard Loving, even if it was legalized 
in permissive Washington, D.C.: “In the middle of the night, they were awoken 
from their sleep. It was the police! An officer shouted at Richard, ‘What are you 
doing with that woman?’” The Lovings resettled and began their family in D.C., 
but they challenged Virginia’s law and won their case before a unanimous Supreme 
Court in 1967 (“The times they were a-changin’”). Alko so skillfully pitches her text 
at an elementary-grade audience that the need to explain “unlawful cohabitation” 
in detail will probably not arise; children will be focused instead on the sadness, 
patience, and determination of a devoted couple who just want to live in their own 
hometown. Alko shares illustration duty with her husband, Qualls, blending styles 
in pencil, paint, and collage scenes. A clear depiction of place conveys the protago-
nists’ circumstances, and a hearts-and-flowers motif speaks to their aspirations. This 
touching selection should be as satisfying a love story as it is a civil rights tale.  EB
346 • The BulleTin
Antony, Steve Please, Mr. Panda; written and illus. by Steve Antony. Scholastic, 
2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-78892-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Mr. Panda offers doughnuts to a variety of critters, and though most of them are 
interested, not one of them asks politely. Mr. Panda, apparently a tyrant where 
manners are concerned, gives each of them the same brusque response: “No, you 
cannot have a doughnut. I have changed my mind.” When Mr. Panda makes his 
offer one last time (“Would anyone else like a doughnut?”), a courteous lemur 
asks, “May I have a doughnut . . . PLEASE, Mr. Panda?” and Mr. Panda rewards 
him with the whole box. It’s not entirely clear what’s going on with Mr. Panda, 
who doesn’t even like doughnuts, but the terse dialogue is funny to read aloud, 
and Mr. Panda’s gruffness and grumpy facial expression are a humorous contrast 
to his otherwise cuddly appearance and the general cheeriness. Young listeners, 
who might not always remember their own manners but who have high standards 
for justice, will likely also savor the abrupt way Mr. Panda shuts down the ruder 
animals. Antony’s illustrations are bold and orderly, featuring a parade of black and 
white supporting animal actors (penguin, skunk, ostrich, killer whale), along with 
the equally monochromatic (and pudgy) Mr. Panda and the topaz-eyed lemur. A 
subtly rippled light gray background helps keep the unadorned design clean and 
crisp, and all the monochrome serves to deliciously highlight the candy-colored 
doughnuts in their white bakery box. Use this in a panda- or manners-themed 
storytime, or simply serve it up with a side of doughnuts—but make the children 
say “please.”  JH
Appel, MArty Pinstripe Pride: The Inside Story of the New York Yankees. Simon, 
2015 [288p] illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1602-3 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1604-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-10
Plenty of sports enthusiasts would love to see the Yankees cut down to size, but 
this probably isn’t quite what they had in mind. Here former Yankees PR director 
Appel trims some 400 pages from his 2012 adult title Pinstripe Empire, offering a 
stripped-down but peppy new model for younger readers. He maps the exact route 
one would expect, lingering over the landmarks like Babe Ruth, the renowned 
stadiums (temporary and permanent), the salad days, and, yes, the lean years. He 
speaks with appropriate awe of the good guys, from Gehrig to Jeter, and lets the 
bad boys like Billy Martin and A-Rod largely off the hook with a shrug and a wink. 
There’s not a lot of broader baseball or historical context, but the reader here is 
likely to be a true believer, possibly with his or her own encyclopedic knowledge of 
the team and baseball history, or a skeptic who comes for the sheer joy of scoffing. 
Regardless, Appel’s enthusiasm is infectious, and readers who are simply looking for 
great anecdotes, or a window into what all the hoopla is about, will be well pleased. 
An index, bibliography, and list of team stats are appended.  EB 
March 2015 • 347
Atteberry, kevAn Bunnies!!!; written and illus. by Kevan Atteberry. Tegen/
HarperCollins, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-230783-5 $12.99  
R 2-5 yrs
A personable little monster is wandering through the woods, greeting whatever he 
sees, when he spots something terrifically exciting: “BUNNIES!!!” The bunnies 
understandably scatter at the approach of a yelling little monster, leaving Monster 
bereft (“Nooooo bunnies”). The same thing happens when the bunnies reappear, 
but eventually the buns are moved by the little guy’s sadness and come out to play 
with him—until he sees a new distraction in a flock of “BIRDIES!” The minimal 
text (which is entirely in-art dialogue) begs to be read aloud, and even the most 
novice practitioner will be able to follow font cues and draw on experience for the 
monster’s delighted screeches and disconsolate laments. Adults (and some kids, 
especially those with younger sibs) will immediately recognize the monster’s bunny-
scattering onslaught from toddler approaches to pets and other small animals, 
while youngsters will quickly rev up for loud participation in the jubilant cry of 
“BUNNIES!!” The digitally created art has a smooth, watercolor-type texture, with 
firm yet organic lines outlining the simple figures in the landscape; playfulness is 
the watchword throughout, with the bunnies glowing in Sweet Tart colors and the 
monster a big-eyed, puffball-tailed figure who’s threatening mostly because of his 
irresistible impulse to chase. The focused consistency of the background (collec-
tions of rhythmically vertical trees, particularly emphatic in the wide double-page 
spreads) and the animated expressiveness of the main events make this resemble 
a lively and engaging cartoon. While this is suitable for just about any readaloud 
occasion, you could definitely use this to bust an Easter storytime wide open, in 
the nicest possible way.  DS
bAnkS, AngelicA Finding Serendipity. Holt, 2015 [224p] illus.
ISBN 978-1-62779-154-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
When Tuesday McGillicuddy goes to check on her author mother’s progress, Ser-
endipity has disappeared, with only a mysterious box containing the words “The 
End” offering a clue to her whereabouts. Tuesday types her own story in hopes 
that it will bring her to her mother at The End, and her words take on the form 
of silver thread, encircling Tuesday and her loyal dog, Baxterr, and pulling them 
out the window into the night, setting them down at The Beginning. So begins 
Tuesday’s journey in a magic world overseen by a helpful if officious librarian and 
traversed by writers developing their own stories, where she envisions herself into 
her mother’s novels in hopes of proceeding through The Middle and to The End. 
Creative and heartwarming, this Australian import evokes some of the magic of 
Funke’s Inkheart (BCCB 3/04), exploring the trials and triumphs of the writing 
process and celebrating the power of imagination. Tuesday makes an admirable and 
appealing heroine, one who rollerskates through City Park and navigates to The 
End with equal determination, adapting to her situation and facing fearsome chal-
lenges with equanimity. More than the plentiful adventure and engaging characters 
(emphatically including the dog), it’s the language here that delights, with clever, 
convivial wordplay and an unabashed sense of joy; softly sketched spot art adds to 
the accessibility and the atmosphere. Give this to budding young writers ready to 
start at The Beginning.  AA 
348 • The BulleTin
benSon, kAthleen Draw What You See: The Life and Art of Benny Andrews. Clar-
ion, 2015 32p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-544-10487-7 $16.99  
Ad 5-9 yrs
Likely best known to young audiences as the illustrator of books such as Jim 
Haskins’ John Lewis in the Lead (BCCB 2/07), Benny Andrews was also an impor-
tant American artist of the twentieth century. Andrews chronicled people from his 
Georgia past, the lively New York street and arts life, and the civil rights movement, 
and he also pushed for inclusiveness in gallery shows and involved himself deeply 
in art education in schools and prisons. The text effectively traces the trajectory of 
Andrews’ life, but it’s fairly vague about the details of his achievements, and the 
sometimes choppy prose lacks the storytelling flair that would bring immediacy 
to the account. The illustrations are taken from Andrews’ paintings, and the full-
bleed images that fill the lanky pages and sometimes double-page spreads showcase 
Andrews’ figural strengths, folkloric echoes, and eye for composition; some partner 
better with their neighboring text than others, but they effectively convey the way 
Andrews drew on his life and surroundings for his art. This could be a useful addi-
tion to an art unit, or it would make an interesting pairing with Andrews-illustrated 
books to talk about the connection between fine art and illustration. An author’s 
note gives more about the painter; a list of source titles and a video are included, 
as is a timeline and details about the included paintings.  DS
biddulph, rob Blown Away; written and illus. by Rob Biddulph. Harper/
HarperCollins, 2015 34p
ISBN 978-0-06-236724-2 $17.99 
 R 4-6 yrs
When Penguin Blue flies his kite, it ends up flying him, along with some penguin 
pals who try to help. Then Wilbur, a seal, and Clive, a polar bear in a fishing raft, 
also find themselves towed along by the kite until it runs out of wind power over a 
remote, shark-encircled jungle island. Fortunately, Penguin Blue rigs up a parasail-
like contraption from leaves and vines and attaches it to Clive’s raft, and the wayward 
group makes it home (along with a stowaway monkey). The rhyming text scans 
efficiently, and it offers touches of wry amusement (“Don’t worry, Wilbur’s seen 
their plight/ . . . Oh, dear. It seems he’s joined the flight”). Geographically savvy 
youngsters may question what a polar bear is doing in the Antarctic setting, but most 
kids will just enjoy the fun of this literal flight of fancy. Biddulph’s stylized digital 
illustrations employ a limited palette of creams, blues, and grays for the Antarctic 
scenes, with scarlet and yellow accents in the kite, raft, and penguin markings, 
while greens dominate the jungle island scene and subtle canvas-like textures add 
warmth to the cool tones. The darkly outlined, streamlined figures of the penguins 
contrast nicely with the fluffy seal and chunky bear, and small details (a pair of red 
underpants from Wilbur’s clothesline get transported to the jungle and turn up on 
a monkey on the endpapers) add interest as well. This would be a comic partner 
with Judge’s Flight School (BCCB 6/14), and kite- or penguin-themed storytimes 
will get a boost from Penguin Blue.  JH
March 2015 • 349
bluMe, leSley M. M. Julia and the Art of Practical Travel; written and illus. with 
photographs by Lesley M. M. Blume. Knopf, 2015 [192p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75283-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75282-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75284-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
The Lancasters have lived in their stately mansion, Windy Ridge, since the days 
of George Washington. Now, in 1968, the only Lancasters left in the home are 
eleven-year-old Julia, her aunt Constance, and her grandmother, since Julia’s single 
mother has run away to embrace the hippie lifestyle. When Julia’s grandmother 
dies and the house must be sold, Aunt Constance packs up the car and she and 
Julia head out to find Julia’s mother. They start in New York City, where Julia ar-
ranges for the public humiliation of the tacky but wealthy woman who bought 
Windy Ridge, then travel to New Orleans, where they meet an elegant voodoo 
queen, and end up, after a few more road-trip adventures, in California, where Julia 
learns some uncomfortable truths about the life her mother has chosen. Along the 
way, she documents the significant moments of her trip with her trusty Brownie 
camera. This trip across weird America in the ’60s, seen through the eyes of a girl 
who understands the lines of propriety that separate audacious from obnoxious, 
is absorbing in its own right, and the close relationship between Julia and Aunt 
Constance adds appeal. The black and white photographs sprinkled throughout the 
text, edged with period-appropriate white frames and photo corners, don’t always 
match the textual descriptions exactly, but they do add a texture of sometimes 
humorous, sometimes poignant realism to the episodes. An interesting road trip 
is a hard thing to resist, a road trip into the past perhaps even more so; give this 
quick read to armchair travelers who appreciate quirkiness.  KC 
brAdley, kiMberly brubAker The War That Saved My Life. Dial, 2015 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4081-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 343, for review.
brAdley, SAndrA Henry Holton Takes the Ice; illus. by Sara Palacios. Dial, 
2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3856-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
Hockey is the center of the Holton family universe, and, just like all his family 
members, little Henry has been skating since he could toddle. Imagine his parents’ 
and sister’s chagrin, though, when he can’t manage the stick. Even worse, he doesn’t 
much care (“Instead, Henry twisted and turned, weaved and wound. He swayed 
and shuffled and shimmied”). An evening at an ice dancing show convinces Henry 
he’s got the wrong gig—he needs to lose the stick and acquire skates with pick 
(“I need to dance”). It takes some calm but firm reasoning for Henry to convince 
the family that ice dancing isn’t just for girls, and with his formerly figure-skating 
grandmother on his side, he gets new skates, a new skating coach, and after “sixty-
nine tries,” the newfound ability to “dash down the ice, spin like a top, and finish 
with one foot high in the air.” Palacios works in easy tandem with Bradley, taking 
350 • The BulleTin
Henry’s dilemma seriously but conveying it with a humorous touch in her expressive 
mixed-media scenes. Kids will chuckle over the pileup Henry’s slick moves cause 
in a hockey games, and the protest poster (“Picks!”) he brings to the rink while 
on strike. However, they may also manage to muster a little sympathy for Henry’s 
befuddled family, who can’t quite comprehend how a child can demonstrate abil-
ity, but lack drive. Tykes fighting their own “I gotta be me” battles, whatever the 
arena, will surely empathize.  EB
breSlin, thereSA, ad. The Dragon Stoorworm; illus. by Matthew Land. Kelpies/
Floris, 2014 24p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-7825-0117-6 $11.95  
R 6-9 yrs
don, lAri, ad. The Tale of Tam Linn; illus. by Philip Longson. Kelpies/Floris, 
2014 32p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-7825-0134-3 $11.95  
R 6-9 yrs
In these two picture-book adaptations of traditional Scottish folktales, a dragon 
and an evil fairy queen threaten happiness, but true love prevails and kicks some 
butt in the process. In Breslin’s book, Princess Gemdelovely finds the man she 
chooses to marry, but she knows that her father’s decree that this can only happen 
if this man can defeat the Dragon Stoorworm is quite an obstacle indeed, unless 
she helps him. In Don’s retelling, Tam Linn, a boy stolen by fairies, concocts a 
plan with the brash Janet, who spots him in the woods and is determined to free 
him. Although source notes would have been welcome, both authors are clearly 
rooted in the Scottish folk tradition, and they tell the stories with rich language 
and a sweeping, timeless elegance. The absence of damsels in distress is appealing 
and natural—these are simply tough chicks who aren’t going to send their men 
out alone to save the day. Longson accompanies Don’s retelling with lush, striking 
illustrations that have a touch of Trina Schart Hyman’s intelligent romanticism, 
with most of the climax of the story told primarily through the artwork. Land uses 
a slightly sparer approach and a lighter palette, though the dragon is impeccably 
drawn in a range of fire colors that makes him even more unwelcome against the 
creamy oatmeal shade and light greens of the countryside. There is true danger, 
hints of innocent love, and fantastic adversaries in each of these retellings, and both 
are visually appealing in ways that will invite repeat reads, particularly since they 
will likely be unfamiliar tales to many U.S. audiences.  AS
brown, Jennifer Life on Mars. Bloomsbury, 2014 240p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-252-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-253-0 $11.99  
R Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Arcturus has carved out his own little place in his loud and ec-
centric family. He’s also got a couple of best friends, he’s got the deliciously scary 
mystery of whether Cash, the guy next door, is a vampire/zombie/serial murderer, 
and he’s got an obsession with space that fills any empty moments. An upcoming 
move and the discovery that his neighbor’s secrets are actually fantastic (the man 
used to be an astronaut) rather than horrifying (though he he has terminal cancer) 
shake up Arty’s world considerably, and Arty is the sort of kid who likes things to 
stay the same. The secondary characters are mostly there to provide color—every-
one in Arty’s family is named after sky features, and the grownups are all slightly 
peculiar—which shifts the focus quickly to Arty and Cash. It is to the credit of the 
March 2015 • 351
author that Cash remains fairly grumpy right through to the end of his life; while 
Arty melts his reserve a bit, their friendship doesn’t miraculously change Cash 
into a sweet guy. Sure, there are some life lessons imparted from Cash to Arty, but 
most of them actually come in the form of Arty’s being wise enough to see how he 
should strive to not become bitter and stuck like his older friend. Space fans will 
appreciate the nifty little bits of information tucked in throughout the novel and 
in the end matter, but the likeliest audience is realistic fiction fans who love tales 
of transcendent old/young friendships.  AS
cook, eileen Remember. Simon Pulse, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1696-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7167-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 Ad Gr. 8-10
Harper shouldn’t notice Neil, the handsome protestor who thinks her father’s 
memory-altering company is evil, but she does, especially when he seems to be 
checking her out too. Harper already has a boyfriend, though, and he’s devoted 
enough to sneak her in for Memtex treatment, despite her father’s prohibition, to 
ease the sad memories of her beloved horse that died unexpectedly. It turns out her 
dad had dramatic reasons for forbidding Harper to have her memory tampered 
with, as she has had it done before (but of course didn’t remember that fact), and 
this resetting unmoors the last one. Fuzzy images of a woman develop into sharp 
memories that indicate Harper used to have a different mother and that her father 
may have wanted that woman’s death kept secret. Harper’s steamy connection 
with Neil will catch the attention of romance fans, especially when contrasted 
with Harper’s obligatory gestures toward her far less exciting current boyfriend. 
The problem is Harper herself: she’s self-indulgent, wishy-washy, and not terribly 
likable, and readers will understand why even her snappy (and fiercely loyal) best 
friend gets sick of her. In addition, the science is so unlikely and poorly explained 
that sci-fi buffs will likely just find the whole experience frustrating; there is little 
to delve into other than brief descriptions of dramatic successes or covered up 
horrible failures. Even with these flaws, readers in it for the romance may find 
some satisfaction, and those who can’t get enough of the idea of medicines or 
treatments that can change a person permanently and instantly could find a clever 
new example here.  AS
cronin, doreen Smick!; illus. by Juana Medina. Viking, 2015 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78578-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* 2-4 yrs
Smick is the name of the cheerful canine subject of this controlled-vocabulary 
picture book; he happily sits when instructed to by the text, and he’s thrilled to 
chase a thrown stick (“Go, Smick, go!”). Smick’s diverted from the stick when he 
hears a cluck from a chick; despite the unseen speaker’s concern for the wee bird 
(“No, Smick, no!”), the two critters affectionately bond. But what will Smick do 
when the siren call of the stick lures him again? The spartan prose is crafted cleverly 
and tightly, with lots of rhyming and repeated words (the text could actually be 
laid out as a poem) that add to the drama of reading aloud and also make this an 
enticing and effective beginning reader. The plot trajectory is gentle but palpable 
and the action is lively, and the big distinctive print will invite kids to pick out the 
352 • The BulleTin
words even from a distance. Medina’s gleefully minimalist illustrations create Smick 
out of fluid black outline on otherwise white pages, with a streamlined simplicity 
that exceeds even Jules Feiffer’s; Smick’s organic roundness and easily legible poses 
make him cuddly and personable even at his most spare. Photocollage elements 
in the stick and the chick (who’s a vivid feather made bird by fluid brushstrokes 
that provide features) add texture and sometimes even dimensionality, as with 
the stick’s frequent shadowing and seeming disappearance into Smick’s mouth. A 
great dual-purpose title that will serve both very young picture-book audiences and 
barely emergent readers, this will be a happy collection workhorse. Workdog?  DS
crowder, MelAnie Audacity. Philomel, 2015 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16899-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 8-12
Reference to Clara Lemlich often appears when the story of garment workers’ 
unionization is told, and in this verse novel Crowder takes an imaginative approach 
to the activist’s life, reaching further back into her subject’s personal history and 
probing for the probable motivations that drove her to risk her and her family’s well-
being to fight for justice in the early twentieth-century labor market. In graceful, 
affecting poetry, Clara shares an internal monologue, relating her early years in a 
Russian shtetl as the hardworking daughter, helping to keep the household running 
while her father and brothers pursue religious study. Their move to America in 
the wake of a pogrom finds her in much the same position but now chafing under 
the expectation of being the main breadwinner as well, working dawn to dusk in 
a garment sweatshop. When the concepts of socialism and unionization ignite her 
spirit, she takes to the union hall and picket lines, fighting to convince other young 
women in her situation to join the battle and ultimately seeing some measure of 
success in sparking a general strike. Crowder does an outstanding job of limning 
Clara’s inner struggles—controlling the anger she feels toward the family she begins 
to regard as freeloaders and trying to balance her need to survive the week with 
her ambition to build a future as a modern American woman: “Look around you,/ 
I long to say,/next time you go to shul/ in the middle of the day./ Do you see anyone 
there/ but the rabbi?/ If you want this family to eat,/ get a job/ and hold what is holy/ in 
your mind/ and heart/ like the rest of us.” With a thorough historical note, glossary 
of terms, and bibliography, this will make an excellent complement to units on 
women’s rights and the labor movement, but it will also satisfy readers in search of 
a well-told tale of a fierce heroine.  EB 
decAMp, AliSon 
My Near-Death Adventures (99% True!). 
Crown, 
2015 [272p] illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39045-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39044-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
For Stanley Arthur Slater, an eleven-year-old growing up in 1890s Michigan, 
there are too many women in his life and not enough male role models. Dad’s 
been AWOL since Stan’s birth, but that doesn’t stop Stan from fantasizing about 
his father’s return. In the meantime, though, Stan’s pretty well smothered by the 
cranky attention of his grandmother, a critical, rule-setting force of nature whom 
he’s not shy of calling “evil.” Money’s getting tight, so Mama and Granny haul 
March 2015 • 353
him up to a relative’s logging camp for a winter season, where Mama cooks while 
Stan freezes in scratchy woollen underwear, runs afoul of a string of practical jokes, 
suffers humiliation at the hands of a girl cousin, imagines dastardly backstories 
for some of the loggers, worries about his mother’s attachment to the camp’s ac-
countant, and generally makes his life sound far worse than it is. Stan’s account of 
his tribulations is accompanied by humorously captioned clippings from period 
catalogs and magazines and letters that he writes himself in the words of the father 
he wishes he had. It’s an entertaining conceit, but it’s not quite strong enough to 
support his ramblings and a recurring schtick wherein he frequently utters sotto voce 
remarks he thought were confined to his head; the story also isn’t as tightly plotted 
as one might wish. Nonetheless, the humor and accessible format may make this 
a diverting quick pick for historical fiction fans.  EB
don, lAri, ad. The Tale of Tam Linn; illus. by Philip Longson.
See review under Breslin, p. 350.
fAlkoff, Michelle Playlist for the Dead. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2015 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-231050-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-231052-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Sam knew that his best friend, Hayden, had a lot going wrong in his life, especially 
savage bullying at the hands of his brother and his brother’s best friends, but Sam’s 
still stunned when Hayden commits suicide. Now sixteen-year-old Sam is trying 
to unpack the story of what pushed Hayden over the edge—and to figure out how 
much is his fault. He tries to decipher the music playlist Hayden left him and find 
out more backstory from Hayden’s computer; he also connects with an intriguing 
girl, Astrid, who’s gratifyingly interested in the romantically inexperienced Sam, 
but who also has information about Hayden she’s keeping from him. The “finding 
truth behind the suicide” plot isn’t new, but Falkoff offers a more dimensional take 
than many, as Sam begins to realize how much more is going on in everybody’s life 
than he perceived. That realization comes both from finding a web of acquaintances 
that Sam had no idea Hayden had and also from discovering that people he might 
have dismissed (including, in a solid supporting role, his sister’s body-modded new 
boyfriend) are actually worth knowing. There’s more than a bit of mystery to the 
layers beyond who did what, who failed Hayden and how, and who’s currently tak-
ing revenge on the “bully trifecta,” adding further interest to an already compelling 
tale. Provocative ethical questions and considerable emotional impact will make 
this a lively book for discussion as well as an absorbing and sensitive read.  DS
ford, John c. The Cipher. Viking, 2015 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01542-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Eighteen-year-old “Smiles” Smylie may be the son of a genius who’s developed a 
popular data encryption system, but he himself is flailing, studying—ostensibly—for 
the GED after getting kicked out of high school. When he meets his eccentric but 
clearly brilliant young neighbor, Ben, he thinks he’s finally found some direction; 
354 • The BulleTin
the two concoct a plan to get the NSA to give them a massive sum of money for 
a new discovery Ben has made, a mathematical puzzle that, if leaked to the wrong 
person, could bring the modern world to its knees as all private information could 
be made public with a quick calculation. Soon, Smiles’ blur of a life turns into a 
sharp adventure plot after Ben is kidnapped, a mysterious and beautiful girl enters 
his life, and Smiles must somehow, with very limited adult skills, step up and save 
his pal, keep his dad’s company safe, make sacrifices for the greater good, and gen-
erally connect with the world. Smiles makes many missteps along the way, in part 
because he just isn’t good at thinking things through yet, and in part because there 
is a mastermind plot against him where almost no one is who they seem. Although 
readers are unlikely to be as trusting as Smiles, they will still likely be blindsided 
by certain elements, and they’ll undoubtedly spend some time contemplating 
how they were also fooled, and how they would have responded. Smiles’ growing 
discovery of maturity is authentic to his character, as he takes small steps toward 
adulthood rather than a giant leap. Mathematical geniuses may spot some glitches, 
but even they will likely find Smiles fascinating enough to see how he handles the 
cards he is dealt.  AS
greenwAld, toMMy Katie Friedman Gives Up Texting!: And Lives to Tell About It; 
illus. by J. P. Coovert. Roaring Brook, 2015 [240p]
Paper over board ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-837-8 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Katie, close sorta friend to Charlie Joe Jackson from Greenwald’s eponymous series 
(Charlie Joe Jackson’s Guide to Not Reading, BCCB 7/11, etc.), has just commit-
ted the Big Kahuna of communication faux pas—texted joking but disparaging 
remarks about her soon-to-be ex-boyfriend, Nareem, directly to him. Needless to 
say, they are now well and truly broken up, and Katie feels all the more the fool 
because, A) Nareem is a really nice guy she’d like to remains friends with, and B) 
she had delayed kicking him to the curb just long enough to go on one last date 
to see her favorite band, the Plain Janes. Maybe her life is as over-connected as her 
therapist Mom claims, and maybe she should take up the challenge of the Plain 
Janes’ lead singer to convince ten friends to go cell-less for a week, which might 
win her concert tickets and the performance of her own song. Rounding up ten 
participants is easier than Katie expects, but their sudden thrust into DIY fun and 
face-to-face honesty carries its own load of unexpected consequences. Katie narrates 
her week’s trials with all the end-of-my-world breathlessness that one has come to 
expect of middle-school heroines, and readers will be thoroughly amused as she 
and her crew, drawn from different strata of the lunchroom hierarchy, navigate 
life off the network. The Plain Janes subplot, however, is glaringly pedantic, and 
readers will readily discern that there’s a weighty message here, sugarcoated in the 
words of a fictional rock star. Nobody’s going to be fooled by that, but they may 
be a nanosecond slower to hit Send.  EB
March 2015 • 355
griMeS, nikki Chasing Freedom: The Life Journeys of Harriet Tubman and Susan 
B. Anthony Inspired by Historical Facts; illus. by Michele Wood. Orchard/Scho-
lastic, 2015 [56p]
iSBn 978-0-439-79338-4 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
It is known that Underground Railroad conductor Harriet Tubman and suffragist 
Susan B. Anthony shared the podium as speakers at more than one activist meeting; 
it is not known whether they encountered each other socially. This leaves the door 
wide open for Nikki Grimes to step through with a deftly devised work of histori-
cal fiction that imagines a conversation at Anthony’s home before the pair takes 
off for an engagement. Focus shifts back and forth between the women, and their 
distinctive voices, neatly wordsmithed to showcase individual personalities, make 
the dialogue credible, informative, and entertaining. Anthony, a kind but assertive 
hostess (although a bit tardy at realizing that the fire is in need of tending), speaks 
with a touch of formality; Tubman, evincing a confidence born of survival, peppers 
her end of the conversation with religious interjections and testaments to her faith. 
The parallel histories of the abolition and suffrage movements demonstrate that the 
two causes did not always work in harmony, and Anthony’s and Tubman’s conversa-
tion gently touches on that fact (“‘Looks like the Lord made us both servants,’ said 
Harriet. ‘We just had different assignments’”). Each spread features text mounted 
on a square of background hue that contrasts with the white page facing a full-page 
acrylic and oil painting styled in a folk tradition, with shallow space perspective 
and motifs drawn from American quilts. Rich back matter includes biographies of 
notable figures to whom the women allude, historical context for important period 
events, a bibliography, and an author’s note. A delight to read independently, this 
could also be an inviting piece for dual performance or readers’ theater.  EB
hAll, MAggie The Conspiracy of Us. Putnam, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16650-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Out of the seeming blue, sixteen-year-old Avery West is compelled forcefully to 
Paris on a private plane by a handsome British guy (current classmate Jack) and a 
handsome Russian guy (Stellan). There she learns that her presumed-dead father 
heads one of twelve families who secretly control the world and that she may 
hold the key to a prophecy dating back to Alexander the Great. Suddenly thrown 
into a whirl of opulence and power, Avery quickly realizes that her new couture 
gowns hide a life of servitude and violence, where her blossoming romance with 
Jack might get them both killed. Her only way out: team up with Jack and the 
enigmatic Stellan to find Alexander’s treasure and free them all. As they globe-hop 
from Paris to Istanbul and back again, solving ancient riddles with assassins on 
their trail, the three begin to realize that the power they are seeking might unite 
the twelve families as one or destroy them completely. The underlying conspiracy 
is awkward, but this title isn’t about logic but action, adventure, and romance, and 
it’s ultimately a heck of a lot of fun. Once the treasure hunt begins in earnest, the 
pace quickens to a heart-pounding degree, and readers will happily get swept up 
in the chase. Likewise, Avery spends the first third as a pretty face to whom vari-
ous handsome young men explain the situation, but once the action picks up, she 
356 • The BulleTin
more than holds her own. Overall, readers with a little patience and a penchant 
for suspending disbelief will find themselves rewarded with a thrilling escapade, 
and they’re likely to hang around for expected sequels.  AM
hArAzin, S. A. Painless. Whitman, 2015 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-6288-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Having the rare syndrome CIPA—congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidro-
sis—means that David has lived a circumscribed life, almost always having to be 
supervised in case he unknowingly harms himself or fails to notice a lethal change 
in his temperature. Now at seventeen, he’s lived longer than most people with the 
disorder, but he’s starting to think about what he wants to do in what’s likely to 
be a pretty limited lifespan. The death of his beloved grandmother, his long-term 
caretaker, makes him particularly interested in finding his mother and father, who 
left him with his grandmother and then disappeared after their divorce when he 
was six. His growing but uncertain relationship with his new personal aide, Luna, 
leads him to invite her with him as he goes in search of his parents, only to find 
the unexpected both in the trip and in Luna. Harazin writes David’s narration 
with understatement, giving him both thoughtfulness and conceptual limitations 
that are plausible for someone with his constrained existence; the details about his 
disorder unfold easily within the story, emphasizing how all-pervasive it is and how 
perplexing other people find it. His road trip with Luna is less successful, however; 
it’s emotionally unfocused and rambling, and the dark secret that Luna has obviously 
been hiding emerges in a melodramatic climax complete with hurricane-spawned 
tornado. The topic and its implications will undoubtedly draw readers, though, 
especially those who can’t get enough of bucket-list books.  DS
helliSen, cAt Beastkeeper. Holt, 2015 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9980-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 6-9
In this elegant, lyrical, and startling original fairy tale, Sarah’s family is cursed on 
both sides, and she is caught in the middle, resisting the effects on herself while also 
trying to save her strange but beloved parents. Her father is doomed to become the 
same beast that her grandfather is now, and her mother has been transformed into a 
bird. It’s all a lot to absorb, particularly since Sarah only learned about it when she 
was dumped at her grandparents’ home a few days earlier. Thirteen-year-old Sarah 
is confused and frightened by the complex curse, but she manages to put together 
pieces of the puzzle, sometimes with the help of the mysterious and ageless Alan, 
who has been around for decades and shares what he knows as necessary. There is 
no true happy ending possible, but Sarah’s made of sturdy stock, and she’ll take 
happy enough and do quite nicely with it. While there are hints of “Beauty and 
the Beast” here, this is a story all its own, and older fans of fairy tales and their 
retellings will revel in this poetic, tragic, epic story of a girl who is faced with the 
worst of what people can choose and instead decides to step outside of the curse 
and make her own way.  AS
March 2015 • 357
holMeS, kAthryn The Distance between Lost and Found. HarperTeen/Harp-
erCollins, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-231726-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-231728-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Ever since she was caught in a compromising position with her pastor’s son, Luke, 
on a youth retreat and was falsely accused of being the aggressor, Hallelujah has 
been a social pariah. Now on another retreat, Hallelujah joins a new girl, Rachel, 
who decides to leave the group during a hike; Jonah, one of Hallelujah’s former 
friends, goes with them; when the three take a wrong turn, they end up lost in the 
mountains of Virginia. They endure pounding spring thunderstorms, but between 
Jonah’s Boy Scout training and Hallelujah’s reasonably well-stocked backpack, they 
are okay for the first couple of days; by day five, having run out of food and each 
having suffered an injury, they begin to despair of rescue. They also get to know one 
another, and their story-sharing results in a warm friendship as well as forgiveness 
and a budding romance between Hallelujah and Jonah. The survival story effectively 
overlays adolescent crises over rugged nature; readers will find echoes of Hatchet as 
these teens find strength, courage, and redemption in their struggle to survive in a 
hostile yet breathtakingly beautiful environment. In seven days, the broken worlds 
they left behind have been remade, furthering adding to the symbolic power of a 
story that includes frank discussion of faith and its challenges; readers undergoing 
their own trials will be bolstered by Hallelujah’s hard-won hope for a bright future 
following adversity.  KC
hunt, lyndA MullAly Fish in a Tree. Paulsen/Penguin, 2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16259-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
As a military kid, Ally has moved from school to school, never staying in one place 
long enough for teachers to see past her diversionary tactics that mask her inability to 
read. She’s on the same path as she enters sixth grade, but a sharp teacher penetrates 
her façade, recognizing her reasoning skills, visual metaphors, and quick wit as 
signs of a fierce intelligence hampered by dyslexia. The teacher, Mr. Daniels, earns 
Ally’s trust by teaching her chess and then begins tutoring her, using techniques 
he’s currently learning in his special education class. While the book tips into cliché 
at times, the familiar tropes offer easy handles for less experienced readers to hold 
on to as they focus on the main point: that learning differences are solvable once 
they’re understood properly. Moreover, each of the hyper-stylized characters offers 
up readable, entertaining dialogue, while Ally’s descriptions of her “mind movies” 
are creative and witty, saving the book from unbearable sweetness. While its best 
use may be as an affirming readaloud for children struggling with their own learn-
ing differences, the treatment of a group of sixth-graders with various quirks who 
face down their bullies extends the book’s interest beyond the immediate focus on 
dyslexia.  KC
358 • The BulleTin
kAplAn, MichAel b. Betty Bunny Loves Easter; illus. by Stéphane Jorisch. Dial, 
2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4061-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
The ebullient Betty Bunny is back, and she’s thrilled to bits about Easter (she 
loves “eating things made of chocolate that looked like her,” and she plans to be 
the Easter Bunny when she grows up). She’s especially excited about the local egg 
hunt, where she always scores big. This year, however, she’s irritated that her siblings 
keep pointing her toward eggs (“Why are you all helping me?”), and she’s annoyed 
to realize that she’s only just noticing the assistance that they’ve always given her. 
Doing it on her own, however, means she’s not getting the huge haul she dreamed 
of; after a pep talk from her parents she forges on anyway, and “those three eggs 
she found by herself meant more to her than any eggs she had ever had.” Betty is, 
as usual, the poster kid for the irresistible object meeting the immovable force, and 
while this outing is a little more nakedly purposive than her others, she remains a 
great proxy for kids whose pell-mell enthusiasm leads them to painfully ricochet 
off of developmental obstacles. The loopy and endearing mixed-media art adds 
some subtle touches of patterning for Easter but avoids the full-on pastel-color 
onslaught, making this a refreshing contrast to more saccharine holiday titles. 
Youngsters suffering from the gap between “I want to do it myself” and the desire 
for results will empathize with Betty’s dilemma.  DS
keenAn-bolger, Andrew Jack & Louisa: Act 1; by Andrew Keenan-Bolger and 
Kate Wetherhead. Grosset & Dunlap, 2015 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-448-47839-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
When Louisa spies her new neighbor in a Mary Poppins t-shirt, she’s thrilled to find 
another MTN (Musical Theater Nerd), even if she always seems to put her foot in 
her mouth around him. While Jack, a former Broadway child star, enjoys Louisa’s 
friendship, he also struggles to fit in at his new school, eschewing musical theater 
in favor of soccer and dismissing her attempts to reel him into theater—that is, 
until the Shaker Heights Community Players stage a production of Into the Woods. 
Fighting his newfound stage fright, Jack scores the fitting part of Jack (of beanstalk 
fame) and Louisa lands her dream role: Little Red Riding Hood. The only real 
problem? Jack’s agent calls to say they want him back to understudy an understudy 
on Broadway, forcing him to choose between his new theater family and his potential 
theater future. The authors—themselves Broadway success stories—have created 
an engaging and straightforward, if somewhat superficial, novel. While rather 
one-note, the characters have enough charm to win over their audience; readers 
will be rooting for them through the minimal, occasionally implausible moments 
of tension and will cheer when they hit all the right notes. Indeed, this novel is 
more about the subject matter than characters or even plot; for depth and agility 
of prose, Tim Federle’s Nate (BCCB 2/13) is still the leading man. Still, diehard 
MTNs may nonetheless appreciate this first act of Jack and Louisa, and they may 
enjoy seeing themselves and their passions so joyously reflected on the page.  AA
March 2015 • 359
khoury, JeSSicA Kalahari. Razorbill, 2015 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-595-14765-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Sarah knows that her family must host teens for an educational safari in the Kalahari 
Desert in order to secure grant money, but she’s not going to be cheerful about it. 
She’s still reeling from the death of her mother, and she’s not terribly socially gifted 
anyway, having grown up with two zoologists in mostly isolated places. After her 
dad and his friend disappear from camp, it falls to Sarah alone to guide the teens 
to safety, a daunting task anytime in the desert, but made even more so by strange, 
metallicized animals and the murderous people who are hunting them. It’s a lot of 
plot, particularly when Sarah herself is infected by the virus that turns the animals 
silver and flits from missing her family to longing for love to creating a vendetta in 
her mind against the paramilitary forces that are trying to hide this science disaster. 
The adults are simply awkward foils, and they’re mostly evil, cowardly, or heedless. 
One can perhaps forgive Sarah for falling for the first teen guy she sees, getting 
herself poisoned, and being slow to put all the pieces together of the mystery given 
that kind of adult modeling, but there’s not as much background to explain away 
the caricatures the other teens mostly represent. Problems aside, there is a certain 
desperate, frenetic adventure pace that will likely keep readers rooting for Sarah 
right through to the end, hoping she bucks the odds and manages to save herself 
and her motley group of dependents.  AS
korMAn, gordon Masterminds. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229996-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-230001-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
The kids in Serenity, New Mexico—all thirty of them—are aware they’ve got it 
good. Their tiny community of under 200 is ranked the best town in America: 
amenities are excellent, community spirit is strong, and employment is at a hundred 
percent—with all parents working in small businesses, town services, or Serenity’s 
single industry, a plant that makes plastic traffic cones. Of course, there’s always 
one complainer, and classmates dismiss Malik’s continual grousing and dreams to 
move someday to a big city. Opinions shift drastically when Eli and Randy take a 
bike ride just outside the town limits to check out an abandoned classic car; Eli is 
stricken with unbearable headache and nausea, the boys are rescued by helicopter, 
Eli recovers immediately upon his return, and Randy is abruptly sent away to his 
grandparents—or at least, that’s the cover story. Randy manages to get a note to 
Eli voicing his suspicions that something fishy is going on in Serenity, and it has to 
do with children who are “special.” Eli, Malik, and three other kids join forces to 
investigate oddities surrounding the cone factory and uncover a cabal that involves all 
the adults in Serenity, as well as a shocking revelation about just how “special” some 
of Serenity’s kids really are. The ever-readable Korman has a winner of a middle-
grades thriller going here, and it will be an easy sell. It’s got a steadily accelerating 
plot and rising stakes, a keenly individuated ensemble cast, and a witty cliffhanger 
that will have readers bouncing on their heels for the next installment.  EB
360 • The BulleTin
lA˙
i, thAnhhà Listen, Slowly. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222918-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222920-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Mia is the only member of the family available to help her grand-
mother finally get some answers about what happened to Mia’s grandfather, who 
was captured during the Vietnam War. Leaving California behind, Mia and her 
grandmother travel to the Vietnamese village of Mia’s father’s birth, where Mia is 
overwhelmed by the attentions of officious aunties and suspicious cousins who are 
fascinated with Mia and anxious to show hospitality, even producing a translator—a 
boy who has gone to school in America and speaks English with a delightful Texan-
Vietnamese accent. Fortunately for Mia, she understands Vietnamese even if she 
can’t speak it, a fact she cagily keeps to herself in order to gain information amid 
the flurry of constant activity, and she’s even able to conspire with her cousins to 
escape the vigilant attention of the adults. Meanwhile, a detective has found the 
man who guarded Mia’s grandfather in his last days, and Mia and her grandmother 
must then to travel to Saigon to find more answers. The village experience and 
Mia and her grandmother’s travels in the city offer La˙i a way to introduce readers 
to various aspects of Vietnamese culture with both wry wit and genuine enthusi-
asm. She’s chosen her narrator well: Mia is a thoroughly credible contemporary 
California girl, tempering her wonder and fascination regarding this world of 
mosquitoes, luminous frogs, no privacy, and endless food with a full measure of 
good-natured tween eye-rolling. Her surprise at finding a new friend in a difficult 
cousin, as well as a new perspective on what really matters, is as endearing as it is 
instructive for readers, and they may be prompted to take more interest in their 
own family histories.  KC
lAuer, brett fletcher, ed. Please Excuse This Poem: 100 New Poets for the Next 
Generation; ed. by Brett Fletcher Lauer and Lynn Melnick. Viking, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01479-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Diversity is the watchword in this collection of 100 previously published poems 
by established poets now plying their trade in American universities, high schools, 
publishing houses, and online. As such, it’s widely inspirational, offering hope to 
teen poets of various ethnicities and geographies that they can make a living by their 
pen, or at least in a related field; indeed, nearly a third of the book is given over 
to contributors’ bios, which list not only their publications and current positions, 
but also offer various personal tidbits such as their favorite foods, words, quotes or 
poems, the talent they would most like to have, their ideas of happiness or misery, 
and their present states of mind. This is the value, then, of the book: it presents 
poets as living, diverse, accessible people. The poems aren’t always as accessible, 
but they are likewise diverse, treating subjects likely to be of interest to teens, such 
as love, break-ups, relationships, sex, rape, parents, and loss; they are often deft, 
frequently poignant, sometimes wry and witty. The order of the collection is some-
what obscure, since there no subject groupings that might point toward variations 
on common themes, but the poems are infinitely browsable, and readers will find 
favorites according to their own preferences and circumstances. This is therefore 
March 2015 • 361
mostly a collection for curricular use or for teens already committed to poetry for 
poetry’s sake, rather than those who need to be convinced that it is a viable outlet 
for those “thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears,” but poetry lovers seeking 
new sources will find satisfying reading here.  KC
lee, StAn The Zodiac Legacy: Convergence; by Stan Lee and Stuart Moore; illus. 
by Andie Tong. Disney, 2015 [504p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8085-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-4049-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
When fourteen-year-old American Steven Lee wanders away on a class trip through 
a Hong Kong museum, he uncovers a secret chamber where scientists are embed-
ding the mystical powers of the Chinese Zodiac into maniacal military contractor 
Maxwell. Steven’s unexpected arrival derails the procedure, though, and when two 
other intruders start a skirmish, the power of the Tiger finds its way into Steven 
instead. At the same time, other mystical animal energies manage to escape, and 
Steven is drawn into a battle to stop Maxwell from recapturing them. Now Steven 
and his two new compatriots are off on a worldwide adventure to discover other 
young people turned superhero by the Zodiac energy, to convince them to join the 
fight against Maxwell and his team of warriors, and to save the world. Jam-packed 
with action scenes and characters with imaginatively conceived powers, this addi-
tion to a growing genre of superhero novels will garner a new generation of fans 
for the venerable Stan Lee. The first in a planned series, the story unfolds along 
conventional lines—teams gathered, powers explained, battle lines drawn—but 
offers additional complexity as characters choose which side to join. Steven is the 
only real kid in the fairly large and diverse cast, and the story isn’t always his; the 
narrative always comes back around to him, though and readers will likely appreciate 
seeing a teen holding his own against and alongside adults. He’s also an engaging 
hero to root for, equal parts confused adolescent and born leader. Ultimately fun, 
and at times funny, this is a strong superhero-team story for readers not ready for 
the bleaker realities of Sanderson’s Steelheart (BCCB 1/14) but who want something 
more complex than Disney’s Big Hero 6. Final art not seen.  AM 
lundquiSt, MAry Cat & Bunny; written and illus. by Mary Lundquist. Balzer 
+ Bray/HarperCollins, 2015 28p
ISBN 978-0-06-228780-9 $17.99  
R 4-6 yrs
Best friends Cat (a little girl in a cat costume) and Bunny (a little boy in a rabbit 
costume) do everything together—until the day that Quail asks to join in. Cat 
hesitates, but Bunny welcomes Quail into the game. More children join the group, 
each with Bunny’s hearty approval, and jealous Cat runs away (“Cat sat all alone, 
waiting for Bunny to come find her. But Bunny didn’t come”). Cat does encounter 
a (real) kitten, though, and soon other kids join her in playing with it; finally even 
Bunny comes over to ask permission to play, and Cat welcomes him with open 
arms. The costuming of the kids is an original visual approach to this friendship 
tale, and the topic of sharing one’s best friend with others is right on target for the 
young audience. While Cat and Bunny’s solution won’t work for every kid, the 
simplicity of the story keeps it strong, and the text offers a useful starting place for 
362 • The BulleTin
discussion. Lundquist’s gentle watercolor and pencil art uses warm tints of green, 
peach, blue, and rose to evoke idyllic but simple interiors and landscapes. The 
trim yet imaginative multicultural child figures in their hooded animal outfits are 
pretty darn adorable as they cheerfully navigate this world; Cat’s stomping away 
and brief solo vigil provide heightened drama, therefore, when placed against this 
sunny backdrop. This may inspire some worthy conversation about friendship 
and inclusion.  JH
lynch, chriS Killing Time in Crystal City. Simon, 2015 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4011-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4013-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
A broken arm following an altercation with his father is just one of many last straws 
for seventeen-year-old Kevin, who has fled his hometown to stay with his black 
sheep uncle in a neighboring city and to break free of his constrained life. On the 
way, he meets fearless runaway Stacey, who’s amused and disarmed by Kevin’s dorky 
innocence. Once he’s installed at the apartment of his welcoming and unabashedly 
criminal uncle, he spends his days either hanging out with Stacey and her young 
protégé Molly, who are staying at a Catholic hostel except when missing curfew 
leaves them out on the streets, or getting stoned with a group of guys who aimlessly 
frequent the small strip of city beach. As Kevin falls harder for Stacey and for the 
gritty and uncertain existence she represents, flashbacks to his previous life, espe-
cially his relationship with his friend Jasper, offer hints—and red herrings—about 
what led him to leave. This is typical Lynch in its taut and authentic writing and 
in the tense, credible ambivalence of Kevin’s relationship with his father. Kevin’s 
desire for embrace of new possibilities (“I feel as if I am hurtling through all the life 
experiences I had missed before now”) is believable both in its strength and in his 
sheltered ignorance, which makes him a tourist amid jettisoned young people who 
have no choice but to live amid violence. The reveal that Kevin may have had sex 
with Jasper (he’s not sure himself) isn’t hugely startling, but the twists about what 
actually happened with his father, and what Kevin’s uncle turns out to be capable 
of, move from surprising to shocking. This is a novel bound to elicit discussion; 
while the dramatic foregrounded events will certainly draw attention, the underly-
ing implications will prompt strong opinions about relationships, perception, and 
the many states of being a teenager.  DS 
lynn, SArAh The Boulder Brothers: Meet Mo and Jo; illus. by Pierre Collet-
Derby. Blue Apple, 2014 90p (Jump into Chapters)
Paper ed. iSBn 978-1-60905-561-5 $5.99  
R Gr. K-2
As Tammi Sauer so ably demonstrated in Me Want Pet! (BCCB 4/12), the truncated, 
half-grunted dialogue that we collectively attribute to stereotyped cavemen makes 
superb fodder for beginning readers. The cave boy brothers Mo and Jo Boulder 
(yes, they do live anachronistically with mammoths and dinos—get over it) debut 
in three chapter-length comic adventures, mashing up standard full-page picture-
book illustrations with the word bubbles and narration boxes of graphic novels. 
Their first issue is olfactory. Something stinks, and although the viewer will readily 
identify a giggling skunk as the culprit, Mo and Jo exchange accusations: Mo’s pits? 
Jo’s feet? Their filthy cave? Next comes a clumsy game of hide-and-seek, in which 
March 2015 • 363
Mo has a hard time explaining the rules to a willing but addled Jo. Finally, the 
brothers are cold, and they try unsuccessfully to muster ideas from nature to address 
the problem (beating rock against rock, or against turtle; sticking bird feathers to 
their skin; pulling fur off a bear—never a good idea) until they realize that a cave 
filled with friends generates heat and amity. Collet-Derby’s illustrations feature 
a palette of bold earth tones, with touches of contrasting color for background 
figures; thoughtful design helps newbies to distinguish the two boys—Mo with 
his red shoulder-draped animal hide and white speech bubbles, and Jo with his 
boxer-styled hide and black speech bubbles. A limited vocabulary, oversized font, 
and lots of word repetition will quickly build reader’s confidence, and the goofy 
mini-plots and earthy humor will have them looking for the sequel.  EB
MAck, Jeff Who Wants a Hug?; written and illus. by Jeff Mack. Harper/Harp-
erCollins, 2015 34p
ISBN 978-0-06-222026-4 $17.99  
R 5-7 yrs
“Everyone liked Bear. No one liked Skunk,” and it’s no wonder: cuddly Bear loves to 
hug while stinky Skunk is a crank. When Bear tries to convince him of the benefits 
of a hug, Skunk responds, in Jimmy Cagney fashion, “Oh yeah? I’m a skunk, see? . . .  
And nobody hugs a skunk!” Cheery Bear is unfazed by Skunk’s sneering, which so 
irritates Skunk that he tries to stink-ify Bear, but an attack with a smelly fish, the 
dropping of a bag of trash, and a stink-bomb balloon all backfire on Skunk, leav-
ing him more malodorous than ever. In his vaporous vulnerability, Skunk finally 
allows Bear to hug him and finds . . . that he likes it. There’s an amusing Looney 
Tunes-esque sensibility to Skunk’s escapades, and kids who resist sweeter stories 
of affection will find this take on hugging to be a hoot. Illustrations enhance the 
humor with Skunk’s grumpy demeanor, his purple-banded black top hat, and his 
penchant for carrying around a boxing glove on a stick and a suitcase labeled “Super 
Stinky Tricks.” The other critters’ cuddly cuteness is endearing (it’s easy to see why 
big brown Bear is so appealing to everyone) while the stinky theme will crack up 
the kids who chortle at potty humor (“Who cut the cheese?” asks a mouse after 
the stink-balloon fail). The digital illustrations (created with pencil and ink and 
Photoshop) are attractively rendered with a tidy style that successfully straddles the 
line between cute and comic, while clean white space keeps the compositions crisp. 
Pair this with Stein’s Dinosaur Kisses (BCCB 9/13) for a more raucous approach to 
an embrace-themed story session.  JH
Mccoy, MAry Dead to Me. Hyperion, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-8712-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Alice never fully knew the reason her older sister, Annie, left home as a teenager 
and dropped off the map. Now Annie lies comatose in the hospital, brutally beaten 
and left for dead, and sixteen-year-old Alice is the only family member who knows 
where she is. A friend of Annie, private detective Jerry Shaffer, turns up, but he is 
reluctant to allow Alice to assist him in finding Annie’s attackers. Of course there’s 
no putting Alice off. She and her sister used to pass the time playing with ciphers, 
pretending they were World War II spies, and Alice knows how to crack the clues 
her sister sparingly left behind. They all lead straight to trouble: her sister, her 
father, and now she herself have been pulled into a web of crimes surrounding a 
364 • The BulleTin
movie idol and his penchant for underage girls. Noir homage can reasonably be 
considered its own subgenre in youth fiction, and McCoy’s debut novel suggests 
she will run at the head of the authorial pack. She paints a convincing picture of 
the seamy side of 1948 Hollywood, where tangled alliances among studio honchos, 
corrupt cops, and screen glitterati conspire to keep the stars’ sins tucked well into 
the shadows. Alice is as hardboiled as the fictional detectives she admires, and her 
gritty, cynical voice is no comic parody but that of a smart teen who has just dis-
covered her parents are more venal than she thought. There are enough twists and 
turns, feints and deceits to rival The Big Sleep for inscrutability, but Alice’s descent 
into the underworld of murder, child pornography, and statutory rape will keep 
readers in thrall.  EB
nApoli, donnA Jo Hidden. Wiseman/Simon, 2014 384p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8300-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8303-3 $10.99  
R Gr. 7-10
In this companion novel to the poetic and haunting Hush: An Irish Princess Tale 
(BCCB 3/08), the younger sister of Melkorka, that book’s protagonist, gets full 
focus. Brigid is fiery and outspoken, even at eight, when she escapes from slavers, 
loses her sister and her comfy royal life in Ireland, and finds herself truly alone in 
a region far from home. She wanders, always with the goal that she will find her 
beloved sister and reunite her family, but she’s also trying to pick up skills, comfort, 
and knowledge along the way. Brigid quickly determines that pretending to be of 
Norse origin is much smarter than being her Irish self, so she adapts and prevari-
cates, remaking herself as Alfhild, the perhaps elf, perhaps slave, perhaps orphan 
child who fits herself where she can in various Nordic communities. The pace is 
languid on occasion, particularly in the middle chapters as Alfhild grows from 
child to teen, but it picks up considerably toward the end, as chapters involving 
bold rescues and female pirates are wont to. There is a dramatic spareness to the 
first-person narration: Alfhild remains in many ways a child despite her advancing 
age, and her understanding of the world is authentically rather limited, given her 
life circumstances. The reader will likely spot places where Alfhild’s perspective on 
a situation is incorrect or too harsh, and she must figure out the more accurate 
reality. Extensive end matter explains the bits of truth, myth, legend, and fiction 
that all went into making these characters, particularly the memorable Brigid/
Alfhild, whose unwavering determination propels her through joy and tragedy 
with equal steel, almost costing her moments of beauty because she is so focused 
on whatever comes next. A glossary, an author’s note explaining the history, and a 
bibliography are appended.  AS
niven, Jennifer All the Bright Places. Knopf, 2015 383p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75589-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75588-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75590-0 $10.99  
R* Gr. 9-12
After the car crash that claimed her sister’s life, a guilty and grieving Violet is drawn 
to the top of the school’s bell tower, possibly to jump. Fortunately, Finch is already 
up there; contemplating suicide is something of a hobby for him, if for no other 
reason that it reminds him that he’s still alive. Finch talks Violet down and reverses 
the situation for the gossip mill so that Violet can be the hero who saved the weird 
March 2015 • 365
guy’s life. Partnered on a class project, they embark on a relationship that proves 
therapeutic for both of them, as Finch helps Violet overcome her fear of being in a 
car and taking risks, and she helps Finch realize that he’s lovable. Their love story 
echoes that of Hazel and Gus (The Fault in Our Stars, BCCB 5/12), with Finch 
playing the manic pixie dream boy to Violet’s moody intellectualism, but it’s clear 
to readers that his mania is neither a choice nor a pose, and that what he calls being 
“asleep” is really a depressive episode on his undiagnosed bipolar roller coaster. His 
persistent fascination with famous suicides and suicide statistics provides ample 
foreshadowing as to where this is going, but to Niven’s credit, the story never breaks 
sympathy with nor champions Finch’s decision and thus ends up with a strong but 
subtle message that Finch’s death is the result of a disease. Ultimately, the book, 
with narration that alternates between Finch and Violet, becomes Violet’s story 
of survival and recovery, affirming the value of loving deeply, grieving openly, and 
carrying your light forward.  KC
o’doherty, dAvid Danger Is Everywhere: A Handbook for Avoiding Danger; illus. 
by Chris Judge. Little, 2014 256p
ISBN 978-0-316-29930-5 $12.99  
R Gr. 4-6
The world can be a terrible place, as far as Noel is concerned, and he believes you 
must be prepared for anything and everything. The structure of this illustrated novel 
by Irish comedian O’Doherty is loosely an instructional guide, culminating in a 
quiz that will show readers how much they’ve learned about the endless dangers 
of the world and how to avoid them. The best parts are the spots where, should 
readers put Noel’s advice into action, chaos would ensue, as when he suggests firmly 
that shoppers should constantly list the things they are not while in the bagging 
area of a grocery store in order to avoid being packaged and handed off to another 
customer. Simple black and white line drawings interact playfully with the text, 
often providing contrasting views of the world Noel inhabits, a place that seems 
remarkably harmless despite his frantic pronouncements to the contrary. While 
the quippy acronyms (nearly every dangerous situation gets an acronym, which 
serves as its referent throughout the book) may get slightly tiring for all but the 
hardcore readers devoted to flipping back through the pages to remind themselves 
what they meant, this is a minor issue in what is overall a sharp, humorous look at 
all the ways the world is out to kill, maim, or at least scare you. For kids who have 
outgrown Scaredy Squirrel and Alvin Ho but still share their angst, or for fans of the 
Wimpy Kid–style diary/graphic novel hybrids, this will offer all that they crave.  AS
oliver, lAuren Vanishing Girls. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 [368p] illus.
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222410-1 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222412-5 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Nicole is still struggling with the aftermath of the car accident that involved her and 
her sister, Dara, and now she’s working with Parker, the boy who came between the 
sisters. Dara and Parker had cycled through stormy break-ups and rocky reunions, 
and on the night of the accident, Parker finally admitted that being with Dara was 
a mistake, and that he had always been in love with Nick, who reciprocated his 
feelings; now Dara barely acknowledges her sister. When Dara goes missing on 
her birthday, Nick searches for her and realizes that finding her sister will solve the 
366 • The BulleTin
mystery of another missing girl. The novel plays out in a series of flashbacks, with 
chapters alternating narration between Dara and Nick, while additional matter—
posts from a gossip blog, emails and reports from the girls’ psychotherapist—hint 
that all might not be as it seems. Keeping track of who is speaking and piecing 
together the incidents in the order in which they occur requires careful attention 
and a fair bit of work on the reader’s part, and that’s part of the point, since Nick’s 
enmeshment with her sister blurs distinctions between the two and highlights how 
deeply a sibling relationship affects both parties. Certain elements, such as Dara’s 
involvement with a skeevy photographer, are slightly contrived, but Oliver ma-
nipulates character to the point where those elements are nearly credible, and they 
synthesize the thematic layers, such as the vulnerability of sisters, the complexity 
of guilt, and the path to forgiveness and redemption. Fans of Oliver’s Before I Fall 
(BCCB 4/10) will find here another exploration of how one’s understanding of oth-
ers changes in the aftermath of tragedy. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley.  KC
oMololu, c. J. The Third Twin. Delacorte, 2015 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99171-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74452-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39024-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When adopted twins Ava and Lexie were little, they invented a “third twin,” Alicia, 
to take the blame for all of their naughtiness. Now that they are high school seniors, 
Alicia has been reinvoked to allow them to date bad boys in her guise. Alicia’s fearless 
and provocative manner isn’t as much of a stretch for Ava as it is for Lexie, who’s 
more conservative and scholarly. In fact, Lexie is ready to give up Alicia for good, 
but when one of Ava-as-Alicia’s conquests turns into someone Lexie could really be 
interested in, she keeps up the deception. Things go bad, though, when first one and 
then another of “Alicia’s” dates is murdered, and the DNA evidence implicates the 
twins. Lexie turns herself in, knowing that she’s not guilty but unsure of her sister, 
but it soon becomes evident that there is someone else involved, someone neither 
twin knows about. The intricate mystery plot will keep readers guessing until the 
end. Additionally, the book explores Lexie’s reconsideration of her life and sense 
of self after her hopes of attending Stanford are dashed and she struggles with the 
possibility that her twin might be a murderer, making this as much an exploration 
of identity as a murder mystery. Well, okay, not really: the page-turning is driven 
by the adrenaline pump of whodunit and who’s next to die, but teen protagonists 
and a minor class and ethnicity narrative (the girls are Latina, adopted by a wealthy 
white man) add a texture of contemporary issues to the mix.  KC 
rAy, MAry lyn A Violin for Elva; illus. by Tricia Tusa. Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-15-225483-4 $16.99  
R 6-8 yrs
When little Elva overhears a violinist playing at a local garden party, she is smitten. 
Since her parents refuse her request for a violin of her own, Elva pretends to play, 
using a badminton racquet or a toothbrush and her imagination. Elva eventually 
grows up, and she gives up even her pretend violin and makes excuses to herself 
about not following her dream (“Well, I have things to do”; “I’m too old now”). 
Her dream doesn’t die, though, and one day, now gray-haired Elva buys a violin, 
March 2015 • 367
signs up for lessons, and finally, happily, plays at her very first recital. Adults may 
get more out of this than kids, but the lessons of persistence and the importance of 
pursuing one’s dreams are communicated in a pleasantly realistic and non-preachy 
way (Elva needs lessons and practice to play, for instance), and many kids will find 
the ending satisfying. The text’s gentle momentum and understated lyricism (“But if 
she saw a page tremulous with music, she remembered what she had once wanted”) 
make it a fine choice for a readaloud selection. Tusa’s dynamic watercolor and ink 
illustrations are both elegant and casual, and they provide some grounding for the 
quietly melodious text, with Elva’s childhood outfits and the record player of her 
older adulthood suggesting an earlier era. Careful compositions convey both energy 
and contemplation, and one can almost hear the heavenly choir at the scene of the 
long-awaited violin acquisition, as elderly Elva hugs her instrument in a beam of 
white light. Share this one aloud, perhaps accompanied by some violin music.  JH
rockliff, MArA Mesmerized: How Ben Franklin Solved a Mystery That Baffled All 
of France; illus. by Iacopo Bruno. Candlewick, 2015 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6351-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
When Louis XVI began to suspect that France’s newest rage—Dr. Franz Anton 
Mesmer with his unseen healing force that “streamed from the stars and flowed 
into his wand”—wasn’t quite on the level, he appointed the ever-popular Benjamin 
Franklin, currently in Parisian residence to curry French support for the newborn 
United States, to a committee to investigate Mesmer’s claims. Rockliff retells the 
episode with equal measures of gentle satire of aristocratic gullibility and tidy re-
construction of the scientific method used to unmask the humbug. Of particular 
note is her explanation of how the blinded tests Franklin devised to eliminate pos-
sible explanations are used by scientists today. She is also generous to the disgraced 
Mesmer (whose technique, now commonly called hypnotism, had more to do with 
autosuggestion than astral forces), crediting him with being on the right track 
concerning the mind’s role in healing, and in pointing the way toward the placebo 
effect. Although the four-page endnote definitely expands information about the 
two competing “scientists” and their showdown (Mesmer was represented by his 
proxy, Charles D’Eslon), the main text itself is sufficient for a cogent introduction. 
Digitally colored pencil illustrations underscore the humor, and boxed insets on 
the scientific method alert readers to pay attention to how Franklin went about 
his proof. A list of sources is included, and the discombobulating optical trickery 
of the endpaper design is worth its own visit.  EB
ruby, lAurA Bone Gap. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2015 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-231760-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-231763-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Bone Gap is the small Illinois town where seventeen-year-old Finn has lived with 
his older brother, Sean, since their mother left them for a brand-new life with her 
brand-new husband two years ago. Now Finn’s devastated by a new loss: Roza, the 
beautiful young Polish woman who turned up on Finn and Sean’s farm from out 
of nowhere, stayed with them, and enchanted the town, was abducted one night, 
but nobody believes Finn’s account of her departure. Finn’s determined to find and 
368 • The BulleTin
save Roza, and he’s bolstered by the mysterious black mare who’s suddenly appeared 
in his barn and on whom he goes riding at night, and by his growing relationship 
with Priscilla “Petey” Willis, the prickly but interesting girl he’s increasingly drawn 
to. Best known for The Wall and the Wing (BCCB 4/06), Ruby turns here to an 
older audience in a tricky, teasing approach that begins in folksy, cornfield-rich 
domesticity and expands into magical realism. The book’s pace is measured but the 
mood remains tense and expectant, and the shifts to Roza’s experience, being held 
in strange places (an isolated house, a mysterious castle) by a sinister man who seeks 
her love, are effectively disorienting. There’s also subtle and successful differentiation 
between Finn’s feelings for Roza, which are tied up with his bond with his brother 
(who loves Roza), and his strong and sexually charged passion for Petey. Some of 
the fantasy plot mechanics are a little underexplained, but the atmosphere and the 
Margo Lanagan–esque compelling strangeness will please readers who like to forge 
off the beaten path.  DS
ryAn, pAM Muñoz Echo; illus. by Dinara Mirtalipova. Scholastic, 2015 [592p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-439-87402-1 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-57650-5 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 6-9
In the nineteenth century, a young boy, Otto Messenger, buys a book from a gypsy 
and finds himself involved in the strange, unfinished tale within its pages. Lost in 
the woods, he meets the three cursed women of the story, who tie their fate to the 
harmonica the gypsy gave him with the book. The enchanted harmonica travels: 
in 1933 in Germany, young Friedrich Schmidt, bullied away from his school 
because of his facial birthmark and his obsession with conducting music only he 
can hear, works at a harmonica factory before his father is sent to a re-education 
camp for consorting with Jews and playing music the Führer finds vulgar. In 1935 
in Philadelphia, two orphaned boys are adopted by a grieving woman according 
to the terms of her father’s will, but a misunderstanding prompts the older boy to 
set his sights on joining Albert Hoxie’s Philadelphia Harmonica Band. In 1942 in 
California, Ivy Maria Lopez is crushed when her father moves the family to a new 
farm to act as caretaker while its Japanese owners are relocated to an internment 
camp, requiring her to leave her music program behind. In the hands of each new 
owner, the harmonica brings hope, beauty and joy to those who hear it, but it isn’t 
until Ivy gives it to Kenny Yamamoto that it completes its destiny, and Otto’s book 
is finally finished. Ryan’s ingenious plotting harmonizes as sweetly as the famed 
mouth harp itself, and her eloquent prose breathes life and energy into likable 
characters whose stories are individually compelling and historically resonant as it 
treats elements such as the forced sterilization of “defective” Germans, the practice of 
farming out teen orphans for wage work, the existence of a professional harmonica 
band, and segregated schools in California. The embellishment of fantasy lightens 
without trivializing the history; instead, it traces a thread of hope and indomitable 
human spirit through dark times. Each extended episode has its own theme song 
from the period, with instructions on how to play it on a harmonica; lots of scope 
for imaginative programming here.  KC 
March 2015 • 369
SAnderSon, brAndon Firefight. Delacorte, 2015 416p (The Reckoners)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99122-6 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74358-7 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81840-4 $10.99  
R Gr. 7-12 
Having killed a seemingly immortal Epic supervillain and freed the town from 
his despotic reign (in Steelheart, BCCB 1/14), David and his fellow Reckoners 
face a new challenge. Regalia, who rules Babylon Restored on the flooded ruins 
of Manhattan, has turned unexpectedly vicious, sending lesser Epics to attack 
David’s city of Newcago. Working with a whole new team in a mysterious new 
city, David and his mentor Prof must solve the puzzle behind Regalia’s change of 
heart and save Babylon Restored from destruction. Meanwhile, David is hoping 
to prove that some Epics might be redeemable, and he’s determined to start with 
Firefight, the girl who infiltrated the Reckoners only to betray them and break 
David’s heart. David’s plans to save the girl he loves may undermine Prof’s plot to 
destroy Regalia, though, and the divide between them may doom the Reckoners 
entirely. This intense sequel builds on the strengths of the initial volume, adding 
nuance and complexity alongside the action and intrigue. The imaginative recast-
ing of superpowers as a corruptive force remains key, but the narrative broadens 
out the Epic lore, exploring their histories, weaknesses, and possible cause. Read-
ers who enjoyed David’s impulsive antics and identified with his driving need to 
prove himself will be pleased to find him much the same young man at heart. The 
novel also allows him to mature, reflecting the story’s nuance in his shifting view 
of both the Epics and his own heroes. A startling twist near the end puts the future 
of both Epics and Reckoners in question and will have readers counting the days 
to the final volume.  AM
SArcone-roAch, JuliA The Bear Ate Your Sandwich; written and illus. by Julia 
Sarcone-Roach. Knopf, 2015 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95860-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85860-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* 5-8 yrs
Our narrator patiently explains to a listener how a bear rode from woods to city 
in a truck bed, entered the city park, found the listener’s unattended sandwich 
on a bench, and ate it. A spread near the story’s end begins to disclose the clearly 
culpable narrator’s identity in a perky pair of pointed black ears; the closing spread 
completes the reveal, featuring a black terrier finishing his “explanation” to a brown-
skinned little girl: “I saw it all. I tried to save your sandwich. I was able to save this 
little bit of lettuce here.” The bear’s transport into the city (he supposedly ate the 
berry harvest in the back of the truck and then fell asleep there) and subsequent 
urban activities (climbing a clothesline, walking through wet cement, trying out 
playground equipment), all of which seemingly happens without human notice, 
are pretty unbelievable—but that’s the point, isn’t it? While the bear storyline is 
entertaining in itself, the ending twist will equally delight kids who love to spot 
untruths, and a second reading for hints as to the narrator’s credibility may well be 
in order. The loose, sometimes expressionistic strokes of acrylic paint with pencil 
illustrations helpfully—and amusingly—fill in the text’s scenarios with entertaining 
and vivid detail. The scenes of the baggy-bottomed black bear at the playground 
370 • The BulleTin
and sneaking up on the sandwich are particularly humorous, and the ingratiating 
tail-wagging and eager-to-please posture of the terrier add to the subtext of deceit. 
This has numerous language arts possibilities, and it would also make a lively ad-
dition to a food or bear-themed storytime.  JH
SAxby, clAire Big Red Kangaroo; illus. by Graham Byrne. Candlewick, 
2015 27p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7075-7 $16.99  
R 6-9 yrs
wignell, edel Bilby: Secrets of an Australian Marsupial; illus. by Mark Jack-
son. Candlewick, 2015 28p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6759-7 $16.99  
Ad 6-9 yrs
Candlewick’s venerable natural history picture-book series draws now from Australia, 
in volumes that treat one of the continent’s most famous animals and one of its 
least known. Saxby’s overview of the red kangaroo follows an adult male named Red 
from the sunset of one day to dawn of the next, as Red and his mob (the technical 
term for a group of kangaroos) find food and water and Red fends off challenges to 
his leadership. Wignell’s treatment of the bilby follows a female as she gives birth 
in her burrow to Baby Bilby, who eventually grows big enough to emerge from 
his mother’s pouch and then the burrow; above ground he learns from her how to 
dig for food and to evade predators, and soon he’s on his own. Big Red Kangaroo 
is the more successful of the two: its prose moves effectively from casual to poetic, 
and the close time frame keeps things immediate. The digital and charcoal art is 
simply stunning, with a smudgy angularity reminiscent of the late Glen Rounds 
but an immersive, otherworldly earthiness all its own, and both the main text and 
the secondary explanatory text stand out strongly against the sandy pages. The ex-
pressionistic paintings of Bilby are often dramatic, and the little animal is definitely 
undertreated in American literature. However, the colors tip occasionally into the 
lurid, key concepts—like the location of the bilby’s pouch—are left unillustrated, 
and scale is difficult to determine; the serviceable text doesn’t quite muster the ap-
peal to overcome these deficits. Together, though, these are an evocative southern 
influence in early biology, and they’ll appeal to youngsters not quite ready for Nic 
Bishop Marsupials (BCCB 11/09). Each book includes an index.  DS
ScAttergood, AuguStA The Way to Stay in Destiny. Scholastic, 2015 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-53824-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-63364-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Moving to Destiny, Florida isn’t what Theo (short for Thelonious Monk Thomas) 
had planned, but when his caretaker grandparents move into a nursing home 
and he’s taken into his bachelor uncle’s keeping, that’s where the two of them go. 
Soon, though, he finds he likes Destiny: he makes a friend of Anabel, who’s in 
his sixth-grade class; he’s excited by the town’s baseball history and the hints that 
Hank Aaron, now in 1974 beating Babe Ruth’s record, may have spent time there; 
he’s thrilled that Miss Sister’s hospitable boarding house includes a piano, which 
the music-loving boy is free to play. But will Theo’s bitter uncle Raymond agree 
to stay in Destiny, and will he forgive Theo for playing the piano after Raymond 
forbade him? Theo has an engaging voice, and his enthusiasm for baseball, music, 
and Destiny makes him an appealing protagonist; the book atmospherically sets the 
March 2015 • 371
Floridian scene through Theo’s eyes as he gets the hang of his new hometown. The 
book has too many plot points, however, so none of them manage to truly compel, 
and Theo’s sad backstory never goes deep enough to draw emotional response. Ad-
ditionally, characters tip into cliché, especially Uncle Raymond, whose revelation 
of past hurts never really redeems his meanness, and the relentlessly sunny Miss 
Sister. This may nonetheless be an easygoing read for kids who like a little baseball 
and a little waywardness to season their period stories.  DS
StrAyhorn, willA The Way We Bared Our Souls. Razorbill, 2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-735-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
In this strange, sometimes confusing novel, five teens agree to undergo a ritual that 
they think is merely symbolic but actually has them swapping bodies for a week. 
The result is increased understanding and patience, but there are also dire conse-
quences for some of the teens. Lo, who gathers the other participants, struggles with 
her family history of multiple sclerosis and her own emerging symptoms, and she 
jumps at the chance, offered by a near stranger, to be part of anything that might 
change her life. She spots the other likely candidates quickly: a former child soldier 
from Liberia, a drug addict, a girl with congenital insensitivity to pain, and a boy 
whose girlfriend died in a car accident. The ease with which she finds a bunch of 
desperate teens will either raise eyebrows or feel depressingly realistic, but either 
way, the relative rapidity with which they all agree to this ritual does strain credulity. 
However, the the dexterity with which the author juggles the perspectives of five 
teens is admirable; even if their individual stories are somewhat thin, the pit of ado-
lescent misery is well-conveyed. Unfortunately, the life lessons are imparted with less 
grace, and they’re often awkwardly reinforced through dialogue. Additionally, the 
whole experience plays out with vague allusions to mysticism and Native American 
spirituality without any references or specific facts to ground them. Nonetheless, 
the core musings on gratitude and individual responsibility might resonate with 
some readers, and the body-swap conceit may appeal to those eternally fascinated 
with walking a mile in somebody else’s shoes.  AS
SundquiSt, JoSh We Should Hang Out Sometime. Little, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-25102-0 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-25101-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Cancer took his leg from the hip down when he was nine, but that doesn’t explain 
why Josh Sundquist, an attractive, witty, kind twenty-five-year-old, has never had 
a girlfriend. Since he’s a bit of geek who’s more comfortable with science and math 
than human relations, he decides to figure out what the problem is through research, 
namely, reflecting on each failed encounter from eighth grade forward, forming 
a hypothesis as to what happened, and then contacting the girl (now woman) in 
question to test his hypothesis against her perspective. This then is how Sundquist 
organizes his memoir: for each girl, he offers background, hypothesis, and inves-
tigation, illustrating his chapters with hand-drawn graphs of various kinds, some 
wittier than others. His findings are illuminating for anyone who has experienced 
social awkwardness in the field of attraction; most often, he has misread cues and 
fumbled due to his own feelings of inadequacy rather than any reluctance on the 
372 • The BulleTin
part of the girls he failed to date. While the focus is never on Sundquist’s experi-
ences as a Paralympic athlete and motivational speaker, readers will learn a bit about 
the differences in abilities based on the extent of an amputation, and his gift for 
encouragement shines forcefully from his final chapters, where he assesses what 
went wrong and relates how he has used his new self-awareness to find love. Readers 
familiar with Sundquist’s website and YouTube channel will be a natural audience 
for this; those resources would also aid a booktalk to lead teens to this helpful look 
at how people can get in their own way when seeking to make connections.  KC 
tennApel, doug Nnewts: Escape from the Lizzarks; written and illus. by Doug 
TenNapel. Graphix/Scholastic, 2015 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-67647-2 $19.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-67646-5 $10.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-77870-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
In this graphic novel, amphibians and reptiles are enemies, and Herk, a amphibious 
Nnewt who may be lacking strength but certainly isn’t lacking bravado is the only 
one left to avenge his village after the reptilian Lizzarks brutally attack. Herk’s legs 
don’t work well, but an encounter with a magical being helps him discover that 
his true legs were actually stolen, and once he has them back, Herk’s even more 
determined to defeat the bad guys, even though he knows it won’t regain him his 
family. Nnewts began as a serial webcomic, but this volume reads as a smooth, 
seamless graphic novel that will feel like home to fans and be a comfortable start-
ing point for newbies; TenNapel strikes the proper balance of providing enough 
background exposition without boring his existing audience. Sharp, detailed il-
lustrations feature cartoonish characters against rich earth colors and watery blues. 
While text and illustrations mostly mirror each other, occasional wordless panels 
are perfectly placed to slow the reader or increase impact of a key scene. Since the 
illustrations read a bit young for the tragedy and intense drama of the text, readers’ 
advisory finesse will allow librarians to guide selection for those who don’t already 
know the author. Final art not seen.  AS
thoMpSon, lAurie Ann Emmanuel’s Dream: The True Story of Emmanuel Ofosu 
Yeboah; illus. by Sean Qualls. Schwartz & Wade, 2015 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81745-2 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81744-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81746-9 $10.99  
R 5-9 yrs
This picture-book biography chronicles the life of Ghanaian disability activist 
Emmanuel Ofusu Yeboah, born with only “one strong leg” in a country where the 
disabled were generally shuttered behind closed doors and or set to beg for their liv-
ing. Driven by an uncompromising mother (she “told him he could have anything, 
but he would have to get it himself”), he broke through social and physical barriers, 
eventually finding work in the country’s capital and sending money home. He then 
embarked on an activist project: to ride a bicycle around Ghana, making a national 
statement about what a disabled person can accomplish, in a journey that made him 
a “national hero.” The book’s a bit light on actual information about its subject, 
and the triumphant finish (“One person is enough to change the world”) is only 
explained in the following author’s note; that said, it’s a tough story to resist and 
March 2015 • 373
it’s ringingly told here, with a refreshingly pragmatic note in the book’s description 
of Yeboah’s acquisition of funding and arrangement of support vehicles. Qualls’ 
mixed-media art balances stylized background shapes against crisp-edged figures, 
often in luminous sunset hues, in the foregrounds; rhythm in color and shapes is 
particularly effective in the full-bleed spreads, in scenes sometimes teeming with 
well-patterned energy and sometimes wide open as Yeboah pauses on the brink of 
his destiny. There are no source notes, but the author’s note points readers to the 
Oprah-narrated documentary Emmanuel’s Gift.  DS
thorne, Jenn MArie The Wrong Side of Right. Dial, 2015 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4057-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Kate Quinn, living with her aunt and uncle since the death of 
her mother, is stunned to find not only that the father she never knew is Senator 
Mark Cooper, current front-runner for the Republican presidential nomination, 
but also that he would like her to join his family for the summer. Suddenly Kate’s 
on the campaign trail and in the public eye, trying to connect with the father 
she’s always longed for and negotiate a relationship with his wife (married to the 
senator when he had an affair with Kate’s mother) and her young half-siblings. As 
if that weren’t challenge enough, she’s developing a clandestine friendship with a 
mischievous young guy named David—who happens to be the son of the presi-
dent, Kate’s father’s opponent. It’s an entertaining what-if scenario, and Thorne 
believably conveys Kate’s new whirlwind life of focus-group-approved outfits and 
preplanned spontaneous photo-ops. Her secret nighttime phone calls from and 
jaunts with the hot young Democrat provide a touch of Romeo and Juliet intrigue, 
enhanced by the fact that David’s one of the few people who actually understands 
her situation and spiced by the possibility that he’s playing her. There’s not much 
substance underneath the tumult, however, as characters streaming by with names 
but rarely much distinguishing depth, and Kate’s emotions are mostly told rather 
than shown, making her relationship with her new family seem facile despite its 
purported growth. Additionally, it’s implausible that her Democratic views would 
fly under the radar, and her influence on her father (his view on immigration is 
softened after he meets her friend’s undocumented parents) is contrived and un-
likely. With 2016 coming up, however, there may be interest in this largely cheerful 
and undemanding take on a teen’s unexpected step onto the campaign bus.  DS
turner, Ann My Name Is Truth: The Life of Sojourner Truth; illus. by James Ran-
some. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-075899-8 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-075898-1 $17.99  
Ad 6-9 yrs
In Turner’s free-verse imagined memoir, the woman who would claim the name 
Sojourner Truth narrates her personal journey from slave, to runaway, to aboli-
tionist speaker. While Truth’s story has been retold often in picture books (and a 
solid list of further reading for children is appended in this title), the voice here 
is distinctive, dignified, and lyrical (“Something about my voice is like/ a blanket 
on a fretful baby/ then at times/ my voice is like Gabriel’s trumpet,/ firing people 
up,/ telling them the good news of salvation/ and the terrible days of slavery”). 
Continuity, however, is an issue throughout the text and pictures, with holes in 
374 • The BulleTin
Truth’s narrative that depend on a final author’s note to fill. For instance, when 
Truth escapes from her owners, the Dumonts, with her baby, the baby promptly 
drops out of sight, and when she refers to a legal claim on her freedom, the nature 
of that claim requires explanation it never receives. Ransome’s watercolor rendering 
of “evil mistress” Mrs. Dumont, coyly puckering her lips when her husband offers 
her a flower, breaks the serious tone of the text with an oddly comical turn; figures 
and faces veer from realistic portraiture to doll-like stylization. Words, however, are 
not dependent here upon images, and for listeners with adequate background on 
Truth’s life and times, this could be a powerful, moving readaloud.  EB
vAn Ark, kAtie The Boy Next Door. Swoon Reads/Feiwel, 2015 [352p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-250-06146-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Maddy and Gabe: neighbors, skating partners, best friends for nearly all their seven-
teen years. He chauffeurs her so she can avoid learning to drive, and she helps him 
weasel out of his numerous short-term romances. Their athletic, energetic skating 
routines showcase their talents and compatibility, with fearless Maddy embracing 
difficult moves and muscular Gabe providing the perfect foil. When their coach 
insists that a romantic new program is needed to keep their competitive edge, the 
friends have very different reactions. Clear about the emotions underpinning her 
relationship with Gabe, Maddy experiences immediate and uncomplicated elation 
at skating Romeo and Juliet that sharply contrasts with Gabe’s horrified response. 
The book establishes this tension from the book’s first pages and launches from 
there, quickly revealing through alternating narrative voices that Gabe’s reaction 
results not from a lack of attraction to Maddy but from his determined suppression 
of such feeling. Thus the reader knows the challenge as these two friends navigate 
their growing passion on and off the ice: it’s not will they recognize their feelings, 
but how they will address those emotions and get to the satisfying ending of this 
consummate (and consummated) romance. Unfortunately, Maddy’s personality 
falls flat, and the rocky road to true love becomes goes beyond genre-predictable 
to labored and even saccharine (think foreshadowing through a fake wedding and 
plentiful mention of Pachelbel’s Canon in D). Nonetheless, the skating scenes have 
some charm, and the ice steams; this therefore may please aspiring skaters and is 
an even likelier bet for aspiring lovers.  AA
wAgner, lAurA roSe Hold Tight, Don’t Let Go. Amulet, 2015 263p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1204-3 $17.95  
R Gr. 8-12
Manman, Magdalie’s aunt, is the only mother fifteen-year-old Magdalie has ever 
really known, and cousin Nadou has been as close as a sister. Although the small fam-
ily has lived in Port-au-Prince in what outsiders might consider poverty, Manman 
has funded the girls’ private-school education with her tireless labor as a domestic 
worker. All that changes in a flash when their world literally crumbles in the 2010 
Haitian earthquake, Manman is crushed in the house collapse, and the girls’ uncle, 
Tonton Élie, steps in as guardian. For Nadou, better days are in store, as her father 
in the United States brings her to Florida, and she vows she’ll find a way to get 
Magdalie a visa to join them. Anyone with an inkling of the rustiness of America’s 
Golden Door, though, knows this is an illusion and that Magdalie needs to make 
other plans. Wagner paints a convincing picture of post-earthquake survival—with 
March 2015 • 375
makeshift communities, reliance on foreign aid, haves and have-nots, surprising 
touches of normalcy (think manicures), and desperate gambles (could sex work be 
the only option?). Fortunately, relatives in the countryside—and even a prospective 
lover—entice Magdalie to a different style of life away from the broken city. Life 
in the countryside is no idyll, though, and the tragedy of Magdalie’s situation is 
less about poverty and more about the soul-wrenching uncertainty over whether 
this is a hard transition to better times or a new normal with no future. Treatment 
of Haitian cultural traditions is fascinating and respectful, and a glossary with 
pronunciation guide is included, as well as a brief history of the nation of Haiti. 
Although Magdalie’s experiences are tied to the 2010 disaster, her trials as a person 
displaced within her own country shed light on adolescent refugees whose lives are 
on hold in other lands as well.  EB
wAlker, SAlly M. Winnie: The Remarkable Tale of a Real Bear; illus. by Jonathan 
D. Voss. Holt, 2015 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9715-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 7-10 yrs
Most kids have heard of Winnie-the-Pooh but far fewer have heard of Winnie, a real 
black bear at the London Zoo, who inspired Christopher Robin Milne to rename 
his stuffed bear “Winnie-the-Pooh” and his father, A. A. Milne, to chronicle Pooh’s 
imaginary adventures. Walker sets out to fill this gap for kids, pithily describing how 
Harry Colebourn, a veterinarian in the Canadian Armed Services during World 
War I, purchased the American black bear as a cub, named the bear Winnipeg (later 
shortened to “Winnie”) after his regiment’s hometown, and took the animal with 
him to Britain on his way to war. When Colebourn was called to France he wisely 
left Winnie behind at the London Zoo, where she became a popular zoo attraction 
due to her gentle friendliness and, after Milne wrote about her stuffed namesake, 
her connection to the Pooh books. This is an intriguing and well-written look 
at a different era of wild animal care, and some kids may mourn the days when 
exotic pets were widely legal and zoo visitors were allowed close contact with the 
animals, even while they acknowledge that such treatment may not have been in 
the animals’ best interest. The real-life connection to Milne’s Winnie-the-Pooh will 
draw kids into the history of the book, and photographs of Winnie, Colebourn, 
and the Milnes on the endpapers will interest youngsters as well. Voss’ watercolor 
and pen and ink illustrations paint a casual and affectionate portrait of man and 
bear, and kids will be amused by his depictions of Winnie’s antics. An author’s note 
offers further information about Colebourn, Winnie and her species, and the Milne 
connection, and lists of written and internet sources (including a link to vintage 
zoo video with footage of Winnie) are also included.  JH
wArgA, JASMine My Heart and Other Black Holes. Balzer + Bray/HarperCol-
lins, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232467-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232469-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
“All I know is that I’m not going to stick around and find out if I become a monster 
like my dad.” So thinks sixteen-year-old Aysel, isolated, depressed, and haunted 
by the father who killed a local hero, and she’s now determined to find a suicide 
376 • The BulleTin
partner (in an arrangement that ensures they both go through with their plans) on 
her favorite suicide-themed website. Fortune delivers in the form of FrozenRobot, 
real name Roman, a teenager in the small town next to Aysel’s, who finds it impos-
sible to live with his guilt over his younger sister’s death. As Aysel grows closer to 
Roman, she finds that the relationship reduces her desire to end her life, and she 
becomes increasingly concerned that he will continue with the plan on his own. 
Aysel’s narration vividly expresses her loneliness and distance without straying too 
far from the flattened affect of “the black slug of depression,” as she describes it; 
the book realistically conveys the disorder of her thinking as she mires herself in her 
wrongheaded conviction that her mother wishes Aysel, the remaining connection 
to her father, gone. The developing romance between Aysel and Roman has enough 
rescue fantasy to please fans of escapist love stories, but there’s also realism in the 
way Aysel’s growing investment in somebody else leads her step by step away from 
death. Give this both to fans of realism and romance readers with scope for some 
darkness as well as light. A list of helplines and website resources is appended.  DS
wAtSon, Andi Princess Decomposia and Count Spatula; written and illus. by Andi 
Watson. First Second, 2015 161p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-275-0 $14.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-149-4 $10.98  
R Gr. 6-8
Princess Decomposia (friends call her Dee) has gotten used to her life of covering 
for her father, the King of the Underworld, who languishes in bed making up ill-
nesses; she fields awkward questions about whether she is actually in charge, and runs 
around like mad from the moment she wakes until she collapses at night. In comes 
a new chef, a charming, handsome vampire who seems to know exactly what Dee 
needs, whether it’s the perfect dessert to win over cranky guests or a gentle reminder 
that Dee has taken on more than she should have to. When the two escape for a 
single day in the Overworld, the king springs into action to prevent their (imagined) 
elopement, proving that he could be far more active than he has been. This graphic 
novel is absolutely—there’s no getting around the word—charming. There isn’t 
much to the plot, but the illustrations featuring Dee, a sort of grownup Wednesday 
Addams, and, for example, Clove, a head of garlic that keeps the kitchen in running 
order, are so impeccably drawn and humorously detailed that they will keep even 
non-romance fans intrigued. Those who swoon at two good souls finding each 
other in a cold, cruel world will find this pairing particularly endearing, regardless 
of their undead state. This could be exactly the crossover book that romance fans 
need to convince them once and for all that graphic novels have a place in their 
world, especially if paired with the My Boyfriend Is a Monster (Storrie’s Made for 
Each Other, BCCB 7/11, etc.) series of comic-style graphic novels about human 
girls and the various monsters they love.  AS
wAtSon, renée This Side of Home. Bloomsbury, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-5999-0668-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-10
Twins Nikki and Maya and their best friend, Essence, have grown up side-by-side 
in their Portland neighborhood. Now Essence has had to move, as her landlord has 
decided to renovate and sell her now-valuable home to an incoming white family, 
which includes a new friend for Nikki, and Tony, a guy who is very interested in 
March 2015 • 377
getting to know Maya and who seems to share her interests and values. Through 
conversations between Nikki and Maya, as well as conflicts within Maya as she 
seeks to sort out how her race matters both privately and publically, Watson paints 
a thoughtful, powerful picture of the complications of contemporary African-
American experience, especially when it rubs up against the hipster middle class. 
For instance, Nikki’s funky, thrift-store aesthetic and affinity for coffee-shop culture 
get her grief for acting white, while Maya’s braids and social conscience earn ap-
proval; on the other hand, can Maya care about race and class issues and still be 
attracted to Hitchcock films and a white boy? Without ever losing focus on the 
story of a group of likable teens working through changes during their senior year, 
Watson effectively manages character and situation to create a genuinely interroga-
tive, genuinely multi-voiced perspective that reflects efforts to negotiate personal 
identity and desires amid unresolved problems of systemic racial injustice.  KC 
weekS, SArAh Glamourpuss; illus. by David Small. Scholastic, 2015 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-545-60954-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-8 yrs
Glamourpuss the cat has it made as the overindulged pet of “gazillionaires” Mr. 
and Mrs. Highhorsen until the day Mr. Highhorsen’s sister, Eugenia, comes to visit 
from Texas, “and she had not come alone.” Bluebelle, Eugenia’s Chihuahua, steals 
the spotlight with over-the-top outfits and a variety of performance tricks, which 
Glamourpuss’ owners might actually admire more than the austere charms of their 
own cat. However, after Glamourpuss spies Bluebelle ripping her costumes and 
props to shreds in disgust, Glamourpuss obligingly instructs Bluebelle in the art 
of hauteur and ends up making a pal in the process. The text’s reveling in frothy 
excess is quite entertaining, as is the imperious tone of Weeks’ narration: “How 
could anyone think Bluebelle was more glamorous than she was? It was preposter-
ous! Outrageous! Absurd!” While the ending is slightly pat, kids will easily relate 
to Glamourpuss’ feelings of inferiority and jealousy, if not her wealth. It’s Small’s 
illustrations (done in ink, watercolor, pastel, and collage), though, that, much like 
Bluebelle, steal the show here. With her plump but sinuous white form, Glamour-
puss leisurely sashays her way across the pages, in contrast to Bluebelle’s frenetic 
posturing in her absurd costumes (some of which include hideous attached ringlets 
of hair); the pup’s Carmen-Miranda-inspired ensemble (complete with maracas) 
will certainly get kids giggling. Cat lovers and fans of the Fancy Nancy series may 
especially enjoy this feline perspective on the glamorous life.  JH
weil, cynthiA I’m Glad I Did. Soho Teen, 2015 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-61695-356-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
If anyone knows the ins and outs of the music business in the early 1960s, it’s Rock 
and Roll and Songwriters’ Hall of Famer Cynthia Weil (writer of megahits such as 
“You’ve Lost That Lovin’ Feelin’”). She sets her first YA novel in the music indus-
try’s famed Brill Building in 1963, following sixteen-year-old JJ Green through a 
summer internship during which she hopes to convince her parents that she can 
make a living writing songs instead of joining the family tradition of becoming 
a lawyer. JJ’s uncle is a bigwig in the music business, but his affiliation with the 
378 • The BulleTin
Kosher Nostra has estranged him from the family; while JJ really wants to make it 
on her own, she soon learns that a nudge from her uncle goes a long way. She also 
meets two people that change her life: Dulcie Brown, a former blues singer turned 
night janitor, and Luke Silver, the son of her uncle’s recently deceased partner. Their 
collaboration on a song for Dulcie’s comeback turns into sleuthing when Dulcie is 
found dead, and the investigation uncovers a life-changing revelation for Luke. JJ 
is both starry-eyed and determined; she takes risks on and off the job while care-
fully weighing the consequences of straying over the lines her parents and her boss 
have established for her. The themes here, from first love to breaking away from 
parental expectations, from race relations to the thrill of succeeding in a competitive 
industry, position this perfectly for YA readers. The prose is straightforward and 
conversational, and Weil finds just the right balance between cynicism and hope, 
romance and heartbreak—kind of like one of her songs.  KC
white, J. A. The Thickety: The Whispering Trees; illus. by Andrea Offermann. Te-
gen/HarperCollins, 2015 [528p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-225729-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-225730-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-7
In this sequel to The Thickety: A Path Begins (BCCB 5/14), Kara and her brother, 
Taff, have fled the ominous village where she was wanted for witchcraft, and they 
have landed in an equally menacing location, the Thickety. Kara’s first priority is 
to keep her beloved brother safe, though that is a difficult task indeed in a place 
with so many life-threatening things, including Mary Kettle (a witch about whom 
they’ve heard terrible stories but who is currently one of their only potential allies). 
Kara is just as gritty as before, but she shares focus with several other gripping 
characters including Taff, who is coming into his own less flashy but still intrigu-
ing powers, and a host of complex, nuanced villains who challenge her. There is 
no guaranteed happy ending here; Kara and Taff are consistently outmatched in 
terms of magic but also in terms of negotiating social interactions with creatures 
and people who are much more adept than they at manipulating truths. White 
integrates key details of the earlier novel with impeccable ease, so that new readers 
may be able to follow the story without having read the first book; this is such an 
exceptionally well-written and compelling sequel, though, that they’ll undoubtedly 
want to go back and see how it started, and they’ll join the existing fans in eagerly 
anticipating the next volume.  AS
wignell, edel Bilby: Secrets of an Australian Marsupial; illus. by Mark Jackson.
See review under Saxby, p. 370.
winter, JonAh The Founding Fathers!: Those Horse-Ridin’, Fiddle-Playin’, Book-
Readin’, Gun-Totin’ Gentlemen Who Started America; illus. by Barry Blitt. Ath-
eneum, 2015 42p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4274-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4275-7 $12.99  
R Gr. 2-5
If the curriculum demands you learn about eighteenth-century dead white guys, 
you might as well have some fun doing it. In a style much abridged but similar to 
March 2015 • 379
Kathleen Krull’s gossipy collective biographies, Winter supplies a humorous but 
cogent summary of the contributions of fourteen “founders,” while Blitt offers 
comical political cartoon–style portraits and vignettes. John Hancock sleeps on a 
“mattress” of money bags, and Winter observes, “If you’re going to stage a revo-
lution, you better have some cash. Well, boys and girls, John Hancock was Mr. 
Money Bags—one of the richest men in all the colonies.” Benjamin Rush, “Father 
of American Medicine,” listens to the heartbeat of a bald eagle, and Winter remarks, 
“Though he hated slavery and argued that black people were just as smart as white 
people, he ALSO thought that being black was a kind of skin disease . . . that could 
be cured!” Winter also presents a half-page of fast facts per subject, categorized to 
enable comparisons among the founders, e.g., amount of land owned, number 
of human slaves owned, hobbies, wealth. He generally plays it straight, but kids 
who read completely and carefully will uncover some witty one-offs: Gouverneur 
Morris’s religion? “Episcopalian? Deist? Who knows?”; James Madison’s “Stance 
on France”? “C’est magnifique!” As one might expect, brevity of entries does not 
allow for nuance, and readers may later need to revise some of Winter’s shortcuts 
and generalizations. Nonetheless, eight pages of entertaining supplemental front 
and back matter on what the founders were up against (and where to find online 
information about them) will help straighten matters out.  EB
380 • The BulleTin
Blowing our own horn DeparTmenT:
cArt, MichAel And chriStine A. JenkinS Top 250 LGBTQ Books for Teens: 
Coming Out, Being Out, and the Search for Community. Huron Street/ALA, 
2015 164p illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-937589-56-1 $21.95
Graduate School of Library and Information Science professor Christine Jenkins 
rejoins her co-author Michael Cart (from The Heart Has Its Reasons) in this an-
notated bibliography of significant LGBTQ-themed young adult titles.  Sections 
feature fiction, graphic novels, and nonfiction, as well as professional resources; 
titles include material from the past few decades, but there’s a strong emphasis on 
recency, with plenty of books published since 2010, so Aidan Chambers’ Dance 
on My Grave (1982) sits comfortably alongside Susan Kuklin’s Beyond Magenta 
(2014). The graphic novel and nonfiction sections are particularly likely to bring 
new books to user attention, but the rich fiction section, which includes hi-los and 
books from smaller presses as well as mainstream successes, is sure to uncover new 
possibilities as well. An appendix explains the thematic codes employed; an index 
of authors, titles, and topics is included.  DS
Bulletin reviewer and Associate Professor of English Karen Coats has received the 
Outstanding University Researcher Award for 2015 from Illinois State University, 
in recognition of her research and her contribution to the discipline. 
Bulletin editor Deborah Stevenson will give the 2015 Lois Lenski Lecture at Illinois 
State University on Monday, March 30.
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
March 2015 • 381
Activists: Thompson
Activists–fiction: Turner
Actors and acting–fiction: Keenan-
Bolger; McCoy
AdvenTure: Adrian; Breslin; 
Ford; Hall; Khoury; Korman; 
Lee; Sanderson
Africa–fiction: Khoury
African Americans: Alko; Benson
African Americans–fiction: Grimes; 
Turner; Watson, r.
Animals: Saxby; Walker; Wignell
Animals–stories: Antony; Atteberry; 
Mack
Art: Benson
Asian Americans–fiction: La˙i
Astronauts–fiction: Brown
Athletes: Thompson
Aunts–fiction: Blume
Baseball: Appel
Bears: Walker
Bears–stories: Sarcone-roach
BioGrApHieS: Benson; Grimes; 
Sundquist; Winter
Books and reading–fiction: Banks
Brothers–fiction: Lynn; ruby
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Bradley, 
K.; White
Bullies–fiction: Falkoff
Cats–stories: Weeks
Civil rights movement: Alko
Clothing: Albee
Conspiracies–fiction: Hall; Korman
Cousins–fiction: Wagner
Crime and criminals–fiction: Ford; 
McCoy; omololu; ruby; Weil
Curses–fiction: Hellisen
death and dying–fiction: Brown
depression–fiction: niven; Warga
determination–stories: ray
disabilities: Sundquist; Thompson
disabilities–fiction: Bradley, K.; 
Strayhorn
disasters–fiction: Wagner
dogs–stories: Cronin; Sarcone-roach
dragons–stories: Breslin
dyslexia–fiction: Hunt
easter–stories: Kaplan
eSp–fiction: Adrian
Ethics and values: Crowder; Green-
wald; ryan; Thorne
Faith–fiction: Holmes
Families: Alko
Families–fiction: deCamp; Harazin; 
Thorne
Families–stories: Kaplan
FAnTASy: Banks; Breslin; don; 
Hellisen; Lee; ruby; Sanderson; 
Strayhorn; White
Fashion: Albee
Fathers–fiction: Lynch
Fear–fiction: o’doherty
FoLKTALeS And FAiry TALeS: 
Breslin; don; Hellisen
Food and eating–stories: Antony
Friends–fiction: Brown; Falkoff;  
Greenwald; Keenan-Bolger; Warga
Friends–stories: Cronin; Lundquist
GrApHiC noveLS: Lynn; Wat-
son, A.
Grief–fiction: Falkoff; niven; Warga
Guilt–fiction: Warga
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CApS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
382 • The BulleTin
Haiti–fiction: Wagner
HiSToriCAL FiCTion: Bradley, 
K.; Crowder; deCamp; Grimes; 
napoli; ryan; Scattergood; Turner; 
Weil
History, European: rockliff
History, U.S.: Appel; Winter
History, world: Albee
Hockey–stories: Bradley, S.
Homelessness–fiction: Lynch
Hugs–stories: Mack
HuMor: Atteberry; Biddulph; 
Bradley, S.; Cronin; deCamp; 
Greenwald; Kaplan; Lynn; Mack; 
o’doherty; Sarcone-roach; Weeks; 
Winter
ice dancing–stories: Bradley, S.
ice skating–fiction: van Ark
identity–fiction: omololu; Strayhorn; 
Watson, r.
illness–fiction: Harazin
independence–stories: Kaplan
Kangaroos: Saxby
Labor movement–fiction: Crowder
Language arts: Sarcone-roach
Latinos–fiction: omololu
Learning disabilities–fiction: Hunt
Literature, children’s: Walker
Literature, English: Lauer
Lying–stories: Sarcone-roach
Magic–fiction: White
MAGiCAL reALiSM: ruby
Manners–stories: Antony
Memories–fiction: Cook
Monsters–stories: Atteberry
Mothers–fiction: Blume
Music and musicians–fiction: ryan; 
Scattergood; Weil
Music and musicians–stories: ray
MySTerieS: Korman; McCoy;  
oliver; omololu; Weil
Nature study: Saxby; Wignell
orphans–fiction: napoli; Scattergood
penguins–stories: Biddulph
pets–stories: Weeks
play–stories: Lundquist
poeTry: Lauer
politics–fiction: Thorne
puzzles–fiction: Ford
rabbits–stories: Atteberry; Kaplan
Readers theater: Grimes
Reading aloud: Hunt
Reading, beginning: Cronin; Lynn
Reading, reluctant: deCamp; 
o’doherty
refugees–fiction: Wagner
relationships: Sundquist
relationships–fiction: Cook; Hara-
zin; Lynch; niven; oliver; ruby; 
Thorne; van Ark; Watson, r.
reputation–fiction: Holmes
rHyMinG STorieS: Biddulph
romance–fiction: Hall; van Ark; 
Watson, A.
royalty–fiction: Watson, A.
runaways–fiction: Lynch
Scandinavia–fiction: napoli
School–fiction: Hunt
Science: rockliff
SCienCe FiCTion: Adrian; Cook; 
Khoury
Scotland–stories: Breslin; don
Secrets–fiction: Cook; Falkoff; Hall; 
Korman
Sisters–fiction: McCoy; oliver
Slavery–fiction: Grimes; Turner
SporTS STorieS: Appel; Bradley, 
S.; Thompson; van Ark
Storytime: Atteberry
Suicide–fiction: Falkoff; niven; Warga
Superheroes–fiction: Lee; Sanderson
SurvivAL STorieS: Holmes
SuSpenSe: Korman
Theater–fiction: Keenan-Bolger
Twins–fiction: omololu
uncles–fiction: Scattergood
vampires–fiction: Watson, A.
verSe noveLS: Crowder; Turner
vietnam–fiction: La˙i
voyages and travel–fiction: Banks; 
Biddulph; Blume; Hall; Harazin; 
La˙i; napoli; White
Work–fiction: Crowder
World War ii–fiction: Bradley, K.
Writers and writing–fiction: Banks
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 68 (2015).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $62.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$103.00 (print); $115.00 (online);  
$144.00 (print & online)
 
To order or To Join
Call 360.571.4520; visit us online at www.childlitassn.org; or 
write ChLA at P.O. Box 138, Battle Creek, MI 49016-0138.
MeMbers get it.
Claudia Nelson, Editor  
Texas a&M UniversiTy
Anne Morey, Texas a&M UniversiTy and  Sara K. Day, 
soUThern arkansas UniversiTy, Associate Editors
Children’s Literature Association Quarterly publishes 
first-rate scholarship in children’s literature studies. 
Each issue features an editorial introduction, juried 
articles about research and scholarship in children’s 
literature, and book reviews. The Quarterly is available 
to members of the Children’s Literature Association 
(ChLA) as a benefit of membership.  
Published quarterly in Spring, Summer, Fall, and Winter for 
the Children’s Literature Association (ChLA). Volume 40 (2015). 
ISSN 0885-0429; E-ISSN 1553-1201.
Children’s literature assoCiation Quarterly
Individual and institutional 
subscription is one of many benefits of 
membership to the ChLA.
