I 
LINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
SKirkus Reviews pointer
6 
and -*
THE 
BRAVE 
GOOD 
BUGS
W2llSum Joyce
"As an old lady lies abed and her garden fails with her, a doughty band
of doodlebugs-'Tiny of body but brave of heart, we will finish what we
start!'-climbs the tallest tree in search of the elusive Leaf Men, hoping
they can set things right. Indeed they can: [After) a short but sharp battle
in which the evil Spider Queen is slain, the Leaf Men, 'gardeners of a
grand and elfin sort,' doctor the foliage, then bring the old woman back
from the brink. .
[A full-color] grand adventure." 
-Kirkus 
Reviews
Ages 4-8. $15.95TR 0-06-027237-6: $15.89LB 0-06-027238-4
Among William Joyce's other full-color picture books
SANTA CALLS
All ages. $15.95TR 0-06-021133-4
DINOSAUR BOB And His Adventures with the Family Lazardo
Includes 16 new pages of story and art
Ages 4-8. $15.00TR 0-06-021074-5: $14.89LB 0-06-021075-3
Dinosaur Bob Doll $15.95 0-06-940-0696-3
The Ballad of Dinosaur Bob Mini Bk/Cassette $11.95 0-069470-059-2
LAURA GERINGER BOOKS
I HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
a
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
December 1996
Vol. 50 No. 4
A LOOK INSIDE
125 THE BIG PICTURE
Going Back Home: An Artist Returns to the South by Toyomi Igus;
illustrated by Michele Wood
126 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
128 * Beyond the Western Sea, Book Two: Lord Kirkle's Money by Avi
132 * The Young Inline Skater by Chris Edwards; illus. with photographs
137 * Jack, Skinny Bones, and the Golden Pancakes by M. C. Helldorfer; illus.
by Elise Primavera
141 
Jacks Around the World by Mary D. Lankford; illus. by Karen Dugan
143 
* Shiloh Season by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor
148 
* The Final ourney by Gudrun Pausewang
156 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
157 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate'School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
Susan S. Verner, Reviewer (SSV)
Amy E. Brandt, Graduate Research Assistant (AEB)
Lisa Mahoney, Graduate Research Assistant (LM)
Pam McCuen, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820-7407. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1996 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Michele Wood, from Going Back Home: An Artist Returns to the South © 1996
and used by permission of Children's Book Press.
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
125
THE BIG PICTURE
Going Back Home: An Artist Returns to the South
by Toyomi Igus; illustrated by Michele Wood
All lives are political, some more than others. When an African-Ameri-
can woman delves into her own and her family's past, it's bound to throw personal
experience into political perspective. Going Back Home is distinguished by the
natural aesthetic balance that artist Michele Wood and writer Toyomi Igus main-
tain between the personal and the political, a balance that is too rarely achieved in
juvenile biography, autobiography, and personal narrative. What's even more
unusual is the success of a collaborative effort between a painter depicting her
subject and an "interpreter" who tells the artist's story, connecting the pictures
into a compelling sequence so that the text is not merely a description of preexist-
ing art but a force moving it forward.
"When I was a little girl, I heard many stories about my family-where
they came from, what life was like before I was born. This is a picture of me sitting
at my aunt's knee, listening to her tales as she did my hair." Igus' opening words
face a full-page oil painting, with strong brush strokes and abstractly patterned
hues, depicting an intimate, madonna-and-child grooming scene. In the next
pages we hear and see Wood's journey into the past, including slavery, sharecrop-
ping, blues singing, getting married, going to church, migrating north and west
and east, and passing on a cultural heritage both proud and imaginatively charged.
"I once saw a picture of a doll that a little slave girl named Emmaline
made for her white master's daughter. I felt sad when I thought about the doll that
Emmaline could not own, so I painted this picture. I dressed the doll in red,
white, and blue to represent America. Behind her you can see an African Ameri-
can soldier who fought for this country even though our people were not allowed
to be free here." As this quote demonstrates, there's no nostalgia for the "good old
days" of African-American history, as we've seen in some romantically glamorized
picture books recently; neither are there overdramatized exploitation of historical
horrors or didactically informational dialogue.
At each step of the way, we hear about Wood's discoveries, their histori-
cal context, and the choices she made in expressing them through her art. She and
her interpreter have trusted the inherent drama of the subject to project her story
without tonal manipulation or adulation. The haunting self-portrait Wood places
at the end of her journey concludes the book on a justifiably hopeful note: "After
going back home, I know more about who I am and I can picture the person I
want to be-a seeker of knowledge, a creator of visions, and a keeper of my family's
history." With the help of a skillful partner, she's advanced toward that goal sig-
nificantly.
126 
* THE BULLETIN
Reinforcing their joint efforts is some assertive book design that throws
Wood's deep colors into contrast against a window of golden light behind the text,
which is in turn bordered on one side with designs picked up from the paintings.
The stately size of the book itself heightens the figures, giving them stature and
emphasizing a vertical sweep of movement in tension with horizontal lines. The
print is big but not blocky; a large golden letter beginning each page of text serves
to balance the bold images of the facing art.
At once calm and honest, this is a book to read aloud and discuss along
with other titles such as Gwen Everett's Li'l Sis and Uncle Willie (BCCB 4/92),
Faith Ringgold's Tar Beach (BCCB 3/91) and Sherley Anne Williams' Working
Cotton (BCCB 11/92). Wood's emotionally magnetic paintings are occasionally
reminiscent of Picasso's compositions and of Friedensreich Hundertwasser's swirl-
ing masks, while Igus' minimal text holds attention through a controlled selection
of telling detail. Yes, Black History month is in February, but this book is a gift, so
we're featuring it for the holiday season. (Imprint information appears on p. 139.)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADA, ALMA FLOR Jordi's Star; illus. by Susan Gaber. 
Putnam, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22832-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
There is little vegetation on the deforested hillsides in Catalonia where the bearded
Jordi herds his goats, and when he attempts to dig a well, the rocky ground yields
no water. The effect of a sudden rainstorm changes his solitary, workaday life
when he discovers a fallen star in the pool made by rainwater in his well hole.
Touched that the star has chosen him for a companion, Jordi honors their friend-
ship with gifts of quartz, moss, and wildflowers that he places in and around the
pool. Jordi eventually replants the entire mountainside, learning to reach out to
people along the way (a la Miss Rumphius and The Selfish Giant). Unfortunately,
Ada's explanation ofJordi's misunderstanding of the star's reflection denies read-
ers the suspension of disbelief necessary in a folktale-like story. This defensive
action weakens our opinion of Jordi, making his croonings to the star sound sen-
timental and silly. Gaber expresses the rocky, unpredictable landscape with dark
hues of blue, brown, and green, lightening her palette as Jordi's relationship with
the star grows. Small details supplement narrative events, as when starlight from
the sky-bound star shines through Jordi's window as he sleeps, while Jordi himself
is a broad and solid figure at home in his environment, whether barren or beauti-
fied. AEB
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
127
ADEDJOUMA, DAVIDA, comp. ed. 
The Palm ofMy Heart: Poetry by African Ameri-
can Children; illus. by Gregory Christie. 
Lee & Low, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 1-880000-41-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
Twenty short poems by African-American students are gathered in this picture-
book-sized collection that celebrates being black. Stunning acrylic and colored-
pencil illustrations enhance brief moodpieces such as the title poem: "Black is
dark,/ dark is lovely,/ lovely is the palm of my heart/ and my heartbeats are filled
with joy." The sometimes rhyming lines artistically arranged on the page in free
verse would not be nearly as effective without their visual context. Exaggerated
and elongated human figures stand against blocks of color and suggested shapes,
reflecting the energy and passion of the text ("Black poetry/ is a dance in the sand,/
a song from a faraway land./ Come, let's dance and sing a song,/ all night long")
and resulting in an unusually affecting combination of imagery and language. JMD
ADLER, DAVID A. 
Fraction Fun; illus. by Nancy Tobin. 
Holiday House,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1259-8 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Adler presents the concept of fractions with the tried-and-true example of dividing
a pie (pizza pie, in this case), then directs readers to draw lines across paper plates
and color the eight resultant wedges in various color combinations. It may be a
fusty old tactic, but it works as well as any, and Adler doesn't shy away from
correct terminology-numerators and denominators-in this primary-grade in-
troduction. Next he launches into some hands-on experimentation: using a postal
scale, readers weigh various light items (coins, tissues, pencils, etc.) to determine
how many of the objects make up an ounce, then express each item's weight as a
fraction of an ounce, and finally compare the fractions. Tobin supplies a jazzy,
eye-popping color scheme and diagrams of exceptional clarity to illuminate the
straightforward text. This title should fit the bill for students ready to venture a
step or two beyond Bruce McMillan's Eating Fractions (BCCB 9/91) EB
AuIK 
Hello! Good-bye!; written and illus. by Aliki. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14334-2 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14333-4 
$15.00 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
The many ways people greet and take leave from families and strangers, friends,
and-well-not-friends are explored here. Aliki addresses circumstances and
moods, verbal and non-verbal communication, and subtle differences in translat-
ing "Hello" across cultures. Cheery single pictures and panels of illustration gen-
erously bordered by clean white space illuminate simple observations, such as "Hello
comes in assorted moods" ("friendly/dreaded" finds a doctor, hypo syringe in hand,
proffering a cordial "Hello there" to a young boy beating it out the examining-
room door). Too often, however, even the pictures cannot fully explain some of
Aliki's sophisticated vocabulary-the crowd shouting "Hail Caesar" probably won't
clarify "ovation," and children who see the king proceed to the throne below his
trumpeters will still not quite grasp the stirring quality of this "musical hello."
Lacking the creative pizzazz of Raschka's Yo! Yes? (BCCB 4/93), which demon-
strated such messages in action, this somewhat bland concept book should none-
theless get listeners thinking about the messages they send comin' and goin'. EB
128 
* THE BULLETIN
Avi 
Beyond the Western Sea, Book Two: Lord Kirkle's Money. 
Jackson/Orchard,
1996 
[4 0 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08870-7 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09520-7 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 6-9
At the conclusion of Book One, exhausted emigrants Patrick and Maura were
awaiting their steerage berth assignments, errant Sir Laurence was stowed away in
a crate in the Robert Peel's hold, and readers were clenching their teeth firmly on
their fingernails. Scarcely skipping a heartbeat between volumes, Avi lashes the
action along, setting old enemies on the trio's trail and new obstacles in their path,
most formidable of which is the Order of the Star-spangled Banner, an anti-immi-
grant organization lying in ambush in the children's promised land of Lowell,
Massachusetts. Luckily, new allies join the side of the angels: Nathaniel, Da's
teenaged roommate; the Hamlyns, kindly boarding house owners; even the once-
treacherous Mr. Grout, now repentant and zealously atoning for past misdeeds.
Taut and ingenious plotting, breakneck pacing, and meticulously timed shifts among
story lines easily counter the Dickensian heft of the saga, and readers can expect to
put their own lives on hold until the last villain is punished, all heroes and heroines
are rewarded, and the back cover is slapped shut with a sigh of relief. EB
BANG, MOLLY 
Goose; written and illus. by Molly Bang. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
1996 
36p
ISBN 0-590-89005-0 
$10.95 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
"On a dreadfully dark and stormy night," a goose egg rolls out of its nest, down a
deep hole, and into a woodchuck den. The egg hatches, and the little goose is
accepted as a member of the woodchuck family. But even though her family and
friends love her, the goose is unhappy, and she sets off into the world. Sad and
lonely, not looking where she's going, she slips off a cliff and, while struggling not
to fall, spreads her wings and flies ("You know, that goose surprised everyone,
especially herself"). This predictable Buscaglia-flavored fable is uplifted by Molly
Bang's paintings. Lush grass greens, deep tree-trunk browns, and rich sky blues
serve as a backdrop for first the yellow gosling and later the black-and-white goose.
The small format increases the intimacy of the rather precious tale, and the combi-
nation of full-page, double-spread, and detail paintings add to the visual harmony.
JMD
BARTONE, ELISA 
American Too; illus. by Ted Lewin. 
Lothrop, 1996 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13279-0 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13278-2 
$16.00 
M 
5-8 yrs
Rosie, an Italian immigrant in early twentieth-century New York, is taunted by
some neighborhood girls because she wears a coral horn necklace to ward off the
evil eye. Resolving to be truly a modern American, Rosie throws aside her talis-
man, renames her doll Meghan O'Hara, and angrily explodes at her father when he
announces she will be queen of the San Gennaro feast-day parade. However, in-
spired by the Statue of Liberty, Rosie finds a way to reconcile tradition with assimi-
lation-she leads the parade dressed as Lady Liberty herself. While the plot (which
jacket notes indicate is based on a family story) is easy enough to digest, both text
and illustrations are bound to provoke a string of questions: What is an evil eye?
What are "provolone the size of baseballs"? Why does beautifully garbed Rosie
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
129
wear the same dress all week? Who is San Gennaro, anyway? Rich, detailed water-
colors offer an intriguing tour of Mulberry Street and its environs, but Rosie and
her family and neighbors tend to mug and pose in rigid tableaux. Lewin lays on
the patriotic sentimentality with a trowel, portraying Rosie head-to-head with the
Statue of Liberty or hand-in-hand with a costumed Uncle Sam, as other immi-
grants dance beneath a burst of fireworks. If an Italian-specific work is called for,
this may pass muster, but for a picture book on immigrant assimilation, try Cohen's
Molly's Pilgrim (BCCB 2/84) instead. EB
BLUMBERG, RHODA 
Full Steam Ahead: The Race to Build a Transcontinental
Railroad. National Geographic, 1996 
160p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-2715-8 
$18.95 
R Gr. 5-8
After chugging through introductory material on the genesis of the cross-country
railroad plan and the political hamstringing that kept it on the back burner for
years, Blumberg picks up steam in the ensuing account of the Central Pacific's
eastward push and the Union Pacific's frantic race to connect with them as far to
the west as possible, with each competitor grabbing oodles of government money
along the way. After being introduced to a host of partisan politicians, sleazy
financiers and boosters, unethical engineers, and naive government rail inspectors
(to say nothing of outraged American Indians tearing up the tracks), readers may
marvel that the railroad ever got built at all. Period photos and enlarged engrav-
ings convey the Herculean tasks laid before the workers-from Chinese blasters
who hung against the mountainsides in woven baskets, to navvies who cleared
snow drifts as high as telegraph poles from the rails, to ingenious organizers who
devised entire cities on wheels to house and supply an army of workers. As always,
Blumberg's endnotes and annotations, bibliography, and index are meticulous.
Students looking for a lively research topic couldn't do better than to get on board.
EB
BUNTING, EVE 
Going Home; illus. by David Diaz. 
Cotler/HarperCollins,
1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026297-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026296-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-8 yrs
Migrant farmworkers, Carlos' parents have loaded up the station wagon and are
heading home to La Perla, Mexico, from California for the Christmas holidays.
The adults are excited, but Carlos and his sisters do not remember Mexico and
find it hard to understand their parents' excitement. "Why did you ever leave?"
the children ask. "There is no work in La Perla. We are here for the opportuni-
ties." When they arrive, there are hugs all around from family and friends, and
"that night, everyone in La Perla comes to Grandfather's house. The walls bulge
with talk and rememberings." Carlos and his sisters begin to understand that the
opportunities their parents speak of are not opportunities for the grown-ups but
for the children. Bunting's text skirts contrivance by focusing on the closeness of
the family and the joy of a family reunion. Diaz' illustrations show a handsome
family driving through village after village, seasonal ornaments and designs pro-
viding a varied background to their travels. The watercolor and ink paintings,
framed in black borders and floral patterns, are set against color photographs of
Mexican folk art and blooming flowers. Diaz' illustrations are the main attraction
130 
* THE BULLETIN
in a flawed design: the photographic backgrounds, sometimes focused, sometimes
fuzzy, distract greatly from the overall compositions, but the paintings are still an
appealing combination of earthy and whimsical, the solid geometric figures of the
family fairly floating in a landscape of stars, cows, and unusual perspectives. JMD
CHRISTELOW, EILEEN 
Five Little Monkeys With Nothing to Do; written and illus.
by Eileen Christelow. 
Clarion, 1996 
[36p]
ISBN 0-395-75830-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
Christelow's five little monkeys are back, and they're bored with summer vacation
and itching for something to do. Fortunately, Grandma Bessie is due for lunch
and, as Mama says, "The house must be neat and clean" for Bessie's arrival. When-
ever the five monkeys announce their boredom, Mama finds yet another task until
they've cleaned the bedroom, bathroom, and rugs and picked fresh berries.
Christelow provides a neat twist as the monkeys, bathing and dressing after the
berry-picking expedition, reduce the gleaming house to a mud-spattered, berry-
stained wreck. Cartoon-like illustrations expressive of children's many moods-
from the slump of boredom to proper toilet-cleaning attitude (hand over the eyes
and tongue stuck out)-accompany a good-humored text. The story, well-stocked
with repetition and refrains that will make it a lively readaloud, provides an early
introduction to the homemaker's perpetual lament: no sooner do you clean some-
thing than it's dirty again. LM
COBURN, JEWELL REINHART, ad. Jouanah: A Hmong Cinderella; written by Jewell
Reinhart Coburn with Tzexa Cherta Lee; illus. by Anne Sibley O'Brien. 
Shen's,
1996 
32p
ISBN 1-885008-01-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
This Hmong version of Cinderella features a father under the thumb of his second
wife, a wicked stepsister, and Jouanah, the kind and beautiful heroine. Following
in traditional footsteps, Jouanah receives help from her dead mother, goes to the
New Year's celebration, and meets her true love, Shee-Nang, honored son of the
village elder: "Then their eyes met, and the melody encircled her like a tender
embrace." Jouanah loses a shoe, Shee-Nang retrieves it, and when he finds her, he
does not even need her to try the shoe on ("No need for words. Their hearts
touched"). They "disappear into the purple shadows of the warm, fragrant night."
The occasionally choppy writing tends toward the flowery and sentimental. Full-
page pastel illustrations alternate with pages of text, both being framed with thin
green borders and decorative designs. Small oval inserts, containing an illustrative
element that reflects an aspect of the story, sit above each text block. The faces of
the characters often lack expression, and the figures are stiffly posed within the
somewhat more articulated landscapes. A note identifies the clothing and orna-
ment style as that of the Blue Hmong clan and cites sources used for the tale. The
story is also available in Hmong and Spanish-language editions. JMD
COTTONWOOD, JOE 
Babcock. 
Scholastic, 1996 
[240p]
ISBN 0-590-22221-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Babcock (no first name) is enamored of classmate Kirsten, she of the blonde hair,
big ears, and cartwheels. Babcock deals with a lot in his rather laid-back manner:
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
131
his Uncle Earl, a con man of the first order, has moved into his room; his garage-
band rehearsals are getting a little complicated; and he has to cope with the appar-
ent racism of Kirsten's mother, as her displeasure at the friendship between her
Kirsten and the African-American Babcock becomes more pronounced. Babcock
(and Cottonwood) plays this story pretty close to the vest-there's a lot of intro-
spection and character development as the thoughtful protagonist figures out how
he's going to cope with the changes in himself and the world around him.
Cottonwood's characterizations are very strong, and the dynamic among Babcock's
circle of friends has a comfortably realistic ring. Babcock's response to his uncle
Earl-at first one of disbelief and then of affection-shows some of the confusing
complexities of human relationships, and the song lyrics and poetry written by
Babcock and Kirsten are realistically, emotively adolescent. Cottonwood ties up
all the plot lines with a firm hand, and if the conclusion seems a little pat, that's a
small thing next to Babcock, a character with character. JMD
COY, JOHN 
Night Driving; illus. by Peter McCarty. 
Holt, 1996 
32 p
ISBN 0-8050-2931-1 
$14.95 
R 6-8 yrs
A young boy and his father are night driving to the mountains in this nostalgic
paean to togetherness on the highway. In the car, the boy and his father talk, listen
to baseball games on the radio, play games, and try to stay awake. Off wheels, they
change a flat tire, look at the stars, pump gas, and have breakfast at a roadside
diner. Coy's text indicates the closeness of father and son and the suppressed
excitement of the boy at the adventure he's having with his father. Reminiscent of
both early Van Allsburg and Gammell, McCarty's pencil illustrations are compel-
ling combinations of light and shadow: the lines on the highway glow against the
tarmac, the stars glow in the sky, and car and truck lights glow in the soft dawn
mist. Details disappear in a fog of moonlight, and faces are less than articulated,
but that does not detract from McCarty's masterful pencil technique. This is
more mood than plot-driven, but it may well make some youngsters long for the
closeness of a nighttime car ride and remind some adults of the intimacy of long
distance road trips. JMD
CRUM, ROBERT 
Let's Rodeo: Young Buckaroos and the World's Wildest Sport; writ-
ten and illus. with photographs by Robert Crum. 
Simon, 1996 
48p
ISBN 0-689-80075-4 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
There've been a stampede of cowboy and rodeo books of late, and here's another
one. Crum focuses primarily on young competitors, kids participating, appar-
ently, in Little Britches and Peewee rodeos, and he devotes sections to several events
(those found also in adult rodeos, such as bullriding, bareback and saddle-bronc
riding, roping events, and barrel racing, as well as those such as mutton-busting
that are the domain only of youngsters) in addition to larger matters such as rodeo
clothing and the stock contractors. The organization, which interrupts the catalog
of events with extraneous matter; is a bit perplexing, and explanations tend to be
vivid and enthusiastic but incomplete. There's never any mention of the scoring
in the rough-stock events, so they sound as if they're merely timed; there's no
indication as to whether events are gender-segregated; the vacillation between de-
scription of rules for adult events and kids' events leaves the parameters unclear
(and in the section on the dangerous job of the clowns, it's never stated if kids take
this role too at youth rodeos). Though the photographs are occasionally dark and
132 
* THE BULLETIN
lacking in contrast, they convey the heat of the action and the energy of the young
wranglers as well as the allure of the sport. Ken Robbin's Rodeo, reviewed below, is
a clearer and more explanatory approach to rodeo, but this has a direct appeal to
kids that many young readers will find particularly engaging. A glossary and an
index are included. DS
DALKEY,KARA 
Little Sister. 
Yolen/Harcourt, 1996 
200p
ISBN 0-15-201392-X 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 8-12
While her father prepares for battle, thirteen-year-old Mitsuko and her family flee
for their lives. Thirteenth-century Japan is a brutal world for the unprotected, and
the family is set upon by outlaws. Her older sister Amaiko's betrothed is mur-
dered, Amaiko herself loses her mind, and the rest of her family are forced to
accept the "hospitality" of an ambitious warlord. But Mitsuko does not hide her
face in her sleeve-she determinedly seeks to restore her sister's sanity and her
family's fortune. Her quest is aided by a shape-shifting tengu named Goranu, a
renegade monk named Dento, and a host of other beings from Japanese folklore.
Dalkey guides the reader painlessly through this lesson in cultural iconography,
the quest construct working-very well as a vehicle for this combination of fantasy
and mythology. The tengu is a gleeful companion, and Mitsuko is braver than her
sheltered upbringing would suggest, her single-minded determination to rescue
her sister and reunite her family providing the necessary cohesive element in a
series of fantastical events. Her decision to become a spiritual pilgrim instead of
taking a position at the Imperial Court is a satisfying one, foreshadowed as it is by
the spiritual curiosity evident in Mitsuko's involving narration. An author's note
briefly discusses Japanese history and mythology; a glossary of Japanese terms is
included. JMD
DOYLE, DEBRA 
Groogleman; written by Debra Doyle and James D.
MacDonald. 
Yolen/Harcourt, 1996 
113p
ISBN 0-15-200235-9 
$15.00 
R Gr. 6-10
Dan isn't sure he can trust Joshua, the reticent hunter who appeared out of the
snow. But Joshua is the only one brave enough to try and save Leezie the Healer
from the Grooglemen, and Dan is determined to go with him. The Grooglemen,
the dragons, the dead lands-all are seemingly the result of some sort of techno-
logical plague, but even though the authors don't spell out the particulars, the
details hardly matter. The writing conveys a concrete sense of the physical envi-
ronment-snowbound forests, abandoned villages, barren swamps-and Dan is a
believable adolescent in a grimly dangerous situation. This post-apocalyptic fan-
tasy manages within a few pages to establish a strong picture of daily life in a social
community and an idea of a limited world order. The characters ofJoshua, Leezie,
and Dan are full-bodied and real, even set against this chaotic milieu. This in-
triguing novel suggests more than it reveals and could provoke some thoughtful
group discussion, while its brevity and readability make it useful as a hi-lo intro-
duction to fantasy and science fiction. JMD
EDWARDS, CHRIS 
The Young Inline Skater. DK, 1996 
37p 
illus. with pho-
tographs
ISBN 0-7894-1124-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-6
After brief introductory material on the history of roller skating and tips on skate
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
133
selection and maintenance, championship skater Edwards cuts to the chase with
step-by-step and stroke-by-stroke guidance on first achieving stability, then move-
ment, and eventually skill on wheels. From rotating skate wheels, to executing
turns, to traversing hills and avoiding hazards, explanations are notable for their
clarity and good humor: "Learning to get up properly will stop you from sliding
back down into your original position. This may be entertaining for people watching
but won't help you much!" The Dorling Kindersley format works to advantage
here, with numbered photo series offering clear, unobstructed views of stances and
maneuvers that verbal explanations could not readily convey. A glossary and index
round off this attractive introduction to a wildly popular sport. EB
FARMER, NANCY 
A Girl Named Disaster. Jackson/Orchard, 1996 
309p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08889-8 
$20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09539-8 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
With the help of her grandmother, Nhamo (Disaster) flees her village home in
Mozambique to escape an undesired marriage. She steals the boat of a dead neigh-
bor and sets out on the Musengezi River for Zimbabwe, hoping to locate her
father and his family. Her journey is fraught with peril, both from the natural and
spirit worlds: she avoids crocodiles and drowning to face starvation and a killing
loneliness that is only alleviated by conversations with her dead mother. Nhamo's
dreamlike encounters with the embodied forces of her religious beliefs act as a
shamanic vision quest that ultimately results in her acceptance by her powerful
grandfather, a traditional healer of her father's family, who declares her heir to his
position as nganga. This is a survival story with intense cultural and spiritual
overtones. When Farmer stays with the main plot thread-Nhamo's attempting
to survive in the wild, without much in the way of equipment or stores-there is a
suspenseful edge to the text that carries the reader through an increasingly labored
storyline. Once Nhamo is safely in Zimbabwe, the story loses much of its impe-
tus, and the ending has a desultory, tacked-on feeling. An abbreviated history of
Zimbabwe and Mozambique, a glossary of Shona and Afrikaans words, an over-
view of the Shona belief system, and a bibliography are included, as is a map of
Nhamo's route. JMD
FROESE, DEBORAH, ad. 
The Wise Washerman: A Folktale from Burma; illus. by
Wang Kui. 
Hyperion, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2232-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0291-X 
$14.95 
R Gr. 3-5
A washerman uses his wits to save himself from the envious mischief of a potter in
this tale based on elements of Burmese folklore and culture. His neighbors believe
that Aung Kyaing "worked magic in his washtub, for he made white clothes gleam
like snowcapped mountains and colorful clothes sparkle like jeweled pagodas."
The only magic the washerman knows is hard work, but that doesn't stop the
jealous potter Narathu from suggesting to the king that Aung Kyaing can turn the
king's gray elephant white. The narration is smooth and seamless, Froese's or-
derly, controlled text building to a level of mild suspense that will also make the
tale an effective readaloud. Wang Kui's gouache and watercolor illustrations are
rich and vibrant, the combination of blues, greens, and pinks reminiscent of dyed
cotton textiles. Although large text blocks surrounded by black curlicued borders
are somewhat distracting, the liquid, flowing lines add a sense of energy and mo-
134 
* THE BULLETIN
tion to the balanced compositions. An author's note offers minimal information
on Burmese culture and describes Thingyan, the Buddhist Water Festival that
figures prominently in this tale. JMD
GARDEN, NANCY 
Good Moon Rising. Farrar, 1996 
230p
ISBN 0-374-32746-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Jan, a high-school senior, is just back from summer stock and looking forward to
getting the lead role in the school production of The Crucible. But the arrival of a
new girl, Kerry, brings more than one surprise: Kerry gets the part Jan wanted,
and Jan falls in love with her. This is pretty standard stuff in the high-school
romance genre, the only curve being that Jan and Kerry are momentarily stunned
at discovering they're lesbians. The characters are stock-the drama coach who is
dying of cancer, the homophobic male lead who's going to kiss Kerry "like a real
man," the flamingly gay actor who advises Jan about homosexuality, and Jan's
former boyfriend who is a paragon of acceptance and support all fall into predict-
able place, their lines down pat. The "outing" of Jan and Kerry and the following
antagonism, while not pleasant, basically fizzles out due to lack of interest, and
everybody lives happily ever after in rosy clouds of tolerance. Cliches and naivete
abound, but then that's what romance novels are all about. JMD
GEORGE, JEAN CRAIGHEAD 
The Tarantula in My Purse and 172 Other Wild Pets;
written and illus. by Jean Craighead George. 
HarperCollins, 1996 
134p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023627-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023626-4 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Ducklings in the tub, owls in the shower, snakes under the covers, and bats in the
refrigerator-in short, just another day at the nature-loving Georges'. This is an
affectionate, shot-through-gauze memoir of George's raising her three youngsters
and half of Nature's as well. We meet magpies, robins, ducks, falcons, owls, rac-
coons, skunks, boas, bullfrogs, even the lowly housefly and learn a little about the
behavior of each species. With her trademark good humor and cheerfulness, George
matter-of-factly outlines care strategies for numerous critters (ducklings have to
dive for their food), issues warnings (raccoons will go through your jewelry), and
never loses sight of the ultimate goal of raising a wild animal-to return it to its
natural habitat. The tone evokes a time past, when even single moms who worked
at home (as did George) seemingly had ample time to indulge their kids' passions.
George proudly relates that all three of her human brood have chosen careers in-
volving wild animals. The author's compact line drawings competently illustrate
the text. SSV
GHAZI, SUHAIB HAMID 
Ramadan; illus. by Omar Rayyan. 
Holiday House,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1254-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
The fasting, altruism, and religious fellowship that mark the Islamic observance of
Ramadan are explored here in an attractive and accessible format. After briefly
introducing Ramadan's place in the lunar calendar, Ghazi describes the rigors of
fasting, the feasts which herald and break the fasts, and the prayers and commu-
nity celebrations, as experienced by a fictional American Muslim boy, Hakeem.
Rayyan's watercolors, bordered in the intricate geometrics which typify Islamic
design, fancifully combine literal depictions of Hakeem's activities with scenes
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
135
symbolic of the significance of the various religious rites (for instance, the building
of a mosaic symbolizes the building of a community). Several glitches and omis-
sions prove somewhat irritating. Elegant Arabic lettering is left untranslated, moon
phases are depicted confusingly (requiring a right-to-left "reading" in the cover
art), and, maddeningly, no mention is made of approximately where Ramadan
falls in the Western calendar. Paired with Matthews' Magid Fasts for Ramadan
(BCCB 2/96), though, this could provide listeners with an entrde into an impor-
tant American religious community that seldom receives its merited share of atten-
tion. EB
GIFF, PATRICIA REILLY 
Dance with Rosie; ISBN 0-670-86864-7; Rosie's Nutcracker
Dreams; ISBN 0-670-86865-5. 
Each book: illus. by Julie Durrell. 
Viking,
1996 
80p 
(Ballet Slippers) 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Rosie O'Meara loves the idea that her late grandmother was a famous ballerina,
and Rosie wants desperately to follow in her dancing footsteps. In the first book,
she almost blows her chance for ballet lessons, but her determination nets her a
spot in the class anyway; in the second, she accidentally jetes into a nerdy classmate
with an overprotective mother, and her refusal to apologize may cost her a longed-
for role in the Nutcracker. There's nothing particularly surprising in the plots
here, and Rosie's beloved grandfather is cut from rather predictable cloth; there's
also an occasional disjointedness to the prose that may have readers leafing back to
see what they missed. The ballet details, however, have enough realism tinged
with romance to satisfy early-grades balletomanes, and Rosie's struggles with the
discrepancy between her terpsichorean fantasy and her actual capability will doubt-
less strike a chord with young readers. Breezy line drawings appear throughout.
DS
GILBERT, SUZIE 
Hawk Hill; illus. by Sylvia Long. 
Chronicle, 1996 
34 p
ISBN 0-8118-0839-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Too tongue-tied to make friends in his new town, Pete wanders the hills near his
home and discovers that a fierce-looking neighbor named Mary rehabilitates and
releases injured raptors. Pete gingerly edges his way into sharing her work, but his
fascination with a particular hawk, which he dubs "Maloney," turns into a bitter-
sweet attachment as Pete strives in vain to wrest some sign of friendship from the
wild creature. While the plot is predictable and Pete's nonchalant intrusion into
Mary's household is implausible, Gilbert's sensitivity to the lonely child's doomed
efforts is ably balanced by the unflinching portrayal of the raptor's non-human
agenda. Long's ink and watercolor pictures are stiffly composed and Mary's pierc-
ingly hawk-like stares are overly histrionic, but the raptors, which are of course the
stars of this show, are carefully delineated. A brief note on wildlife rehabilitators
and vignettes on fourteen North American raptors are included. EB
GLAss, ANDREW 
The Sweetwater Run: The Story ofBuffalo Bill Cody and the Pony
Express; written and illus. by Andrew Glass. 
Doubleday, 1996 
42p
ISBN 0-385-32220-8 
$15.95 
R 
7-10 yrs
In a fictionalized narrative that begs to be read aloud, Buffalo Bill Cody reminisces
about his brief stint as a Pony Express rider and, in particular, about a November
1860 run with the presidential election results locked in his mail pouch and his
curiosity gnawing at him every hoofbeat along the way. Background on Lincoln's
136 
* THE BULLETIN
election and the looming war between the states is so smoothly incorporated into
plausible breakfast table talk that listeners will catch the urgency of Bill's mission
while focusing on the ride itself-fraught with snake bites, Indian attacks, drunken
Express riders, and perilous transfers made at full gallop. Vigorously sketched and
boldly colored, Glass's lavish mixed-media scenes (and endpaper maps) are a wor-
thy match for the heart-pounding pace of the narrative. Several pages of conclud-
ing notes on the origin and operation of the Pony Express are comprehensive enough
to serve report writers. Children who met Cody in Eleanor Coerr's readalone
Buffalo Bill and the Pony Express (BCCB 4/95) may notice some discrepancies in
detail; Glass explains that "although there is no shortage of information about the
Pony Express, it is difficult to separate fact from fiction," and he clearly indicates in
his notes exactly where, in this account of Bill's adventures, fact and fancy part
company. EB
GOODE, DIANE 
Mama's Perfect Present; written and illus. by Diane
Goode. 
Dutton, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-525-45493-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
The two knobby-kneed, ruddy-cheeked children of Where's Our Mama? (BCCB
9/91) are loose in gay Paris again, this time searching elegant boutiques andpatisseries
for the perfect birthday gift for Mama. While the deux enfants calmly contemplate
the specialties of each shop, their dachshund, Zaza, wreaks glorious havoc all around,
illustrating the particular drawbacks of each present. The stiff, uninspired text
suggests this would be more effective as a wordless picture book. The detailed
illustrations of Roaring Twenties Paris and Parisians, in birthday-party colors of
cream, blue, green, and pink, are comically expressive. The preponderance of
dogs, gracing the tops of fancy cakes, glowering in shoe stores, modeling for an
artist, both foreshadows and underscores the importance of Zaza and her nose for
chaos. Eventually, le chien leads the children to an art supply store and the chil-
dren carry their new papier, peint, and brosses to the setting of Seurat's pointillist
painting, Sunday Afternoon on the Island ofLa Grandejatte (in which the propor-
tion of canines to humans has mysteriously increased), and create for themselves
what families everywhere will recognize as the perfect present. AEB
HALL, ZOE 
The Apple Pie Tree; illus. by Shari Halpern. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
1996 
[32 p]
ISBN 0-590-62382-6 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Most of us are not lucky enough to have our own apple tree, so we head for the
orchard or the supermarket, but the children in this offering have a backyard apple
tree complete with a robin family as tenants. Painted and found-paper collage on
double-page spreads give textural contrast and vivid color to this step-by-step weaving
of the life cycle of the apple tree and the robin family ("Now our tree is covered
with blossoms. And the baby robins begin to grow feathers"). The seemingly
touchable quality of the robins' nest, the coarsely textured tree bark, a windswept
rainy day, and a reappearing orange tabby are just some of the well-executed details
which will delight young and old readers alike. Scientific details are explained
simply and accurately ("Small green apples grow where the blossoms used to be"),
although someone who has a hankering for more might want to check out The Life
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
137
and Times oftheApple by Charles Micucci (BCCB 4/92) or An Apple Tree Through
the Year by Claudia Schnieper (BCCB 11/87). All this new knowledge culminates
in the children's triumphant creation of an apple pie-with Mom and Dad's help,
of course. A recipe for apple pie and a note on the role of bees in apple reproduc-
tion is included. The children and the readers are presumably left with an empty
pie dish and an empty robins' nest ... until next year. PM
HELLDORFER, M. C. Jack, Skinny Bones, and the Golden Pancakes; illus. by Elise
Primavera. 
Viking, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-670-86006-9 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Jack is abandoned in the desert as a baby and rescued by a mongrel dog named
Skinny Bones, who reluctantly takes him to his thieving mistress, Granny Trick.
There they stay until the devil shows up, and then all hell breaks loose. Devil tales
in which the Evil One is routed and packed off to Hell are eternal favorites, and
Helldorfer acknowledges her debt to them as well as crediting various plot ele-
ments to Chaucer, among others. This story, then, is a Heinz-57 mixture of age-
old tall tales, mixed with gen-u-ine Western characters, and served up (according
to the flap) as an "original folktale." Whatever it is, this is a gosh-darn good'un
and should make a lot of folks pretty durn happy. Primavera's palette darkens
from the bright glow of the desert to the dark and brooding climactic scene in
which the deliciously evil devil is tricked and run out of town. The devil, nattily
dressed, has a kind of high camp appeal and steals the show, but that's understand-
able-and a wee bit gratifying. Try this one for storytime and enjoy the noisy
results. SSV
HERB, ANGELA M. 
Beyond the Mississippi: Early Westward Expansion ofthe United
States. 
Lodestar, 1996 
136p 
illus. with photographs 
(Young Readers' His-
tory of the West)
ISBN 0-525-67503-5 $16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
This first volume of a new series on America's West covers a period from Lewis
and Clark's exploration of the Louisiana Territory through the discovery of gold in
1848 California and its attendant population explosion. Although the overall
scheme is chronological, each of the nine meaty chapters focuses on a topic of
particular importance within a span of years-Fort Vancouver, the Whitman mis-
sion, the Black Hawk War, Mormon immigration, etc. Herb's text is denser and
drier than that of her recent For Home and Country: A Civil War Scrapbook (see
review under Bolotin, BCCB 10/95), with even the bloodiest massacres flatly re-
counted: "The Blackfeet retaliated. With increasing frequency, they murdered
and scalped traders and stole their horses and equipment." Captioned illustrations
and inserts (often of distracting length) do, however, enliven the overall textbook
tone, and with its detailed index and extensive list for further reading, this volume
could steer middle schoolers onto some fertile topics for social-studies research.
EB
HESSE, KAREN 
The Music ofDolphins. Scholastic, 1996 
181p
ISBN 0-590-89797-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
A modern-day Mowgli, Mila has lived with the dolphins for something like a
decade since, as a toddler, she was lost at sea in a plane crash. Now she's been
138 
* THE BULLETIN
found and "rescued"; researchers are helping her adjust to life as a human and
trying to learn from her at the same time. Mila misses the water and her dolphin
family, but her curiosity and openness make her receptive to new information; her
love of music and her interest in another feral girl, Shay, even provide her with joy
in her new home. Soon, however, the coldness of her position as research animal
begins to take its toll, and her longing for return to the loving life she had known
overcomes the small pleasures found on dry land. This is a smoothly told story
following the classic parameters of feral-child fiction, where the stranger in a strange
land allows readers to examine their own world afresh. Like many such fictions,
however, this displays a deep and unquestioning romanticism and falls predictably
into the cliched dichotomy of utopian animal society and dystopic human culture.
Still, the poetic evocation of Mila's life among the waves and her longing for same
compels and will entrance many a reader; those really serious about human/animal
questions, however, will want to turn to Dickinson's Eva (BCCB 5/89). DS
HORVATH, POLLY 
When the Circus Came to Town. 
Farrar, 1996 
138p
ISBN 0-374-38308-1 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-7
Life in the quiet Midwestern town of Springfield will never be the same after the
Halibuts, formerly with the circus, move in. Fifth-grader Ivy is thrilled, not only
by the adventure but also by the gaining of her first real friend in young Albert
Halibut, fellow writer (she is not entirely convinced she didn't write him into
existence), but many of the townspeople are less sanguine. When the charms of
Springfield lure snake-lady Elmira Degoochy, the Flying Gambinis, and more cir-
cus colleagues to settle there, intolerance for the newcomers builds to the point
where the annual bake-off becomes the pivotal battle in a civil war (which the
friendly circus folk aren't entirely aware they're engaged in). Horvath's relentless
and effervescent absurdity means that while the xenophobia is serious and un-
pleasant, the story also zips along without preaching, providing characters of un-
forced zaniness, cheerfully random events, a glorious food fight, and an ending
with an amusing meta-twist. Demanding, stubborn Ivy provides an entertain-
ingly jaundiced narration for the proceedings, pausing occasionally to provide bits
of wisdom ("A man drinking a strawberry soda is a man ready to listen to reason")
and to quarrel with Albert. The affection that overlays the story keeps it from
being just an exercise in eccentric humor; in addition to laughing, readers will
genuinely root for sweet Elvira's snake cake to win the day. DS
HOWARTH, LESLEY 
The Pits. Candlewick, 1996 
220p
ISBN 1-56402-903-4 
$16.99 
R Gr. 7-10
An archaeological expedition uncovers "The Iceman," the remains of a Stone Age
man preserved since 7650 B.C. under layers of ice and snow. The history of iceman
Arf unfolds as the narrator explains the life events that shaped him, giving a depth
and richness of detail only an eyewitness could supply. The eyewitness narrator-
Broddy Bronson, now a ghost, telling the story on a computer in the archeology
lab-was a comrade of Arf s. What is most unusual about this book is that it
works, and works remarkably well. Howarth creates a prehistoric world that is
eminently credible, peopled by individuals with complex personalities, family rela-
tionships, and belief systems that make them much more than the usual grunting
cavemen. Present-day themes of conflict and survival bring an immediacy to the
plot that make it unusually involving, as Broddy suffers from an adolescent iden-
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
139
tity crisis, grieves for his mother after her death, fights to defend his turf, and cares
for his three younger sisters. Howarth and her narrator succeed in doing what the
discovering archaeologist does not even conceive of-seeing Arf as a window into
a complex societal group of three-dimensional individuals with souls and hearts,
instead of just as bones to be studied. JMD
HULME, JOY N. 
Sea Sums; illus. by Carol Schwartz. 
Hyperion, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2142-6 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0170-0 
$13.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
As surgeonfish, lionfish, urchins, and sponges dart and creep and wave amid the
coral reef, rhymed verses offer tidbits of information about their feeding habits
and a mathematical expression keeps tally of the comings and goings ("When foes
approach two surgeonfish/ Four scalpels pop out with a swish .... But when the
coast is clear of foes/ The blades can just as quickly close"). The luminous blue
and yellow fish thwart a shark primed for attack and, tucked in the corner of the
double spread, is the tally "4 scalpels - 4 scalpels = 0 scalpels." All this rhyming,
marine biology, and arithmetic gets a bit tangled, and young listeners may find it
difficult to keep each strand separate, particularly with the additional (but wel-
come) distraction of Hulme's handsomely detailed, particolored gouache paint-
ings. However, this could serve as an appealing introduction to coral-reef fauna,
especially in the hands of a reader-aloud who can focus listeners' attention on one
theme at a time. EB
IGUS, TOYOMI 
Going Back Home: An Artist Returns to the South; illus. by Michele
Wood. 
Children's Book Press, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-89239-137-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
See this month's Big Picture, p. 125, for review.
JESPERSEN, JAMES 
Mummies, Dinosaurs, Moon Rocks: How We Know How Old
Things Are; written by James Jespersen and Jane Fitz-Randolph; illus. by Bruce
Hiscock and with photographs. 
Atheneum, 1996 
92p
ISBN 0-689-31848-0 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Amber-preserved prehistoric insects whose DNA is analyzed, cloned,
recreated ... no, it's notJurassic Park for Juniors, but the basic science is the same.
Through a multitude of methods, scientists determine the age of dinosaur bones,
potsherds, trees, ancient scrolls, mummies, cave art, and moon rocks. In short
order, but with admirable thoroughness, the authors explain how various dating
techniques-Carbon 14, tree-ring dating, satellite sensors, thermoluminescence,
potassium-argon, and CAT scans-work. Among the newsworthy subjects dis-
cussed are the Iceman of the Alps and the search for the lost city of Bar. Jespersen
and Randolph stress that what we "know" today is different from what we thought
we knew earlier and, doubtless, from what we will know tomorrow. The writing is
relatively clear and jargon-free, considering the conceptual challenge of some of
the text. This is an excellent source for report writers or the scientifically adventur-
ous. The illustrations help clarify the material; the black-and-white photographs
seem rather old-timey but do the trick. There is a glossary, an annotated bibliog-
raphy, and an index. SSV
140 
* THE BULLETIN
JuKEs, MAVIS 
Expecting the Unexpected: Human Interaction (Sex Ed) with Mrs.
Gladys B. Furley, R.N. 
Delacorte, 1996 
[144p]
ISBN 0-385-32242-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
An authentically flip pre-adolescent named River hurtles through sixth-grade scrapes
and family crises of manageable proportions. With a talent for looking dutiful in
class, River fluctuates between using her artistic gift to help win the school "Class
with Class Award" and turning everything into a joke-especially Mrs. Furley's
sex-education unit, a pilot program awaiting final board approval. River's natural
preoccupation with sex is rivaled only by her ambivalence about it, and it is fueled
by discovering that her teenage sister may be pregnant (as is the family cat). Young
readers will be surprised by the concluding twist-it's River's "post-menstrual"
mother who is pregnant-and will be entertained by the middle-school slang-code
dialogue. With an unabashed reference to Are You There God? It's Me, Margaret,
this is a lighter, brasher scenario ofpost-Blumekids who still worry about the same
problems even after they've been openly educated about them. Sometimes the
sitcom humor seems forced, and the tone and focus are pretty relentless, but then,
so are twelve-year-olds. BH
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
Billy Lazroe and the King of the Sea: A Tale of the North-
west; illus. by Michael Steirnagle. 
Browndeer/Harcourt, 1996 
40p
ISBN 0-15-200108-5 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-6
Kimmel relocates a traditional Russian tale to the Pacific Northwest, creating the
concertina-playing, chanty-singing, saltwater-in-his-veins sailor Billy Lazroe. Billy's
tunes win him a friend in Davy Jones, King of the Sea, and after giving a concert
for drowned sailors in Davy Jones' Locker, Billy is rewarded with the love of
Willamette, Davy's daughter. But he loses her a la Orpheus and Eurydice when he
looks back at her on their way up from the bottom of the sea. Nobody knows
Billy's fate, but Kimmel certainly knows his form, as this engaging (dare we say
rollicking?) retelling attests. Steirnagle's illustrations have an intrinsic tangibility
belied by his medium-the pastels here aren't pale and powdery hues but rich,
dense colors that add substance to his sweeping compositions. This title lends
itself easily to storytelling or reading aloud, and it will double as an adventure story
without any strain at all. JMD
KRENSKY, STEPHEN 
My Teacher's Secret Life; illus. by JoAnn Adinolfi. 
Simon,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80271-4 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
For kids, school is a place you leave behind at three o'clock. For teachers, school is
also home-sweet-home. Or so the narrator thinks, as he chronicles the after-hours
life of his teacher, Mrs. Isabelle Quirk. She and the other teachers cheerfully con-
sume cafeteria leftovers, listen to the librarian tell bedtime stories, and settle down
for the night with their inflatable mattresses (which are kept in the universal "bot-
tom left desk drawer, the one that locks with a key"). Following Adinolfi's gouache-
watercolor-pastel illustrations takes concentration. The teachers inhabit a
psychedelic Candyland world: spirals, squiggles and wavy lines abound; colors are
boldly fluorescent. The narrator's matter-of-fact tone and detailed "observations"
do lend focus and credibility to the zany antics of the teachers. 
Herein lies the
twist, however, which adults will find amusing but which may be tricky for younger
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
141
readers to grasp: twenty-four hour school is a teacher's real lot in life, and our
young narrator has discovered Mrs. Quirk partaking in a secret (mundane) life.
She loads up a cart at the supermarket and roller skates in the park with a man and
a look-alike girl; what will happen when the school-bound teachers find out? Be
prepared for some creative rumors to circulate whenever this book does. AEB
LANKFORD, MARY D. Jacks Around the World; illus. by Karen Dugan. 
Morrow,
1996 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13708-3 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13707-5 
$16.00 
R Gr. 2-5
Tossing and grabbing sheep knucklebones, peach pits, stones, metal jacks, or rice-
filled silk bags, children from Texas to Thailand demonstrate their single-handed
dexterity in variations on this well-known street game. Lankford sets down the
basic rules, and she then proceeds alphabetically through thirteen countries with
local directions for play and notes on each game's typical players and cultural con-
text. The Hawaiian Kimo, played with pebbles, is a good starting place for nov-
ices, who can then work up to the truly devilish Singapore variation Five Stones,
which resembles juggling. Lankford includes any foreign words and their transla-
tions that are integral to a game, but no pronunciation key is offered. Instructions
for making a set of air-hardened clay knucklebones are a welcome bonus (leading
the reader to wish that directions for the silk bags had been offered too), as is a
nifty challenge to join Lankford in attempting to discover where and when the
star-shaped metal jack was invented. Teachers planning multicultural activities
will be scooping this one up with both hands. EB
LEVITIN, SONIA 
Nine for California; illus. by Cat Bowman Smith. 
Kroupa/Or-
chard, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08877-4 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09527-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Amanda, her mother, and her sister and brothers (Baby Betsy, Billy, Joe, and Ted)
pack up their belongings and head for the California gold mines via stagecoach to
join Papa. Squeezed on board with Cowboy Charlie, banker Mr. Hooper, and
schoolteacher Miss Camilla, they are a tight fit and are like to die of boredom on
the twenty-one day trip, as Amanda's repeating refrain attests: "The long road
never ended. I wished that something would happen. It did." Problematic en-
counters with hungry Pawnee, a freezing hailstorm, a buffalo stampede, and stage-
coach robbers are all resolved with something out of Mama's big sack, and everyone
arrives safe and sound in Californ-y. Levitin's tale borders on the tall, with the
humorous text enlivened even further by Bowman's jolly, slapsticky watercolors.
Pair it with Stanley's Saving Sweetness (BCCB 11/96) for an offbeat introduction
to the Old West. JMD
LOEWER, PETER 
Pond Water Zoo: An Introduction to Microscopic Life; illus. by
Jean Jenkins. 
Atheneum, 1996 
90p
ISBN 0-689-31736-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Forget everything you learned in school about humans reigning supreme over the
earth-it's the bacteria that really count. The planet could get along just fine,
thank you, without us, but scratch the microscopic critters from the roster and
Earth would be mile deep in sludge and slime in no time. That's the theme here
142 
* THE BULLETIN
and a good one it is, too, but one rather wishes it weren't so dryly presented.
Despite the occasional flashes of zippy writing (didiniums are "an aquatic wolf
pack"), the text is generally textbookish. It's good for us to learn all about algae,
diatoms, amoebas, ciliates, rotifers, tardigrada, etc., but a teaspoon of fun would
have made the parthenogenesis go down a bit better. Nevertheless, there's plenty
of solid research-paper info here-how to use a microscope, how to start your own
zoo in a jar, how to ID what you see, plus an overview of the scientific impact of
the discovery of microscopic life. The black-and-white drawings are serviceable, if
a bit murky, but the layout and design are generous and clear. Unfortunately, one
can't help but lament the absence of full-color shots of biology's starlets. A glos-
sary, bibliography, and index are included. SSV
MARK, JAN, ad. 
The Tale of Tobias; illus. by Rachel Merriman. 
Candlewick,
1996 
32p
ISBN 1-56402-692-2 
$15.99 
R Gr. 2-4
From the biblical Apocrypha comes the story of Tobias, told from the point of
view of his dog: "I am the dog of Tobias. I have no name-I am only a dog. But
Tobias and I have seen strange things together. Listen, I'll tell you the story." And
he does, relating how Tobias' father lost his fortune and his sight, and how the
coming of a helpful stranger brings Tobias a wife, wealth, and the means of return-
ing his father's vision. Mark's retelling hews close to the grain of a traditional
folktale, with the straightforward narrative, helper figure, and overcoming of ob-
stacles having a comfortable form and execution. Merriman's watercolor and
crayon-pencil illustrations have charm and wit, with the cartoon-like figures and
simple backgrounds depicted in a peach and salmon palette complemented by
deep shades of taupe and blue. The humor in the illustrations is subtly reflected in
the understated text, as when Tobias reacts to Azarias' (the helper, and angel in
disguise) announcement that Tobias will marry the well-known Sarah: "I have
heard about Sarah. She is beautiful and good and I am sure I shall love her, but she
has had seven husbands and they are all dead." With the help of Azarias, Tobias
defeats the demon responsible for Sarah's husbandless state, and all ends happily in
this unusual and engaging tale. JMD
MARTIN, 
ANN 
M. 
Leo the Magnificat; illus. by Emily Arnold
McCully. 
Scholastic, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-48498-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
This is the semi-factual biography of a cat who belonged to a church and its con-
gregation. Leo (originally Cleopatra, until it was discovered that the belly bulge
was avoirdupois rather than impending kittens) wanders into the church and makes
himself at home there, becoming a regular attendant at services, participating in
covered-dish dinners, and bringing two lonely members of the congregation to-
gether. Contrary to predictions, he stays with his home (with the small exception
of an afternoon joyriding in a taxi) for twelve years, until age and infirmity take
their toll and Leo comes to rest in a small grave in the churchyard. There's not a
lot of conflict here, but the cat's unusual and enriching life has its own drama, and
Martin deftly weaves in small details that make Leo clearly a person worthy of
biography ("If he was in a good mood, he sang along with the choir. ... 
His
favorite bed was the sheep costume for the Christmas pageant"). McCully's water-
colors show Leo as a showstopping piebald longhair, comfortable with acquain-
DECEMBER 1996 
* 143
tances of all ages and stripes and favored despite anti-pet signs and anti-cat tastes;
vignettes interspersed with wider cityscapes give the impression of a bustling ur-
ban existence that relishes the soft feline purring at the center of it. Young listeners
will feel both Leo's presence and his passing keenly, and they will devoutly wish
that their own places of worship were similarly staffed; Sunday School classes lack-
ing cats of their own might well benefit from at least sharing Leo's story with
young parishioners. A concluding note gives more background on the real Leo.
DS
MARTINEZ, VICTOR 
Parrot in the Oven: mi vida. 
Cotler/HarperCollins,
1996 
216p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026706-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026704-6 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Manny, a Latino high school student, narrates a few months' worth of events
affecting his family and his future. His father has lost his job because of alcohol-
ism, his older brother Nardo won't work, his sister Magda is seeing a boy on the
side, and his mother is trying to hold it all together. Manny's responses and reac-
tions unite a series of related vignettes, from his father going after his mother with
a rifle, to a truly horrific scene where Manny thinks he has shot his baby sister
Pida, to Manny's initiation into a half-baked gang. Reading this book is so inti-
mately revelatory it's like moving into someone's house. Martinez' deceptively
straightforward prose is rich with poetic turns of phrase, and his ability to commu-
nicate the environment and dynamics of this family-their struggles with poverty,
racism, and violence-makes his writing startlingly visceral. Manny's close call
with the police and his realization that chance and small choices decide our lives is
an epiphanic conclusion. JMD
MARX, TRISH 
I Heal: The Children of Chernobyl; written by Trish Marx and
Dorita Beh-Eger; illus. with photographs by Cindy Karp. 
Lerner, 1996 
48p
ISBN 0-8225-4897-6 
$14.96 
M 
Gr. 3-5
The introduction rather misleadingly implies that Cuba is one of only two coun-
tries (Israel being the second) to assist children suffering from radiation-related
illnesses following the Chernobyl disaster; this book describes the treatment expe-
rience at Tarara, Cuba, by following the stories of two children. Elena tells her
own story and moves on to that of her friend Lubo; both children undergo surgery
and chemotherapy in Cuba, then recuperate by the seaside. The narration de-
scribes, in adulatory tones, the kind care of the doctors and nurses and the camara-
derie and natural beauty available at Tarara, but it also straightforwardly deals with
hair loss, sickness, and even death of the young patients. There's little focus, since
the text tends to ramble and it's not clear why two kids undergoing the same
experience are described sequentially. The lack of information is frustrating (How
many Ukrainian children have actually traveled to Tarara? How many of them
have gotten well?), and occasional seeming disparities may puzzle-the introduc-
tion states that Cuba offered to host as many sick children as necessary, but the
text later says that the expense of treatment and the scarcity of drugs means that
some sick children cannot come. The book's deliberate blandness about Cuban-
U.S. relationships and the Cuban economy (and the prominent inclusion of a
couple of beaming Castro portraits) makes the entry more, rather than less, politi-
cal. Photographs sometimes seem posed and occasionally are confusingly placed
(the paragraph discussing the computer room sits under a photo showing kids
144 
* THE BULLETIN
playing with non-electronic toys), but their depiction of convalescing youngsters
soaking up the rays is cheering and hopeful. A map is included, but there is no
index or bibliography. DS
MEDDAUGH, SUSAN 
Martha Blah Blah; illus. by Susan Meddaugh. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-395-79755-1 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Martha's real-life counterpart has, alas, gone to that great doghouse in the sky, but
Martha the canine picture-book heroine (see Martha Speaks, BCCB 11/92, etc.)
remains with us. She's got problems, however: ruthless downsizing has cheated
her language-giving alphabet soup of several of its most crucial letters, which leaves
Martha pert-near speechless (Meddaugh helpfully and hilariously provides foot-
notes for Martha's impaired utterances). Martha finally manages to correct the
corporate misdeed and is triumphantly assured of speech (and sequels?) forever-
more. The story is high-spirited and wears its message (Martha's family loves her
even when she's lost her glib chat) lightly, providing just enough tension to keep
the plot going without ever endangering Martha or her appeal. The illustrations
gleefully depict Martha's chunky charm and lend more magic to soup than the
Campbell's folks ever dreamed of. Young pups fond of Martha's earlier excursions
will lap this one up. DS
MILLEN, C. M. 
A Symphonyfor theSheep; illus. by Mary Azarian. 
Houghton,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-395-76503-X $14.95 
R 
4 -6 yrs
The process that inspired old favorites such as Elsa Beskow's Pelle's New Suit and
de Paola's Charlie Needs a Cloak (BCCB 6/74) here generates a lyrically cadenced
description of shearing, washing, carding, spinning, weaving, and knitting wool.
The setting is an idyllic Irish landscape as depicted in Azarian's homey, hand-
colored woodcuts: "The shuttle flies/ and colors bloom/ in blues and greens of
stormy seas/ against a sky of weathered grey/ and muted hues of heathered heath/
which climb the hills of Derryveagh." The singing rhymes, foot-tapping beat, and
tongue-tangling wordplay are visually metered in the illustrations' rhythmic black
outlines to exert the appeal of a dance (though perhaps the titular symphony is
something of an overstatement). So what if most sweaters nowadays start with an
acrylic-loaded machine? These strands of cozy-hued poetry, history, and cultural
tradition will warm up an audience of young listeners. BH
MOORE, CHRISTOPHER, ad. 
Ishtar and Tammuz: A Babylonian Myth of the Sea-
sons; illus. by Christina Balit. 
Kingfisher, 1996 
26p
ISBN 0-7534-5012-7 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"In long ago Babylon, four thousand years past, Ishtar was worshiped as queen of
the stars and goddess of all creation." But Ishtar has a destructive side as well,
becoming jealous of her own son Tammuz, who inspires the affection of all the
creatures on Earth. Ishtar has Tammuz killed, plunging the world into gloom,
and then repents, battling her sister in the underworld for Tammuz' return during
part of each year. Although there are echoes of Demeter and Persephone here, the
adaptor's note suggests that originally Tammuz was more probably Ishtar's "semi-
divine shepherd-king" husband than her son, which relationship sheds consider-
ably different light on the dynamic forces at work in a balance of power amongn
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
145
heaven, earth, and the underworld. The version here is clear and clean, however,
with tempo and atmosphere enough to keep young listeners absorbed. Balit's
illustrations are dominated by an intense lapis-lazuli blue that's often juxtaposed
with contrasting gold, bronze, and sunburnt orange, all patterned into motifs from
Babylonian art. The perspective is flattened, with many figures outlined from the
side. This book would make an effective companion to Ludmila Zeman's Gilgamesh
the King (BCCB 1/93) and could also suggest a comparison with the patriarchal
deities that permeate Greek and Scandinavian mythologies. BH
MORRIS, JUDY K. 
Nightwalkers. HarperCollins, 1996 
133p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027201-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027200-7 
$14.95 
Ad Gr. 4-6
James is trying to settle in at his new foster home but he misses his old foster father.
Soon he realizes that Daisy, the African elephant in the local zoo, misses some-
thing too: her elephant sister. They hunt together at night and he researches
further during the day, eventually successfully locating Daisy's young relation, but
will Daisy or James be allowed to rejoin the families they miss so desperately? This
is essentially fantasy couched as reality: Daisy's capabilities aren't magical but are,
to put it mildly, exceedingly unlikely, and the parallel between the situations of
James (African-American on the cover, race-neutral in the text) and of Daisy is
excessively neat. Morris' writing is both accessible and energetic, however, as James
gallops elephant-back through the District of Columbia's streets and longs for his
beloved Big Jim. Little villainy, high adventure, and great likability make this
book engaging despite its contrivances, and readers (especially pachyderm aficio-
nados) will enjoy the unusual ride. DS
MOWRY, JESS 
Ghost Train. Holt, 1996 
16 4p
ISBN 0-8050-4440-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Remi has just moved from Haiti to Oakland for the eighth grade, and he finds
America a strange world. Strangest of all is the train that noisily ploughs past his
apartment in the middle of the night-on tracks that haven't been used for de-
cades. He finds a friend in Niya, a neighbor girl, and the two begin to investigate
the phenomenon, uncovering a hidden wartime murder. The story is neatly turned
and nicely finished, and Mowry manages to address some serious issues of racism
(like Remi and Niya, the ghost was black, and his murder was racially motivated)
while keeping the style simple. The writing tends to be naive, with characters
receiving extensive description instead of characterization, Remi's speech contrivedly
amusing with its blend of precise formal English and Oakland slang, and the social
commentary rather heavy-handed. It's still an entertaining urban mystery, how-
ever, and young readers will appreciate Remi and Niya's setting things right. DS
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Shiloh Season. 
Atheneum, 1996 
120p
ISBN 0-689-80647-7 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 6-8
Marty Preston is happy. He has "bargained" with mean-spirited Judd for the
beagle, Shiloh, and the dog now belongs to him (see Shiloh, BCCB 10/91). Judd
has since started to drink heavily and to imagine that somehow Marty and his folks
have done him wrong. Marty, still struggling with his conscience, is fascinated
and repulsed by Judd and spends a lot of time trying to figure him out. When
Judd runs his truck off the road into a ditch, it is Shiloh who awakens Marty and
146 
* THE BULLETIN
his father and leads them to the seriously injured man. In an emotionally resonant
conclusion, Marty goes with his father to visit the convalescing Judd, taking Shiloh
with him, and "Judd lets his fingers rest lightly on the top ofShiloh's head, just the
way mine did. And then, he begins to stroke my dog." There is more external
action in this sequel than in the first book, and the violence is somewhat more
overt-Judd, drunk, angry, and out of control, is truly a danger to those around
him. The humor is more overt as well, however, with Marty's moral wrestling and
the tension created by the unpredictability of a dangerous man offset by stories of
Grandma, who has turned senior-citizen desperado in the nursing home. Naylor
has a fine hand with the nuances and complexities of her characters-not even
Judd is all bad-and in the end, the reader is glad for the slightest hint of his
redemption. JMD
Nix, GARTH 
Sabriel 
HarperCollins, 1996 
292p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027323-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027322-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Sabriel is the eighteen-year-old daughter and protegi of the necromancer Abhorsen,
now missing. In her quest for her father she must take on the mantle of the
Abhorsen, battle the spirits of the dead, and redeem a bastard prince. This is an
involving fantasy that takes off running and doesn't let up the pace until the final
page. Reminiscent of LeGuin's Earthsea, Nix's world is fully realized, and the
combination of modern technology and old magic is nearly seamless. Sabriel has
character and courage, easily winning the reader's sympathy and support. Nix
wisely keeps his primary characters few in number, placing them in situations of
increasing danger that reveal their history and personalities. The pacing is exquis-
ite, the suspense rising and falling and rising again until the truly edge-of-your-seat
finale. Strong visual language, an eerie combination of horror and fantasy, and
just enough lovey-dovey stuff to satisfy the hopelessly romantic make this a winner
for fantasy and adventure lovers. JMD
O'CONNOR, KAREN 
A Kurdish Family. 
Lerner, 1996 
56 p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Journey Between Two Worlds)
ISBN 0-8225-3402-9 
$16.13 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
This is an entry in a new series, Journey Between Two Worlds, which "describes
the journey of a family from their homeland to the United States and how they
adjust to a new life in America while still preserving traditions from their home-
land." Given the rising numbers of political refugees (an increase of tenfold in the
past twenty years) combined with the increasingly hostile treatment of immigrants
in the U.S., this is certainly an issue that needs to be addressed. The story of this
Kurdish family drives home the point that America still can be a refuge to the
huddled masses. Unfortunately, the book sweepingly and uncritically contrasts
good (Kurds) and evil (Iraqis and Turks) in the old world and continues in this
vein in the new ("I like the United States. No one can do anything to you here").
California appears to be paradise after their savage treatment at "home." Still,
O'Connor manages to put human faces onto a political issue which is, admittedly,
rather abstract for American youth. One hopes for a little less of a Reader's Digest-
style take in the subsequent books in the series-today's kids are hip to our own
home-grown violence and are, unfortunately, likely to be turned off by too saccha-
rine a portrait. A pronunciation guide and suggestions for further reading are
appended. SSV
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
147
OPIE, IONA, ed. 
My Very First Mother Goose; illus. by Rosemary
Wells. 
Candlewick, 1996 
108p
ISBN 1-56402-620-5 
$19.99 
R* 2-5 yrs
Opie's selection of traditional Mother Goose rhymes holds a number of extremely
pleasant surprises. Most of the entries will be familiar to grown-up readers, but a
few of them will have a delightful newness, as they are seldom anthologized. These
traditional verses have tremendous child appeal, combining as they do rhythm,
rhyme, and built-in bounce. Opie's choices for inclusion are flawless, and the
design and layout of the book is exuberantly in sync with the boisterous nature of
the ditties and their dramatis personae. Wells does an exemplary job with a plethora
of watercolor-and-ink illustrations, her by-now familiar-as-old-friends animal fig-
ures providing an inviting visual counterpoint, although the use of rabbits dressed
up as Indians (complete with feathers and teepees) for "Up the wooden hill to
Blanket Fair" may give some pause. Rich colors, patterned borders, and large type
add to the flashily attractive book design, making this a laudable new edition of
the familiar rhymes. JMD
PARASKEVAS, BETTY 
Cecil Bunions and the Midnight Train; illus. by Michael
Paraskevas. 
Harcourt, 1996 
34 p
ISBN 0-15-292884-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
A young boy finds himself drawn from his bed to a sleek and sinister night train, its
inhabitants alarming, its menu depressing, and its refrain sinister: "NEVER COM-
ING, NEVER COMING, NEVER COMING BACK." Fortunately, he stumbles upon Cecil
Bunions, private eye, who clues him into the fact that they must be asleep and then
engineers an escape back to waking life. The plot sometimes floats about rather
ethereally even for a dream book, but the verse, ballad meter set in couplets, gal-
lops along with only the occasional bobble in scansion. Michael Paraskevas' gouache
art makes an arresting fantasy world, using thick brushstrokes to give a glistening
surrealism to the fierce-masked, carnival-hued figures and the gleaming metallic
train slipping through the blue night. Sort of "Hotel California" on rails and with
a happier ending, this might make a bedtime book for youngsters who like a little
nightmare to spice up their dreams. DS
PATERSON, KATHERINE 
Jip: His Story. 
Lodestar, 1996 
181p
ISBN 0-525-67543-4 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Jip lives on the village poor farm, mid-nineteenth-century Vermont having little
else to offer him when he tumbled off a wagon as a toddler and remained un-
claimed. Now that he's pressing on towards his teen years, he's more aware of the
deficiencies of his life, but he has good friends at the farm and finds a great deal of
excitement in his new attendance at school. This Oliver Twist story becomes
Pudd'nhead Wilson when it turns out that the people who have been asking after
Jip are doing so because he is the son of an escaped slave and her white master and
he is therefore himself a slave, his father's legal property; Jip must then muster his
few defenses against the threat of enslavement. Paterson is, as always, a solid story-
teller, and she makes Jip and his friends sympathetic (if a bit too good to be true);
the paradigm shift of the discovery of Jip's origins comes a bit late but is exceed-
ingly effective. Young readers will appreciate the clarity of the moral choices here
as well as the suspenseful escape drama. DS
148 
* THE BULLETIN
PAUSEWANG, GUDRUN 
The Final Journey; tr. by Patricia Crampton. 
Viking,
1996 
155p
ISBN 0-670-86458-0 
$14.99 
R* Gr. 8-12
A novel almost entirely set in a railway boxcar filled with Jews being transported to
Auschwitz, this begins with the clang of locked sliding doors and ends in a "shower"
just before the gas is turned on. Between the first and last moments, we come to
know a community of individuals bonded by emergency and witnessed through
the eyes of an eleven-year-old girl whose rite of passage leads nowhere. The only
hope offered is that readers will feel this account so deeply that they will never
participate in the kind of hatred and/or indifference that allowed the Holocaust to
happen. Pausewang's development of characters-especially the protagonist, who
has been sheltered from knowledge of Nazi persecution, and her grandfather, who
dies on the train-is acutely detailed. The suspense of the journey is heightened
by the birth of a baby boy and by the murder of a young man attempting to escape,
but most of all by the relentless spread of feces from a designated "toilet" corner,
an image that vividly represents the degradation of the group. Perhaps Alice's first
menstruation is a symbolic overload, and maybe some of the Briticisms will throw
U.S. readers off track, but these are quibbles compared to the achievement of
realizing a tragedy that has been conventionalized, even cliched, through repeti-
tion. Pausewang shows not only what victims of the Holocaust endured, but why
they seemed so helplessly bewildered in the face of the inexorable violation of their
lives. In doing so, she has also portrayed human variants of greed and kindness
without oversimplifying either. Although her fiction honestly reflects historical
facts, it never falls into a representative mode of generic docudrama. The indi-
viduals whom we've learned to care about are the ones we lose: many men, most
women, and all the babies, children, preadolescents ... all of them. BH
PELLETIER, DAVID 
The Graphic Alphabet; written and illus. by David Pelletier.
Orchard, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-531-36001-6 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Each page offers a dark square with a thick white border; under the square is a one-
word caption ("Avalanche" for the letter A, for instance), and within it is an
eyecatching light-on-dark depiction of both the word and the appropriate letter of
the alphabet (bits break off from the top of a huge golden A and tumble down the
slope of its side). This isn't so much an alphabet book as a guessing game and
mind-stretcher: though the presentation of the letter is sometimes cleverer than it
is clear (the lower-case g for "gear" is hard to discern, for instance), many entries
are quite ingenious (the red capital D on its side becomes a faceless devil complete
with horns). This doesn't have the enchantment of Stephen Johnson's Alphabet
City (BCCB 11/95), but the conceptual and artistic challenge will appeal to art
teachers looking for ways to help youngsters rethink the familiar. DS
PITCHER, CAROLYN 
The Snow Whale; illus. by Jackie Morris. 
Sierra Club,
1996 
[2 6p]
ISBN 0-87156-915-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Leo and his older sister, Laurie, work all day with the neighborhood children to
build a whale out of snow. The finished whale, complete with flukes, mouth, and
blowhole, is magnificent: "He was the most beautiful snow whale in the whole
world-high as a house, round as a cloud, white as an ice floe." When Leo asks his
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
149
sister where the snow goes, she explains that it melts and flows into the rivers that
flow down to the sea. When the whale melts, as it heartbreakingly must, Laurie
sobs, "Where has the whale gone?" Leo comforts his sister: "He's gone back to the
ocean again. Snow whale's gone home." Pitcher's language is rhythmic and po-
etic, expanding the appeal of this readaloud tale of the water cycle beyond its
curricular message. Morris' colored-pencil illustrations, in snow-and-ice shades of
blue, have an unusual, arresting texture that lifts the pictures above the merely
cute; they do an excellent job of evoking the feeling of a freezing day of snow play,
emphasizing the glittering iciness of this "great white whale." JMD
RAEL, ELSA OKON 
What Zeesie Saw on Delancey Street; illus. by Marjorie
Priceman. 
Simon, 1996 
[34p]
ISBN 0-689-80549-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
It is Zeesie's seventh birthday, and not only does she have an elegant new dress and
her own dollar bill, Papa has deemed her old enough to attend that evening's
package party. There her parents and neighbors bid on surprise boxes of home-
made goodies to raise money to bring over immigrants from their old European
community, Zborovah. During the festivities, Zeesie notices each of the men
disappearing one at a time into a back room, which she is prohibited from enter-
ing. Papa explains that in the "money room" each man either leaves a donation or
takes an amount he truly needs. "And, this is most important to know, it's as
much a mitzvah-a good deed-to take when you need as to give when you can."
Still, the little girl cannot contain her curiosity and, hiding behind a stack of boxes
in the dingy room, she discovers a close family friend prayerfully removing eight
dollars from the cash box: "Zeesie heard Max's need in his prayer." Max leaves,
and Zeesie performs her own mitzvah, rejoining the fete a far wiser seven-year-old.
Readers are initiated into the community revel right along with Zeesie, savoring
the toothsome dishes (glossary and two recipes included), dancing, practical jok-
ing, and warm neighborliness. The unmistakable lesson-that it is as blessed to
receive as to give-may not be news to youngsters, but it's joyously conveyed by
Priceman's zany, dreamlike figures cavorting across bright orange backdrops or
tense and needy against somber gray. Zeesie finds "treasure" at her first package
party, and listeners will too. EB
RASCHKA, CHRIS 
The Blushful Hippopotamus; written and illus. by Chris
Raschka. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08882-0 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09532-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
Roosevelt, a young hippo, is having some trouble with his loudmouth older sister.
She teases him constantly, calling him a "blushful hippopotamus" every time he is
less than successful, whether riding his bike, eating ice cream, or falling down.
Roosevelt turns to his best friend Lombard, a white bird, for reassurance. Lombard
says, in sentences of escalating affection, "A thoughtful hippopotamus is who is
you. ... A skillful hippopotamus is what it is you are.... A wonderful hippopota-
mus are you, are you, are you!" In sweeping black lines on colored paper (touched
with red stripes and red nails for sister hippopotamus, blue stripes for Roosevelt's
overalls, and white plumage for Lombard), Raschka presents a familiar sibling
dynamic defused by loyal friendship. Roosevelt's set-up dialogue with his sister is
150 
* 
THE BULLETIN
somewhat contrived, but his concluding dialogue with Lombard is stronger and
less obscure. As Lombard reassures Roosevelt in each double-page spread, Roosevelt
(who starts out very small) gets larger and larger, and his sister (who starts out very
large) gets smaller and smaller. The last page is filled with Roosevelt and Lombard
in an affectionate hug. This is a deceptively simple book that merits a closer look.
JMD
RHEINGROVER, JEAN SASSO 
Veronica's First Year; illus. by Kay Life. 
Whitman,
1996 
26p
ISBN 0-8075-8474-6 
$12.95 
Ad 
4-9 yrs
The nursery is freshly painted, the crib mobile is hung, and Nathan has even, with
his own money, bought his newborn sister a red squeaky bear. In this slight story
depicted in a subdued palette of watercolor pastels and muted earthtones, baby
Veronica arrives ("'Your little sister is a special baby,' Mama said. 'She may need
extra help at the hospital"'). We soon find out with Nathan that Veronica's
"specialness" is Down Syndrome ("That means that it will take her longer to learn
how to do things"). Though this conceptual chronicle of Veronica's first year is
more reassuring than informationally helpful (a note for parents appends the text),
it does take the often scary complexities of the birth of a child with a mental
disability and reduce it into a comforting, albeit bland, formula. The inclusion of
Nathan's and Veronica's baby albums, which depict important achievements in
their early lives, enables readers to compare the developmental milestones of both
children in that so-important first year. A soothing but prosaic text accompanies
the almost cloyingly sweet illustrations which portray a caring, concerned family
(sometimes looking more posed than natural) who respond with tears and smiles
to a challenging situation. A better choice might be Thomas Bergman's We Laugh,
We Love, We Cry: Children Living with Mental Retardation (BCCB 2/90). PM
RICHARDSON, JUDITH BENET 
Old Winter; illus. by R. W. Alley. 
Orchard,
1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08883-9 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09533-9 
$14.95 
R 6-8 yrs
Old Winter, bewhiskered and bebooted, overhears townsfolk complaining bitterly
about the weather. He is so put out that he goes into the deep freeze in the P&J
Grocery Store and doesn't come out for two months. When he finally emerges,
the town is in a state of winter siege: "Snow was packed and filthy. Cars were
crusted over with mud and salt.... A few people in thick coats huddled by the
newspaper box. Old Winter could see the headline: TOWN FROZEN. IS
THERE NO END IN SIGHT?" Spring arrives in a green t-shirt and a shiny
yellow car and convinces Old Winter that the Argentine pampas need him. Old
Winter heads south. "And then it rained .... 'Play ball!' cheered Peter. 'No more
boots! Hooray for cleats!' He practiced his swing so hard that he fell in a puddle."
Alley's watercolor-and-ink illustrations (somewhat reminiscent of Lynn
Munsinger's) are a standout in this weather-beaten tale. Old Winter, Spring, and
the frustrated townspeople all have personality and panache-even the geese have
expression. The frozen townscape will be shiveringly familiar to those in northern
climes, and the vision of Spring in a yellow slicker, sitting on an awning with a
watering can as the rain comes down in torrents, is sure to elicit a chuckle. JMD
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
151
ROBBINS, KEN 
Rodeo; written and illus. with photographs by Ken Robbins. 
Holt,
1996 32p
ISBN 0-8050-3388-2 
$14.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Robbins takes his customary genre of the photoessay out West, briefly describing
the seven main rodeo events (bareback riding, saddle-bronc riding, bull riding,
steer wrestling, calf roping, team roping, and barrel racing) and a few other aspects
of rodeoing. The brief text will leave greenhorn youngsters with a few unanswered
questions (what do the competitors win? Do women compete in events other than
barrel racing?), but it conveys the necessities in a short amount of space. More
importantly, the words stay out of the way of the photographs: 
Robbins'
handcolored images are particularly well-suited to their work here, their grainy
texture and subdued tones emphasizing the dust and strain of the sport while blurs
of speed and closeups of thundering hooves keep things action-packed. This isn't
as informative as it is evocative, but it evokes its milieu effectively; kids looking for
a peek into a wild Western world won't want to miss it. DS
ROBINET, HARRIETTE GILLEM 
Washington City is Burning. Karl/Atheneum,
1996 
149p
ISBN 0-689-80773-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
It's August of 1814, and as the British advance on the young nation's capitol,
members of the city's slave and free black community, and particularly those at-
tached to the Madison family at the White House, use the turmoil and confusion
as a cover to spirit slaves out of the auction pens (known as "trader slaves") and off
to freedom. Tobias, one of President Madison's slaves, has recruited the help of
Virginia (who narrates the tale), a teenaged house slave who once proved her brav-
ery before an overseer at Montpelier. But Virginia's need for affection and ap-
proval causes her to leak information about the clandestine activities and jeopardize
the lives of other slaves. Robinet again demonstrates her ability to create a fiction-
alized yet credible slave/free black community whose members pursue highly indi-
vidualized agendas against the backdrop of a larger historical movement. Too
often, however, Virginia indulges in "What will happen next?" outbursts, creating
melodrama where more subtly deployed tension is required. Robinet clearly states
in her end notes that "as far as I know, there were no trader slaves held or clothed
at the White House." It is therefore a bit of a stretch to construct a tale which so
closely involves major historical figures upon the premise that "on the other hand,
I have no proof that they did not assist escapes, either." Those who are not con-
cerned with historiographical quibble, however, will find much to enjoy in this
speculation on slave resistance in the ultimate upper-crust household. A bibliogra-
phy is included. EB
Ross, KATHY 
Gifts to Make for Your Favorite Grownup; illus. by Anne Canevari
Green. 
Millbrook, 1996 
96p
Library ed. ISBN 1-56294-274-3 
$17.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-0079-1 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 2-5
In a page or two of clearly presented directions per gift, Ross guides young crafters
through projects which generally call for household cast-offs, recycled packaging,
and lots of glue, and which require little to no adult supervision. While many, if
not most, of the items can be found in other craft books, the directions here are
152 
* 
THE BULLETIN
especially independent-user-friendly and are organized into nine themed chapters.
Some of these treasures will probably be hoarded by the creator (such as the neck-
ties converted into hair scrunchies), but items in the "Gifts of Food" section-
drink and soup mixes and chocolate-covered spoons-may well find some
appreciative recipients. This will be a useful resource for child care providers and
programmers, and Brownie troop leaders will be set for the year. EB
SIEGEN-SMITH, NIKKI, comp. 
Welcome to the World: A Celebration of Birth and
Babies from Many Cultures. Orchard, 1996 
[48p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-531-36006-7 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 10 up
Arresting poems emerge from the many cultures featured in this collection, al-
though they will arrest only those mature readers interested both in not-always-
straightforward poetry and in infants. "Anonymous" poems attributed to societies
(Yoruba, Inuit, etc.) and works by such prominent writers as Sylvia Plath and
Eavan Boland follow one another in a harmonious arrangement. The photographs
accompanying the poems vary in impact; some vividly depict infant personality,
bonding moments such as breastfeeding or cuddle times, or adults' reactions to
babies, while other pictures drowse into the mundane. As in Songs for Survival
(BCCB 9/96), Siegen-Smith briefly notes her sources but gives no sense of how
translations have affected the poems or of when the poems broadly attributed to
one culture may have originated. Detailing a hodgepodge of rituals from different
cultures in the appendix "Birthing Traditions," Siegen-Smith tries to show both
the diversity and the universality of such ceremonies, all the while flinging forth
disjointed cultural tidbits of questionable relevance. Many of these poems vividly
express awe, devotion, and joy, and some of the illustrations deepen those emo-
tions; Siegen-Smith's snippets of ritual add little depth. This is a gift book for
adult sensibilities with limited appeal for kids. LM
SMALLS, 
IRENE Jenny Reen and the Jack Muh Lantern; illus. by Keinyo
White. 
Atheneum, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31875-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
This authentically scary African-American story centers on Jenny Reen, a young
Southern slave whose parents work the fields while she stays with Sister Louisa,
"the slave quarter roots woman." Shortly before All Hallows' Eve, Sister Louisa
tells Jenny Reen about the Jack Muh Lantern that has "great googly google eyes
and no lips, just a big wide gash, open from ear to ear" and that "leads you into the
bogs and marshes and leaves you there to slowly sink and slowly die." Of course,
Jenny Reen soon encounters the creature and outwits him by remembering Sister
Louisa's advice. Except for a slowish beginning-which makes slavery sound pre-
historic ("Once upon a time, when the great mountains were high, before they
were pebbled apart into the sandy beach that we are standing on today .. .") and
has Jenny Reen asking, out of the blue, "when will I'se be free?"-the narrative is
economical and powerful, with an inevitable momentum to the sequence of events.
The paintings feature heavy brush strokes, deep hues, accurate drafting, plain com-
positions, and amorphous shapes more suggestive than definite. Both art and text
successfully stimulate the imagination, so gear your presentation for kids who have
a firm enough grasp on the difference between fantasy and reality to handle things
that go bump in the night. BH
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
153
STEMP, JANE 
Waterbound. Dial, 1996 
229p
ISBN 0-8037-1994-9 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
In the course of researching protest songs from the nineteenth through the twenty-
first centuries, Gem Rannesen encounters some unfamiliar words on her com-
puter screen-"Blind. Deaf. Disabled. Wheelchair"-words that the officially
sanctioned on-line dictionary is unable to define. Not long after, Gem stumbles
into the secret tunnels beneath the City and finds herself face-to-face with young
people who are blind, deaf, in wheelchairs, or otherwise disabled. They are the
Waterbound, the castaway children of a highly regulated society, their existence
unrecorded in Admin's (the government) version of history. Involuntary exile has
made the Waterbound bitter, and Gem's ignorance and unintended insensitivity
compound their City-directed anger. Yet because we are generally told about
rather than shown the City society that rejected the children, and because the
consequences of defying surveillance-happy Admin remain vague, what results is a
science-fiction sermon rather than a compelling vision of the future. Often-melo-
dramatic prose, a spurned lover so bent on revenge that he jeopardizes the
Waterbound's escape plan, and a happily-ever-after ending, in which the
Waterbound are reunited with their families, undercut the issues that drive this
story of resistance. AEB
STEWART, DIANNE 
Gift of the Sun: A Tale from South Africa; illus. by Jude
Daly. 
Farrar, 1996 
26p
ISBN 0-374-32425-5 
$15.00 
R 4-6 yrs
The gift of the sun is forecast here in bright yellow endpapers tracked with black
seeds, dropped no doubt from the sunflowers on the cover. Thulami, who loves to
bask in the sun, decides to swap his cow ("I am tired of all this milking") for a series
of equally troublesome animals. A goat for sheep, sheep for geese, and geese for a
pocketful of seeds make Thulami's wife despair at his bargaining ineptitude, but
then the family hens peck away at the seeds produced by the sunflowers produced
by the seeds-and double their egg production, bringing in money for sheep, geese,
a cow, a horse, and more. It's a classic fool's tale, rendered all the more satisfying
by Daly's airy watercolors. The slanting rural landscapes and suspended figures
project a topsy-turvy feeling and tonal lightness appropriate to a spring story hour-
pair this one with Perkins' Home Lovely (BCCB 9/95) and, for a little traditional
drama, what else but "Jack and the Beanstalk"? BH
STROUD, BETTYE 
Down Home at Miss Dessa's; illus. by Felicia Marshall. 
Lee &
Low, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 1-880000-39-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"It takes a village to raise a child," runs the popular African adage, and Stroud's
depiction of a rural African-American community in the 1940s shows how the
roles played by neighbors benefited both young and old. Miss Dessa, the elderly
woman who lives down the dirt road from the narrator and her little sister, is a
fixture in the girls' lives and, when she injures her foot, they tend to her as she has
tended to them in the past. The girls help Miss Dessa work on a quilt for her
daughter in New York City, and they pick peaches and flowers to surprise her.
The story is a series of gentle and nostalgic incidents (playing games of Zudie-O,
sleeping in old iron beds) that illustrate the time period and the relationship be-
154 
* THE BULLETIN
tween Miss Dessa and the girls. Unfortunately, more than that is required for
involvement with the story, and there's no crescendo of action and little dramatic
tension. The acrylic illustrations have a rough-hewn quality that conveys the warmth
of the characters, the welcoming air of Miss Dessa's small but sturdy wooden house,
and the appeal of a landscape glowing with green meadows, lush trees, and pink
chinaberries. Members of this community would have been puzzled by the strange
New England notion that good fences make good neighbors. LM
THORNHILL, JAN 
Wild in the City; written and illus. by Jan Thornhill. 
Sierra
Club, 1996 32p
ISBN 0-87156-910-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
This is a carefully constructed story meant to show the interdependency of human
and animal life in a city environment. Jenny and her mother, Asian-Americans,
live in a large town which is replete with wild animals, from lowly moths to mighty
hawks. One night when Jenny is going to bed, she hears the churr, churr, churr of
a raccoon family outside her window. The raccoons, in turn, hear the whirr of
hawk wings as the predator swoops down. As the story unfolds, the reader is
shown the interdependency of the food chain. Although the connectedness of the
story has a repetitive and reassuring quality, Thornhill's gentle text never actually
has the animals doing what they really do-eat each other. The bold illustrations
experiment successfully with point of view, showing us what each animal actually
sees, but the animals are stiffly stylized and.anthropomorphic. 
Jenny's pet cat
appears in each picture and we are told we can guess its name if we can locate the
letter hidden within each spread (Bulletin reviewers remain baffled). Three pages
of facts about all the animals round out the nature lesson. This might be a useful
choice for a unit on urban biology. SSV
TOKSVIG, SANDI 
If I Didn't Have Elbows: The Alternative Body Book; illus. by
David Melling. 
De Agostini, 1996 
[28p]
ISBN 1-899883-65-7 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 2-4
Toksvig takes us on a jokey romp through the human body using the "what if'
format (what if I didn't have hair, muscles, blood, a brain); double-page spreads
answer the question and provide factoids on the body parts. The oversized comic-
book format and brightly colored illustrations are appealing if hindered by a kind
of greeting-card flatness. Still and all, there's good information here (on the skel-
eton: a sparrow has more bones than a giraffe), but the reader has to slog through
many unrelated bits and forced jokes to find it. If you can't find an alternative to
this alternative, use this one as a springboard to a meatier discussion of basic hu-
man biology. SSV
VALGARDSON, W. D. 
Sarah and the People of Sand River; illus. by Ian
Wallace. 
Groundwood/Douglas and McIntyre, 1996 
50p
ISBN 0-88899-255-6 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Sarah has grown up hearing stories of how her grandparents came from Iceland to
the isolated shores of Frog Bay, and how they would have died the first winter if
not for the gifts of food from the Cree people of Sand River. Sarah's father, hop-
ing to have her learn to speak English in addition to Icelandic, sends her to board
with a family in Winnipeg. The family treats Sarah badly, keeping her from school,
DECEMBER 1996 
* .155
working her like a slave, and abusing her, and her survival is made possible only by
the magical intercession of Sand River Cree helper figures. When Sarah can bear
it no longer, she runs away. Divided into five short chapters, this Cinderella story
is a combination of history and fantasy that works fairly well. Valgardson's text is
suspenseful, Sarah's plight and flight emotionally involving, her salvation desired
and believable. From endpaper to endpaper, Wallace's pencil, gouache, and wa-
tercolor illustrations are lovingly detailed, with a use of shadow and light that
evokes a fairy tale atmosphere even as he realistically depicts the forests and cities
of turn-of-the-century Canada. JMD
WETTERER, MARGARET K. 
The Snow Walker; written by Margaret K. and Charles
M. Wetterer; illus. by Mary O'Keefe Young. 
Carolrhoda, 1996 
4 8p 
(On My
Own Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-87614-891-7 
$13.13
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87614-959-X 
$5.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Independent readers who enjoyed the derring-do of Kate Shelley in Wetterer's
earlier work (Kate Shelley and the Midnight Express, BCCB 11/90) should be equally
pleased with this true account of twelve-year-old Milton Daub in the Northeast's
record-holding blizzard of 1888. Setting out on a pair of homemade snowshoes to
do a brief family errand, Milton spent a full day traversing precariously piled drifts
in the deserted streets to bring food and medicine to snowbound neighbors, while
watching his makeshift footgear gradually come apart. Wetterer stretches the story
a bit with Milton's musings about Alaskan adventures, but the boy's own relentless
trek packs plenty of thrills: "A frozen bird fell from a tree and landed on his
shoulder. Milton jumped, stepping hard on his right snowshoe. Another wire
snapped." Notes on the blizzard accompany the text, and plentiful watercolor
scenes elicit appropriate shivers. Trot this out around February for kids who whine
that they can't take another day of winter. EB
WHITE, LINDA 
Too Many Pumpkins; illus. by Megan Lloyd. 
Holiday House,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1245-8 
$15.95 
R 4-8yrs
Old Rebecca Estelle has hated pumpkins ever since she was a little girl and her
family had nothing to eat but pumpkins for a whole month. When a pumpkin
truck splatters a giant pumpkin, slime and most especially seeds, close to her gar-
den, she covers it all with dirt. When plants begin to grow, she vows not to water
'em, weed 'em or take care of 'em, and she is certain they'll perish. Well, they
don't-and she's left with a mess of pumpkins. She picks 'em, bakes 'em, carves
'em and cooks 'em, and everybody in town comes out to enjoy them. In water-
color and inks, Megan Lloyd's bright orange pumpkins and their leafy green vines
are a harvest joy to see, and the cantankerous Rebecca Estelle is the jolliest old
biddy around. The party-happy conclusion hits just the right note as Rebecca
Estelle successfully eliminates all trace of the pumpkins--except for the seeds she
saves to plant next year. JMD
V;Zaý
156 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Johnson-Feelings, Dianne, ed. The Best of The Brownies' Book. Oxford, 1996.
352p. ISBN 0-19-509941-9. $29.95. illus. with photographs
Though apparently aimed at young readers, this collection of pieces from the fa-
mous Brownies'Book, published monthly from 1920 through 1921 and "designed
especially for young people whose ancestors were from the continent of Africa,"
will mainly interest adults. Johnson-Feelings arranges the entries thematically, in
sections focusing on racial pride, biography, everyday life, storytelling, and world
cultures; a complete facsimile of one issue is included, as is a gallery of some of the
magazine's best-known contributors (including W.E.B. DuBois, Langston Hughes,
and Nella Larsen Imes), notes putting the collection in context, and an author and
title index. DS
Phelan, Patricia, ed. High Interest-Easy Reading: An Annotated Booklistfor Middle
School and Senior High School. Seventh edition. NCTE, 1996. 115p. Paper ed.
ISBN 0-8141-2098-9. $11.95.
Drawing from books published in 1993 and 1994, this is the newest edition of one
of NCTE's most useful bibliographies. Their definition of "easy" is broad, but the
subject, theme, and genre-oriented divisions ("Adventure," "Dealing with Death,"
"Fantasy," "Mystery," and 15 more) all include a range of approaches and skill
levels. An appendix of award-winning books from the time period, a directory of
publishers, and indices for authors, subjects, and titles are included. DS
Chambers, Aidan. The Reading Environment: How Adults Help Children Enjoy
Books; 88p; Paper ed. ISBN 1-57110-029-6. Tell Me: Children, Reading, and
Talk; 120p; Paper ed. ISBN 1-57110-30-X. Each book: Stenhouse, 1996. $10.00.
These two slim books, initially published by Thimble Press earlier in the decade,
provide an intelligent, lively, and digestible assist for educators hoping to expand
children's contact with literature and, by extension, for those librarians hoping to
participate in the process. The Reading Environment focuses on getting kids in
contact with the books in the first place, while TellMe explores ways of encourag-
ing children's responses to literature. Both are filled with pragmatic tips, well-told
and relevant anecdotes, and theoretical knowledge couched in unintimidating lan-
guage; both do in a small space what many longer books don't manage as well. DS
Children's Book Council, ed. Children's Books: Awards e' Prizes. Children's
Book Council, 1996. 500p. ISBN 0-933633-0303. $75.00
The new edition of this extremely useful bibliography covers book awards from
Addams, Jane to the Young Hoosiers, including a multitude of regional, topical,
and other awards in between. Listings are separated into U.S. adult-chosen, U.S.
children's-choice, awards from other English-speaking countries, and selected in-
ternational awards; a listing of selection publications and a variety of useful indices
are also included. DS
DECEMBER 1996 
* 
157
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Africa-fiction: Farmer
African Americans: Igus
African Americans-stories: Smalls;
Stroud
African Americans-fiction:
Cottonwood; Mowry; Robinet
African Americans-poetry:
Adedjouma
ALPHABET BOOKS: Pelletier
Angels-stories: Mark
Apples-stories: Hall
Art: Igus
Ballet-fiction: Giff
Bible-stories: Mark
Biology: Loewer; Toksvig
BIOGRAPHIES: Igus
Birds-fiction: Gilbert
Birds-stories: Bang; Hall
Birthdays-stories: Goode
Blizzards-fiction: Wetterer
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Pitcher; Raschka
Burma-folklore: Froese
Canada-fiction: Valgardson
Cats-stories: Martin
Christmas-stories: Bunting
Circus-fiction: Horvath
Clothing-stories: Millen
Cuba: Marx
Disabilities-fiction: Stemp
Dogs-fiction: Naylor
Dogs-stories: Helldorfer;
Meddaugh
Dolphins-fiction: Hesse
Dreams-stories: Paraskevas
Ecology: Gilbert; Pitcher
Elephants-fiction: Morris
Ethics and values: Hesse
Families-fiction: Cottonwood;
Martinez; Naylor
Families-stories: Bunting; Rael
FANTASY: Dalkey; Doyle;
Howarth; Nix; Valgardson
Fathers and sons-stories: Coy
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Ada; Froese;
Helldorfer; Stewart
Foster care-fiction: Morris
Friendship-stories: Raschka
Games: Lankford
GHOST STORIES: Mowry
Health: Toksvig
HISTORICAL FICTION: Avi;
Paterson; Robinet; Valgardson;
Wetterer
History, U.S.: Blumberg; Glass;
Herb
Hmong-folklore: Coburn
Holidays: Ghazi
Holocaust-fiction: Pausewang
Homosexuality-fiction: Garden
Illness: Marx
Immigrants: O'Connor
Immigrants-fiction: Avi
Immigrants-stories: Bartone
Ireland-stories: Millen
Islam: Ghazi
Japan-fiction: Dalkey
Jews-fiction: Pausewang
Jews-stories: Rael
Language arts: Aliki; Pelletier
Latinos-fiction: Martinez
MAKE AND DO BOOKS: Ross
Marine life: Hulme
Mathematics: Adler; Hulme
Mexico-stories: Bunting
Migrant workers: Bunting
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Jukes
Mothers: Siegen-Smith
158 
* THE BULLETIN
MYTHS AND LEGENDS:
Moore
Nature study: George; Hall;
Thornhill
NURSERY RHYMES: Opie
Physical education: Edwards
POETRY: Siegen-Smith
Pony Express-stories: Glass
Pumpkins-stories: White
Railroads: Blumberg
Railroads-stories: Paraskevas
Reading aloud: Froese; George;
Gilbert; Kimmel; Levitin; Mark;
Thornhill
Reading, easy: Giff; Morris;
Wetterer
Religious education: Ghazi
Rodeos: Crum; Robbins
Romance-fiction: Cottonwood;
Garden
School-stories: Krensky
SCIENCE FICTION: Stemp
Science: Jespersen
Seasons-stories: Richardson
Sisters-stories: Goode
Skating: Edwards
Slavery-fiction: Paterson; Robinet
Social studies: O'Connor
South Africa-stories: Stewart
Storytelling: Froese; Helldorfer;
Kimmel; Mark; Moore; Smalls
Storytime: Bang; Meddaugh;
Paraskevas; Stewart; White
Survival-fiction: Farmer
Teachers-stories: Krensky
Transportation: Blumberg
Voyages and travel-stories: Coy;
Kimmel; Levitin
Water: Pitcher
West, the: Glass; Herb; Levitin
World cultures: Aliki; Lankford;
Siegen-Smith
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION OF THE
BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS (ISSN 0008-9036), as
required by 39 U.S. Code 3685.
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS is published eleven
times a year (monthly except August); annual subscription price is $40.00 (institutional,
domestic), $47.00 (institutional, foreign), $35.00 (individual, domestic), $42.00 (individual,
foreign).
The owner and publisher is the University of Illinois Press acting for the Graduate School
of Library and Information Science at the University of Illinois, a nonprofit organization.
Office of publication is located at 1325 South Oak St., Champaign, IL 61820-6903. The
managing editor is Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
Children's Research Center, 51 Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820. There are no stock-
holders, bondholders, mortgages, or other security holders.
The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status
for Federal income tax purposes have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Average number of copies printed per issue (net press run) during the preceding twelve
months: 5546; number for single issue nearest filing date: 5615. Average number of copies
of each issue distributed by mail to paid subscribers during preceding twelve months: 4283;
number for single issue nearest to filing date: 4759. Average number of copies distributed
for free per issue during preceding 12 months: 71; number for single issue nearest to filing
date: 69. Average number of total copies distributed during preceding 12 months: 4354;
number for single issue nearest to filing date: 4828. Average number of copies of each issue
not distributed (office use, unaccounted, spoiled after printing) during preceding 12 months:
1192; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 787.
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.
Nancy K. Barrett
Assistant Business Manager, University of Illinois Press
September 25, 1996
n exemplary reference which shouldn't be
hidden behind the reference desk, as it serves parents
(and their precocious offspring) quite as well as it does
librarians, teachers and administrators."
-
Reference & Research Book News, April 1992,
(from a review of the previous edition)
2 /1 
:
0 
, 
/ 
l 
/ 
l, 
1
v t h iti
Practical for book selection and purchasing, curriculum
support, readers advisory, and cataloging and classification
-
An annotated list of 6,000 select 
-
Titles selected by experts for
titles for grades Pre-K 
quality, currency, and diversity
through six 
-
Directory of Publishers and
-
Adds 500 new works in each of 
Distributors provides addresses,
four annual supplements 
phone numbers and ordering
-
Indexed by author, title, subject, 
instructions
and analytical entry for 
-
A standard reference in libraries
composite works 
for 87 years
Serves Your Library Through the Year 20001
-Mýl zfi 
J 
P
M'M M
M:
P. ý 
WN ROM
MM 
.
.....
ýýz NOW.'UX
"""f 
, 
R.P.M.1
-,ao Q 
0
....... 
... 
........ 
.. 
..
42-0893 -5
Omer oun 
upplements
.[got 
A, 
d 20M.
n".
H.W. Wison
9?-fPx
JL~
'- Publishers Weekly stars
"Employing the same mixed-media technique used so effectively in
the Caldecott-winning Smoky Night, his previous outing with Bunting
.. Diaz's fiesta-bright [full-color] artwork ignites this joyous tale of a
Mexican American family's emotional ... Christmastime trip [from
California] to their Mexican home. By journey's end, Carlos has a
better understanding not only of 'home,' but also of his parents, and
of the depth of their sacrifice. Bunting's eloquent prose gracefully
defines the story's rich mix of emotions, and her descriptions of rural
Mexico are both earthy and reverent. A veritable feast for the eyes,
this South-of-the-border treat stirs the soul as well."-PW
"A lovely journey home for Mama and Papa and their children, and for
readers, a journey to understanding." -School Library Journal
Ages 4-8. $14.95TR (0-06-026296-6); $14.89LB (0-06-026297-4)
Joanna Cotler Books
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
__ 
_ 
_ 
__
Celebrating
Lillian Hoban's tenth Arthur book
In 1979 Lillian Hoban introduced
Arthur, the soon-to-be enormously
popular young chimpanzee, in
Arthur's Christmas Cookies. Since
then, Arthur and his little sister
Violet have starred in eight more
explorations into the ups-and-
downs of early childhood. Now both
are back in their tenth I Can Read
Book-"a surefire selection for the
first day of school."
- School Library Journal
Full-color pictures by the author
Ages 4-8. $14.95TR (0-06-024955-2)
$14.89 LB (0-06-024956-0)
Lillian Hoban's nine earlier Arthur books
ARTHUR'S CAMP-OUT
Full-color pictures by the author
$14.00TR (0-06-020525-3)
$13.89LB (0-06-020526-1)
$3.75PB (0-06-444175-X)
ARTHUR'S CHRISTMAS
COOKIES
3-color pictures by the author
$14.89LB (0-06-022368-5)
$3.75PB (0-06-444055-9)
$7.95 BK/CASS (1-55994-217-7)
ARTHUR'S FUNNY MONEY
3-color pictures by the author
$14.89LB (0-06-022344-8)
$3.75PB (0-06-444048-6)
$7.95 BK/CASS (1-55994-218-5)
ARTHUR'S GREAT
BIG VALENTINE
3-color pictures by the author
$15.89 LB (0-06-022407-X)
$3.75PB (0-06-444149-0)
L HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
ARTHUR'S HALLOWEEN
COSTUME
3-color pictures by the author
$14.89LB (0-06-022391-X)
$3.75PB (0-06-444101-6)
ARTHUR'S HONEY BEAR
3-color pictures by the author
$14.95TR (0-06-022369-3)
$14.89LB (0-06-022370-7)
$3.75 PB (0-06-444033-8)
$7.95 BK/CASS (1-55994-219-3)
ARTHUR'S LOOSE TOOTH
3-color pictures by the author
$14.89LB (0-06-022354-5)
$3.75 PB (0-06-444093-1)
ARTHUR'S PEN PAL
3-color pictures by the author
$14.89 LB (0-06-022372-3)
$3.75 PB (0-06-444032-X)
$7.95 BK/CASS (1-55994-238-X)
ARTHUR'S PRIZE READER
3-color pictures by the author
$14.89LB (0-06-022380-4)
$3.75PB (0-06-444049-4)
$7.95 BK/CASS (1-55994-220-7)
Arthur's
Back to School Day
Lillian Hoban
-pý
1eaders
by Donna Jo Napoli
. "Rich, complex....A passionate,
painful elaboration of the story of 
t
Rapunzel, from the author who did
the same for Hansel and Gretel in
The Magic Circle."-Kirkus
Reviews (Pointered)
*X"A work of depth and beauty.
..The genius of the novel lies in its
breadth of vision."--*Publishers
Weekly (Starred)
'"This 
version will challenge
readers to think about this old story on a
deeper level. It begs for discussion in literature
classes."--SLJ(Starred)
Ages 12 up. 0-525-45612-0. $15.99
Napoli's superb 
i
companion novel...
THE MAGIC CIRCLE
* ALA Best Book for YAs
* Booklist Editors' Choice
•Bulletin Blue Ribbon
Ages 12 up.
0-525-45127-7. $14.99
Also available in
paperback from Puffin
DUTTON
A Division of Penguin USA
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
Ages 5-9, $15.95
ISBN 0-8075-1662-7
8 x 10, 32 pages
e 
Albert Whitman & Company
S6340 Oakton Street
J Morton Grove, Illinois 60053
The Dog
Who Lost His Bob
by Tom and Laura McNeal
Illustrated by John Sandford
"Phil is a lost, dirty, blue-stained (yes,
blue) dog. He runs away from his
Sunday morning bath and embarks
on a journey that is filled with bow-
wow woes and that ends six months
later.... Readers will be rooting for
Phil as he attempts to find Bob, his
owner .. .Text and watercolor/pencil
illustrations successfully collaborate to
capture the excitement and pathos
of the gangly dog's plight.. ..This is a
tale for anyone (and their dog) who's
been lost."
Recommend, The Bulletin
0008-9036(199612)50:4*; 1-K
9 
*
A1
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
II111111
I I IIll 
ll
