T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
May 2013
Vol. 66   No. 9
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Published by  
Th e Johns hopkins University press
essential.
Deborah stevenson, Editor
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 66 (2013). 
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $58.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$98.00 (print); $105.00 (online); 
$137.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
May 2013
Vol. 66 No. 9
409  the BIg PICture
 
 Ol’ Mama Squirrel  written and illus. by David Ezra Stein
410  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
413 • Spirit and Dust  by Rosemary Clement-Moore
417 • Awesome Dawson  written and illus. by Chris Gall
430 • A Corner of White   by Jaclyn Moriarty
431 • Rotten  by Michael Northrop
442 •  Gone Fishing: A Novel in Verse  by Tamera Will Wissinger;  
illus. by Matthew Cordell
445  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
446  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $98.00; combined print & electronic $137.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2013 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Ol’ Mama Squirrel ©2013 by David Ezra Stein and used by permission of Nancy 
Paulsen Books/Penguin Group (USA).
May 2013 • 409
the BIg PICture
Ol’ Mama Squirrel
written and illus. by David Ezra Stein
Anyone who’s ever come a little too close to a protective squirrel’s territory knows 
the verbal abuse that the critters can heap upon trespassers. A champion at the 
practice is Ol’ Mama Squirrel, who has successfully chased dangerous predators 
(and kites, and airplanes) away from many litters of kits. She may only be the size 
(and, with her rectangular body, roughly the shape) of a loaf of bread, but she’s a 
full-on ferocious mama bear when it comes to protecting her babies: “No one could 
scold like Ol’ Mama Squirrel. The cat or owl that ran afoul of her would slink off, 
looking for some easier meal.” 
When she faces a real grizzly bear looking for a snack, that protective-
ness kicks into overdrive. Ol’ Mama Squirrel threatens the bear for all she’s worth, 
“Chook-chook-chook”-ing at him while brandishing sticks and leaves and pum-
meling him with last year’s nut harvest. Not deterred by her courageous display of 
motherly love, the bear is only heartily amused, and he threatens to eat her entire 
family. With a clarion cry of “Not on my watch, buster!”, Ol’ Mama Squirrel scoops 
up her kits and calls in the reinforcements: “‘Chook, chook, chook!’ said Ol’ Mama 
Squirrel. ‘Chook, chook, chook!’ said twenty other mama squirrels. ‘Chook, chook, 
chook!’ said one hundred more mama squirrels.” The band of mad mama squirrels 
proves that there is indeed strength in numbers, and they successfully chase off the 
bear for good. Even the people of the town are grateful to Ol’ Mama Squirrel for 
ridding the place of the pesky ursine usurper, and they honor her with a plaque 
commemorating the event: “If you’re ever in town, you should go see it . . . Chook, 
chook, chook! . . . if you can get anywhere near it.”
This is both an amusing ode to the strength of maternal love and an 
affectionate depiction of the small but sassy squirrel, and mamas everywhere will 
appreciate Ol’ Mama Squirrel’s of motherly protection. Kids will be tickled by Ol’ 
Mama Squirrel’s equal-opportunity scolding of not only animal predators but also 
kites, airplanes, and human tree-trimmers, and by her alternately “threatening” and 
triumphant posturing as deftly depicted in Stein’s illustrations. Young listeners will 
also enjoy chiming in on repeated phrases (such as Ol’ Mama Squirrel’s dismissive 
“And that takes care of that” after she routs each potential foe), and they will hap-
pily join in on the “chook, chook, chook” of the squirrels’ scolding. Both Stein’s 
text and illustrations emphasize the humor of the story: a scolded dog making a 
hasty exit cries out, “This squirrel is crazy! They must put crazy powder in the 
nuts around here! HELP!,” while the spread in which the wide-eyed bear runs for 
his life as legions of angry squirrel mothers rocket through the sky towards him is 
particularly hilarious.
410 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
Allen, CrystAl The Laura Line. Balzer + Bray, 2013 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-199274-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220844-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Seventh-grader Laura Dyson is ashamed of the fact that the slave shack her ances-
tors inhabited still stands on her grandmother’s property. When Laura’s teacher 
schedules a field trip for the class to tour the shack and learn its history, Laura is 
completely mortified, despite admonitions from her mother and grandmother 
that the shack does not represent her family’s shame but instead showcases the 
successes of a long line of proud African-American women, all named Laura, who 
made their way in the world; they’re especially proud of the first Laura, who will-
ingly sacrificed her freedom to ensure the freedom of four other young Africans 
aboard the Amistad. The successes of Laura’s other namesakes over the years are 
fairly programmatic (the first Laura’s story is apparently entirely fabricated, and 
there’s no note to clarify the real Amistad history), and Laura’s responses to them 
are overplayed as she moves from abject embarrassment to enthusiastic pride; in 
The art is perhaps the most appealing part in this appealing title. The 
boxy-shaped squirrels are both adorable and comical, their teeny waving limbs 
conveying the twitchy-even-when-still nature of the critters. The casual, attractive 
illustrations, done primarily in shades of yellow-greens, browns, and grays, were 
rendered by a process in which outlines were drawn with a pencil dipped in ink, 
then copied onto watercolor paper, at which point watercolor paint and crayon 
were applied. Stein is particularly gifted at creating effective and funny composi-
tions, looking down on the bear from the nest’s vantage point, or sideways at the 
leaping flock of vengeful mama squirrels; lively circled vignettes add energy to 
several spreads. The contrast between Ol’ Mama Squirrel’s fierce expressions and 
postures and her diminutive size, tiny limbs, big pink nose, and fluffy tail make 
viewers want to both chuckle at her and cheer for her. The squirrel kits, though in 
a supporting role, also manage to provide some levity as well, using the hoarded 
nuts as playthings (one mischievously tries to stuff a nut in another one’s mouth) 
or excitedly clinging to Ol’ Mama as she sails through the air.
You’d be off your nut if you squirreled this title away, so include it as part 
of a squirrel- or mom-themed storytime, use it as a lively introduction to some 
backyard nature study, or simply share it aloud for some giggles and grins. Chook, 
chook, chook! (See p. 436 for publication information.)
 
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer
May 2013 • 411
fact, Laura’s responses to all situations, big and small, good and bad, are consistently 
over the top, which is sometimes funny but sometimes a little relentless. This is a 
lively approach to an issue that’s come up recently in the news, however, and the 
historical aspect could help readers consider their own family lore that may not 
have made its way into written accounts. Laura reflects openly on the lessons she’s 
learning throughout her experience about friendship and family legacies, a practice 
which, if not entirely credible as a seventh-grader’s earned wisdom, nevertheless 
provides careful guidance for young readers and gives them something to reach for 
in their own development.  KC
AuCh, MJ One + One = Blue. Ottaviano, 2013 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9405-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8.
“I’m the biggest loser in the seventh-grade class,” says Basil Feeney, who’s a low-key 
kid largely resigned to his status and comforted by his stable home life with his 
grandmother, who’s cared for him ever since his mother, Carly, left to become an 
actress when he was five. A smart, kooky new girl, Tenzie, shakes up his world and 
draws him into a friendship; they bond further upon the realization that they both 
have synesthesia, a sensory eccentricity that makes them see numbers as colors. 
When Basil’s flighty mother returns and signs on to direct the school play, Basil is 
horrified but Tenzie is starstruck; while Carly predictably takes off again, Tenzie 
insists that she and Basil track her down. Basil’s a sympathetic guy, largely at ease 
with himself and his eccentricities, and his narration is plainspoken and accessible. 
It’s Tenzie who really steals the show here, and the way she turns Basil’s drama into 
her own is both credibly annoying and a touching indication of the depth of her 
need. Unfortunately, her behavior and lack of impulse control are so extreme that 
the book seems dismissive of the scale of her problems; additionally, the synesthesia 
theme, though interesting, involves some contrivance and sometimes disappears 
from the story. Nonetheless, it’s a readable account of a kid who learns that it’s okay 
to disturb the universe a little but also to appreciate what he has.  DS
BAlog, Cyn Dead River. Delacorte, 2013 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99012-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74158-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98578-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
White-water rafting and roughing it outside during a Maine winter are not exactly 
what Kiandra had planned for her senior prom weekend, but her boyfriend and 
best gal pal are the outdoorsy types, so she reluctantly agrees to join them on a 
camping “anti-prom.” As she gets closer to the river, however, Ki starts hearing 
voices and having horrific visions—much like her own mother experienced ten 
years ago, before the woman committed suicide. When several mysterious figures 
from her childhood show up, Ki learns that she, like her ancestors before her, is a 
Mistress of the River and is responsible for shepherding lost souls across the river 
to a peaceful afterlife. Unfortunately, a particularly restless spirit is intent on seeing 
her fail, and Ki may lose her life as a result. Much of this reads like a conventional 
horror movie, with secondary characters making appearances solely to relay crucial 
information to the protagonist, while the tension is primarily derived from Ki herself 
412 • The BulleTin
either mistaking or misinterpreting the various circumstances she finds herself in. 
The additional storyline about her and her mother’s role as spirit guardians is both 
convoluted and overplayed, and it undermines what could have been a simple but 
effectively creepy ghost story. That’s not to say this isn’t nail-bitingly frightening 
at points, and the scenes in which Ki is pulled into the river by bodiless hands or 
is witness to grisly murders via her psychic powers are certainly scary. The various 
spirits in the river and the stories of how they got there provide some solid fodder 
for tales to tell around the campfire, and readers may want to throw this in their 
overnight bag next to the chocolate and marshmallows.  KQG
BAnAsh, Jennifer White Lines. Putnam/Penguin, 2013 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25788-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Her mother hits her, her father has left her, but the little white lines of cocaine and 
the thrumming beat of house music never fail to make seventeen-year-old Cat feel 
alive and loved. Starting with her first visit to an underground club in New York, 
she has been part of the ’80s club scene, hosting themed parties, working the red 
ropes, deciding who’s in and who’s out. The only problem is that after night comes 
morning, when she has to go to school and face her daylight self. Ever since social 
services stepped in and determined that she couldn’t stay with her mother, she’s been 
living alone in a downtown apartment (paid for by her distant father), the envy 
of her few friends, but she’s desperately lost and lonely. Her one true friend, Sara, 
is worried about Cat’s drug use and her inability to stop longing for the mother 
she wants rather than the mother she has, while Cat is too wrapped up in her own 
sorrow to see the needs of her other friend, Giovanni, who has become homeless 
and suicidal. Banash captures the pulsing atmospherics of the ’80s club scene in 
minute and perfect detail, juxtaposing her descriptions of the outlandish fashions 
and stylized personalities against evocative, lyrical metaphors of Cat’s brittle inner 
life. The effect is emotionally lashing; readers can’t miss the note of desperation, 
sadness, and insecurity that threads through and in fact drives the relentless party 
scene for all the players, or that Cat’s only moments of happiness come when she’s 
high. The steadying presences of Sara and a new boy bring Cat back from the edge 
to end her story with a note of hope; give this to fans of Francesca Lia Block to see 
what Weetzie might have looked like on the East Coast.  KC 
BowMAn, erin Taken. HarperTeen, 2013 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211726-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211728-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
All the men in Claysoot disappear the minute they turn eighteen, leaving behind 
children they have fathered during month-long relationships with girls chosen by 
the village leaders, a process designed to discourage commitment and love matches. 
Despite these precautions, Gray has fallen in love with Emma; at the same time, he 
has discovered a secret about himself that unsettles everything he has ever known. 
Despite the fact that everyone who has ever attempted an escape has been found 
dead, Gray decides to risk going over the wall around Claysoot rather than waiting 
until he is taken; he’s followed by Emma, and the two discover a world that’s full of 
secrets and danger but that also holds the possibility of freedom for their people. 
May 2013 • 413
The ravenous appetite of young readers for dystopias is fortunately matched by 
the seemingly limitless imagination of authors for creating them, and the genre’s 
enduring questions of how to balance security with freedom and when to risk one 
for the other play out effectively here. Readers will find all the elements they love—a 
sinister overlord who plays with people like pawns, a fearless and feisty rebel force 
with a possibly doomed plan, innovative uses of technology, athletic girls who know 
how to use weapons, characters with an appealingly unfinished, emotionally clumsy 
quality, and a love triangle as Gray must find his heart between the love of Emma 
and one of the young female dissidents. Give this to fans of James Dashner’s The 
Maze Runner (BCCB 11/09) and the Hunger Games trilogy.  KC 
CleMent-Moore, roseMAry Spirit and Dust. Delacorte, 2013 [400p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98970-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74080-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98271-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
The Goodnight family has been using their supernatural abilities to assist law en-
forcement for generations now, with seventeen-year-old Daisy their latest psychic 
sleuth to team up with the FBI. When the daughter of a notorious crime boss goes 
missing, Daisy flies from sunny San Antonio to the chilly streets of Minneapolis 
to see if her discussions with the dead will help the feds; instead she finds herself 
kidnapped and subsequently on the run with Carson, the lead (and stunningly 
good-looking) henchman of said crime boss. As Daisy follows the trail on a forced 
road trip through the Midwest, she finds herself ensnared in a supernatural ca-
tastrophe involving Egyptian mythology, ancient artifacts, and a power-hungry 
ghost. Despite having spent much of her life conversing with the dead, Daisy 
is charmingly optimistic (and certainly a relative in spirit to Maggie Quinn of 
Clement-Moore’s Prom Dates from Hell, BCCB 7/07), facing down the spirits of 
overprotective grandmothers, murdered bodyguards, and ancient Egyptian queens 
with unblinkingly cheerful wit. Carson, as her foil, is then appropriately moody 
and stoic, and the push and pull between them is the stuff rom-com dreams are 
made of. There’s a campy playfulness to the whole endeavor, and even the villain 
is a bit of a laugh, a tweed-wearing professorial type turned Egyptian god bent on 
overtaking the world with, what else, mummies. You can’t really beat a story that 
has hijinks, romance, and a culminating scene in which the heroine defeats the bad 
guys by animating the bones of Sue the T-rex, can you?  KQG 
CuMMings, troy Giddy-Up, Daddy!; written and illus. by Troy Cummings. Ran-
dom House, 2013 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97129-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97856-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98123-4 $10.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs
“Once there was a dad who was really good at playing horsey.” His awesome ability 
leads to confusion, however, and he’s stolen away by some horse rustlers (“They 
lured the dad away with some sugar cubes”). His two kids track him to a rodeo 
and ride him away, hotly pursued by the villains. After an exciting interlude in a 
circus and a brief tour through a polo match and the Kentucky Derby, the family 
heads to Canada; when the rustlers make one last grab for their prize, the kids reveal 
414 • The BulleTin
that they’re actually Canadian Mounties and they arrest the bad guys. This has the 
rambling, slightly hallucinogenic quality of a silly story crafted by kids and parents 
together, and the seriousness of the dad’s horse imitation is a solid gimmick that’ll 
amuse audiences. The breathless craziness lacks a plot rhythm, however, causing the 
story to lose its momentum as events just pile on randomly rather than developing. 
The digital art is largely flat and slick, with compositions often fussily overbusy in 
a way that accentuates the unfocused style of the story. There’s charm in the manic 
exuberance, though, and in the poker-faced mien of the 1960s-cartoon dad as he 
gallops through the pages on his hands and knees. The plot sprawl will lose some 
youngsters, but those raised on absurd family stories may appreciate the joke and 
chime in with their own tall parental tales.  DS
DAhl, elisABeth Genie Wishes; written and illus. by Elisabeth Dahl. Amulet/
Abrams, 2013 273p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0526-7 $16.95   
R Gr. 4-6
It’s the beginning of fifth grade, and Genie Haddock Kunkle has just been nomi-
nated as the class blogger. Between an epic sleepover, the parental canceling of 
Junk Food Day, and the dreaded Sex Ed class, Genie finds she has plenty to write 
about, but as the year goes on, she starts wondering if her posts should be more 
serious. After all, she’s experiencing some pretty major life changes, like losing a 
best friend and gaining a new one, trying on bras and deodorant, and watching her 
single father take up dating again. Genie is a remarkably angst-free preteen, and 
her creative responses to the various issues of puberty and middle-grades dynam-
ics involve little drama, offering a refreshingly optimistic option to kids who don’t 
get what the fuss is about all these “changes.” The third-person narration is a little 
rambling and purposive, but the blog entries themselves are short and sweet and 
to the point. Additionally, the author has a keen eye for the tween girl experience: 
Genie’s plans for the future involve living right by her best friend and working 
together as dolphin trainers, while the highlight of her summer is the fact that her 
other friend just joined the pool. This will no doubt resonate with tween girls, and 
it has the charm and the discussion fodder to make an excellent mother-daughter 
book club selection.  KQG
DoeDen, MAtt A Marked Man: The Assassination of Malcolm X. Twenty-First 
Century/Lerner, 2013 88p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-5484-0 $33.27
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1054-1 $24.95   
Ad Gr. 6-10
“‘I’ll never get old. . . . You’ll find that very few people who think like I think live 
long enough to get old.’” Although any civil rights activist from the 1960s could 
have made a similarly prophetic claim, Malcolm X had good reason to believe 
that he’d meet an early demise. Here Doeden traces what Malcolm X regarded as 
the path to the inevitable, from Malcolm’s unsettled youth in foster care, through 
his disillusioned period of crime and incarceration, to his conversion to Islam as 
interpreted and practiced by the Nation of Islam. Although he was radicalized and 
committed to wresting power from the white establishment by “any means neces-
sary,” his falling out with the Nation of Islam and his disdain for the nonviolence 
of mainstream civil rights leadership left him marginalized and surrounded by 
potential enemies—black and white, quasi-religious and political. The brevity of 
May 2013 • 415
this title allows for little more than an outline of the complex shifts in Malcolm 
X’s philosophy, but Doeden lays out the immediate circumstances surrounding the 
actual assassination with admirable clarity. He also presents alternative explana-
tions of who might have actually ordered the hit and possible co-conspirators. An 
intervening chapter on slavery and civil rights seems unnecessary for most readers 
and unfortunately breaks the otherwise strong narrative flow of the text, and a 
glitch in the diagram of the Audubon Ballroom assassination scene conflicts with 
the main text as to the relative timing of the smoke bomb and the triple shooting. 
Despite these missteps, the importance of the subject and the tight focus on the 
much-debated murder conspiracy will make this a good choice for teen readers 
seeking material that’s short, substantial, and horrifyingly true. A timeline, glossary, 
list of resources, index, and section of brief biographies are included.  EB
DrAper, shAron M. Panic. Atheneum, 2013 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-0896-8 $16.99
ISBN 978-1-4424-0898-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Diamond and her friends love dancing at Crystal Pointe Dance Academy. They all 
still dream of fame in the larger world, however, so when Diamond meets a man 
who claims to have a daughter her age and connections to some big stars that he’s 
casting for a movie, she abandons common sense and goes with him to an “audi-
tion,” which turns out to be an internet porn operation. He keeps Diamond locked 
up and drugged for six days while her family and friends fear for her. Her drugged 
state allows for the multiple rapes she endures to be only hinted at and affords her 
a mechanism of oblivion when she eventually escapes that makes the aftermath less 
traumatizing. Meanwhile Layla, another girl at the studio, is struggling with her 
own abusive situation as her boyfriend, Donovan, gets more and more aggressive, 
and her public humiliation enables her to be sympathetic to Diamond’s exposure. 
Draper employs her signature format here of focalizing through an ensemble cast 
of African-American teens coping with the multiple facets of their own lives while 
being involved in a single larger issue. Each character is given a distinct set of fam-
ily circumstances and personality traits to ensure multiple access points for reader 
identification, and their choices, while not always wise or comfortable, certainly 
have credibility. What’s particularly interesting here is where she takes the aftermath 
of her protagonists’ traumas: there’s no blaming or moralizing, just a sympathetic 
acknowledgment of the need to move forward from bad circumstances, a supportive 
point that will ring truer to readers than more didactic approaches. The emotional 
ranges of the characters are likewise readily recognizable for teens: Draper doesn’t 
go too deep or rely on metaphor or complex psychology to establish motivation, 
and this straightforward treatment, along with the pacing and subject matter, will 
make this attractive even for older teens who enjoy drama but don’t necessarily see 
themselves as enthusiastic readers.  KC
eMerson, Kevin The Fellowship for Alien Detection. Walden Pond/HarperCol-
lins, 2013 428p
ISBN 978-0-06-207185-9 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Straitlaced, overachieving Haley would have never guessed that she’d spend the 
summer after eighth grade looking for extraterrestrial life, but that was before she 
416 • The BulleTin
stumbled across the story of Suza Raines, a girl who went missing from a nearby 
town, possibly as a result of alien activity. Thirteen-year-old Dodger, meanwhile, 
has never heard of Suza, but he’s quite familiar with the town of Juliette, AZ, a 
place that doesn’t exist on the map but plays a radio broadcast in Dodger’s head 
nonetheless. Dodger and Haley are brought together when they win the Fellowship 
of Alien Detection Award; when they join forces to continue their investigations, 
they come face to face with an alien race that is, you guessed it, trying to take over 
the human world. Budding conspiracy theorists and X-Files fans will fall right in 
line with this action-packed ride that successfully combines adventure, mystery, 
humor, and a bit of early teen angst. Between their narrow escapes from memory-
wiping electromagnetic pulses and sinister aliens in orange suits, Haley and Dodger 
are also facing their own personal problems regarding their places in their families, 
what they want from life, and what their desires mean for the people around them. 
Emerson capably blends these more introspective elements with the larger story, 
implying the connection between their search for truth within themselves and the 
search for truth in the world rather than overtly pointing it out. The conclusion 
hints at future installments, so readers can only hope that Haley and Dodger con-
tinue in the footsteps of Mulder and Scully.  KQG 
fitzMAuriCe, KAthryn Destiny, Rewritten. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2013 335p
ISBN 978-0-06-162501-5 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Sixth-grader Emily Elizabeth Davis has serious questions about fate and destiny, as 
well as about her own parentage. Her hippie-esque mother, a poet and professor at 
Berkley, believes that fate hinges upon following little signs the universe gives and 
maintains the fates don’t want Emily to know who her real father is. Emily grows 
increasingly skeptical that one’s destiny is set in stone, and she rejects her mother’s 
version of the world by secretly looking for her dad and by deciding to become a 
romance writer, like her hero Danielle Steele, instead of the poet her mother hopes 
she’ll be. Emily’s exploration of fate is intriguingly presented, and a happy ending 
comes about through both Emily’s choices and pure luck, leaving readers with the 
pleasantly paradoxical idea that fate is both beyond and within one’s control. Her 
mother’s coy silence makes Emily’s decision to grab the reins of her own destiny 
entirely plausible, and Emily is a strong and likable heroine. The Berkeley setting 
(complete with literal tree-huggers) is credibly evoked, and secondary characters, 
particularly Mortie, Emily’s younger, military-obsessed cousin (who is actually 
quite helpful in her quest to find her father), are engagingly depicted as well. This 
would possibly make a good pairing with the film Brave for a duo of stories about 
girls trying to discern the boundaries of fate.  JH
frenCh, renée Barry’s Best Buddy; written and illus. by Renée French. Toon 
Books/Candlewick, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-1-935179-21-4 $12.95   
R Gr. 1-2
Barry (the bird) is awakened from his nap by his friend Polarhog (the . . . polar-
hog?), who has a surprise for his buddy. Polarhog takes Barry out for a walk, teas-
ing him with the upcoming surprise, and the two wander around trying on hats, 
indulging in ice cream, and amiably bantering and bickering (Polarhog is sunny, 
Barry sardonic). They end up back at Barry’s house, which has been transformed 
by hardworking ants (who’ve been trudging past Barry and Polarhog with paints, 
May 2013 • 417
balloons, and ornaments in spread after spread) into a vivid and brightly illuminated 
birthday-celebrating showpiece. This is positioning itself as a “first comic,” but it’s 
basically a readalone picture book with the text all in speech balloons, and a fine 
and inviting one at that. The friendly, jibing conversation between the protagonists 
has a pleasing edge (“How is this a good idea?” queries Barry as he’s squashed into a 
ridiculous hat), and the text’s blend of sparseness and humor makes it appealing to 
novice readers. The visuals are key here, since they’re cluing viewers into the ants’ 
ongoing action, and the full-bleed spreads effectively immerse readers in the peace-
ful and parklike landscape as Barry and Polarhog troop across the pages. There’s a 
subtle waxy depth to the digital coloration, and the pencil linework is trim, tidy, 
and slightly otherworldly: the big-eyed ants look vaguely mechanistic, and squat, 
huge-eyed Barry resembles one-eyed monster Mike from Monsters, Inc. With its 
sophisticated look and easily decodable blend of art and text, this friendship story 
should win early readers looking to conquer something on their own.  DS 
gAll, Chris Awesome Dawson; written and illus. by Chris Gall. Little, 
2013 34p
ISBN 987-0-316-21330-1 $16.99   
R 4-8 yrs
Dawson, child inventor, is acclaimed by cast-off junk as “a hero to toys everywhere.” 
Ever since he was just a tinkering toddler, knocking together a space helmet from 
spoons and a chicken take-out bucket or building a bathtub powerboat from 
newspaper and eggbeater, he’s steadily improved his skills at turning recyclables 
into clever playthings. Even inventor prodigies resist parental orders to do their 
chores, and Dawson sets to work on a Vacu-Maniac robot that will do the work for 
him. The vacuum’s propensity to suck up its surroundings moves from troubling 
to threatening as the more voraciously it feeds, the bigger it grows. The problem 
is traced to its cat-food brain, which Dawson replaces with the head of his favorite 
toy cow, Mooey, and a kinder, gentler, more useful robot is born. Dawson pledges 
hereafter “to use his powers only for the good of others,” and the closing spread 
finds him piloting an airborne version of the Vacu-Maniac to fend off an invasion 
of space aliens. The plot’s a little thin, but visiting Dawson’s workroom is a bit like 
touring a junk-bedizened Batcave, and the slick, stylized art enhances the comic-
book feel. Mooey, a bodiless cow head mounted on a unicycle, threatens to upstage 
Dawson with its eerily fixed stare and deadpan observations on the mayhem around 
them. Dawson’s creation may not be as finely tuned as Mini Grey’s Traction Man 
(BCCB 5/05), but a kid and a kluge is a reliable combination for an imaginative 
adventure.  EB
gArlAnD, MiChAel Car Goes Far; written and illus. by Michael Garland. Holi-
day House, 2013 [32p] (I Like to Read)
ISBN 978-0-8234-2598-3 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. K-1
This entry in the I Like to Read series features a little red, Beetle-like car with a 
toothy, grinning grille, looking good and out for a spin. Mud splashes, smoky 
exhaust, and bird droppings take their toll on Car’s shine, but fortunately a coast 
through a car wash sets all to rights. Fortunate, too, for beginning readers, that Car’s 
adventures play out so smoothly in monosyllabic terms, a tidy blend of sound-outs 
and sight words: “Oh, no! Birds make a mess on Car. Car does not look good now.” 
418 • The BulleTin
The digital artwork, though not quite up to Pixar standards, should nonetheless 
strike readers as a cozily familiar milieu for automotive adventures, and background 
signage (“Go Go Burger,” “Shop Quick,” “Fast Gas,” “Hot Dogs”) offer some ad-
ditional reading matter for kids who speed through the main text. Rate this four 
and a half beeps in the annual beginner-reader buyers’ guide.  EB
gerMein, KAtrinA My Dad Thinks He’s Funny; illus. by Tom Jellett. Candle-
wick, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6522-7 $14.99   
Ad 5-9 yrs
Some dads have their funny bits, but others are nonstop jokers from dawn to dusk, 
and so it is with the narrator’s father. He’s a wellspring of dorky humor, whether 
in his answers to common questions (“If anyone asks, ‘How is it going?’ Dad says, 
‘By bus’”), his responses to common occurrences (“If I fall, Dad says, ‘Welcome 
home. How was your trip?’”), or his fondness for bathroom humor (“And when 
Dad says, ‘Time for a special announcement,’ we leave the room fast, before it really 
starts to smell”). There’s no real trajectory here—though the sequence ends with 
nighttime, it doesn’t even follow the events of a day, so there’s not much shape or 
momentum to what is essentially just a list. It’s a funny list, though, and Germain’s 
extensive library of dopey dad sayings is sure to elicit recognition from youngsters 
who know somebody similarly given to jokes that have listeners simultaneously 
snickering and face-palming. The mixed-media art blends layered paper collage 
with thick, crayony lines and blotchy fill, gaining stylish design from precise and 
inventive compositions (including a helpful diagrammed instruction for an eye-
roll). There’s a plausible scruffiness to the adolescent-humored dad, who engages in 
some visual-only humor as well (making funny faces, holding drinking glasses up 
to his eyes like binoculars), and the resemblance is clear in the family’s red heads 
and ski-jump noses. This will be a lively prompt for youngsters to share their own 
family’s dumb jokes and collect some possibilities for dorky return fire.  DS 
gerstein, MorDiCAi How to Bicycle to the Moon to Plant Sunflowers; written and 
illus. by Mordicai Gerstein. Roaring Brook, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-512-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-5
The boy narrator is too busy with “homework, soccer, violin, and all the other 
stuff I had to do” to make a bicycle trip himself to cheer up the Man in the Moon 
with a garden project, but fortunately he’s done all the heavy thinking, and now 
it’s up to an enterprising reader to simply execute the plan. And what a plan it is. 
Two thousand used truck-tire inner tubes and a pair of sturdy birch trees make 
a giant slingshot, which will propel said bicycle along tautly stretched lengths of 
connected garden hose (harpooned up to the moon via slingshot), which will not 
only serve as the roadway but also the irrigation system to prepare the lunar soil. 
NASA cooperates with a donated space suit (in an extra-small size), snacks and 
squeezable space foods provide nourishment, special clamps keep the bicycle from 
slipping off the hose, a hangable sleeping bag lets the traveler dangle from the 
hose to get some rest, and the rest is just a matter of simple gardening. After the 
celebrations and TV interviews are over, everyone can gaze through a telescope to 
enjoy the vision of the moon abloom in a smiley face of sunflowers. Crayon-bright 
cartoon illustrations, neatly numbered for ease in following directions, strike a 
May 2013 • 419
delightful balance between fantasy and plausibility. There’s enough reference here 
to the actual challenges of space travel to justify a quirky side trip in a solar system 
science unit—not that flights of fancy require justification.  EB 
gewirtz, ADinA rishe Zebra Forest. Candlewick, 2013 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6041-3 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6568-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
It’s the summer of 1980, and eleven-year-old Annie dreams of adventure, but she 
knows that reading Treasure Island aloud with her younger brother and making up 
fantastic tales about their late and mysterious father’s exploits is as much excite-
ment as she’ll get. She’s wrong: when a group of inmates escapes from the nearby 
prison, one forces himself into the house where Annie and her brother live with 
their grandmother; she’s even more floored when he turns out to be her father. As 
he hides out in their home, Annie and her brother must come to terms with the 
lies they’ve heard all their lives and the reality of the man now in their house. An-
nie’s narration is plaintive and plainspoken as she describes a life so dysfunctional 
that it’s ironically improved by being taken hostage: her grandmother’s depressive 
neglect has left the house a disheveled wreck and resulted in the children’s coming 
under the watchful eye of social services, while her father actually works on cleaning 
the place up and arranging some decent meals. Annie’s acute ambivalence toward 
her father—desperation to learn the basic information about her family that Gran 
refuses to share, craving for the parental relationship she’s never known, and anger 
with him for his present action and his past abandonment—plays out with credible 
tension, especially as her brother, her only ally, remains implacably opposed to the 
man. While a few of the elements are overcontrived, the absorbing voice and short 
chapters make this a taut, accessible read (and older readaloud), and kids will be 
engrossed by Annie’s dilemma.  DS 
hAAs, Jessie Bramble and Maggie: Give and Take; illus. by Alison Friend. Candle-
wick, 2013 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5021-6 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
After finding a new home with Maggie (in Bramble and Maggie, BCCB 6/12), 
Bramble is now settling in nicely and teaching Maggie the importance of partner-
ship (“Neither of them should be boss all the time. There should be some give-
and-take”). In this easy reader’s short chapters, Bramble gets bored when Maggie 
goes off to school, enjoys her first visit to an ocean beach, and finds a buddy in a 
neighbor’s chicken, who’d rather live in the barn with Bramble. More focused on 
Bramble than the first title, this is really an early horse book, with Bramble’s quirky 
and authentically equine point of view permeating the story; Haas’ short, accessible 
sentences (“Bramble sneaked up. She blew her breath under the hen’s feathers”) are 
an inviting and achievable success for readers just moving beyond formal beginner 
series. Friend’s gouache illustrations combine soft, sunny realism with a touch of 
bulbous cartooniness in Bramble herself, whose wide-eyed expression always seems 
to be questioning the world. Horse lovers who’ve moved past Bang-Campell’s Little 
Rat Rides (BCCB 4/04) will enjoy Bramble and Maggie’s company.  DS
420 • The BulleTin
hArrington, JAniCe n. Busy-Busy Little Chick; illus. by Brian Pinkney. Farrar, 
2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-374-34746-8 $15.99   
R 5-7 yrs
In this interpretation of “The Hen’s House,” a fable from the Nkundo people of 
Central Africa, Little Chick does all the work of building his family a much-needed 
new house while Mama Nsoso and his chick siblings spend each day chowing down 
instead. Evocative, repeated words and phrases, some in the Lonkundo language 
(the chicks peep “Peo-peo,” Mama Nsoso goes “cwa-cwa-cwa” when she walks), help 
provide narrative structure for young listeners and enhance the readaloud value of 
the book. Little Chick’s youthful enthusiasm is utterly charming and his determined 
work at the house is admirable—though surely some kids will feel he deserves more 
than a few crickets after all the work he’s done. Pinkney’s bold, slightly abstract 
illustrations vividly depict the chicks and hen in bright, swirly scrawls of golds and 
orangey-reds, accented with heavy, black brushstrokes around the contours of the 
figures. While the busyness of the scribbly lines is a little distracting up close, the 
little hen and chicks translate well to viewers at a distance. Overall, this is an enter-
taining, solidly constructed tale that many children will enjoy, and it could serve as a 
useful contrast to “The Little Red Hen” or Aesop’s “The Ant and the Grasshopper.” 
Harrington helpfully includes both a pronunciation guide and a thorough author’s 
note describing her sources and her process for shaping the tale.  JH
henKes, Kevin Penny and Her Marble; written and illus. by Kevin Henk-
es. Greenwillow, 2013 48p
ISBN 978-0-06-208203-9 $12.99   
R Gr. 1-2 
In the latest Penny episode (see Penny and Her Song, BCCB 4/12), our mouse 
heroine contends with a moral dilemma all too familiar among little children. While 
out walking her doll, Penny finds a lovely blue marble on the lawn of her neighbor, 
Mrs. Goodwin. She pockets the treasure with only the tiniest twinge of guilt, but 
as the day wears on, her decision begins to weigh on her. Of course, Penny knows 
what she should do, and when she returns the marble to where she found it, Mrs. 
Goodwin is right there to reassure her that she left the marble there on purpose, 
hoping “someone would walk by and see it.” Henkes is a proven master of juvenile 
angst, and he views the situation with a sharp eye and a compassionate heart. The 
four-chapter easy-reader format deftly advances the trajectory—Penny’s discovery 
of the marble, her fading joy in its ownership, the seriocomic attack of guilt (“At 
dinner, Penny did not eat much. The oranges in the bowl looked like big orange 
marbles. The peas on her plate looked like little green marbles”), and Penny’s relief 
at doing the right thing. Mrs. Goodwin, in her turn, handles the situation perfectly, 
reassuring Penny that the marble is hers to keep but respectfully allowing her to 
confess her presumed wrongdoing and relieve her conscience. Watercolor pictures 
in a pastel palette are sweet but not saccharine, successfully conveying the range 
of expressions that accompany Penny’s day of turmoil and the warmth of Penny’s 
supportive parents, who would definitely be proud of their little girl’s integrity, if 
only they knew.  EB
May 2013 • 421
higgins, ryAn Wilfred; written and illus. by Ryan Higgins. Dial, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3732-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
Poor Wilfred—a goggle-eyed, hairy giant—is lonely until he discovers a town full of 
bald people, including a little boy who is not only unafraid of Wilfred but actually 
enjoys his company. It looks like the beginning of a beautiful friendship until the 
bald adults of the town gang up on Wilfred and demand his hair; Wilfred gener-
ously obliges, and the bald people shave him bare and make his hair into wigs for 
themselves. When the worried boy searches for Wilfred, he gets lost in a blizzard, 
and Wilfred selflessly saves him, curling his big, hairless body around the boy in 
the snow. Chastened by Wilfred’s heroism, the townspeople soon gather up the 
wigs and sew them together into a big hairy suit: “And that’s how Wilfred came 
to have a zipper, a smile, and a very best friend.” The sacrificial lengths to which 
Wilfred will go to make friends recall the The Giving Tree, but this is a far more 
lighthearted tale, and the oddball friendship between the Muppet-like Wilfred and 
the little boy is sure to please young readers. Cartoonist Higgins’ zany ink linework 
filled in with digital colors provide much of the book’s visual humor as they depict 
the Wilfred’s interactions with others: he overenthusiastically tries to join the bald 
children’s play, arms up and grin wide, while they (except the boy) run away in 
open-mouthed horror. Squiggly, energetic linework and townspeople who resemble 
wide-eyed versions of Mr. Magoo reflect the story’s wacky, absurd tone. Pull this 
out to perk up an otherwise ordinary day, but be advised that every kid is going to 
want a “Wilfred” afterwards; a crafty adult with a sewing machine, some fake fur, 
and a pair of oversized googly eyes might be able to oblige.  JH
horáčeK, petr Puffin Peter; written and illustrated by Petr Horáček. Candle-
wick, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6572-2 $16.99   
R 3-5 yrs
Best friends Peter and Paul, two nearly identical puffins, are separated by a storm 
while diving at sea. Peter ends up on the back of a blue whale, who helps him look 
for Paul, guided by Peter’s descriptions. When Peter tells the whale that Paul is 
“funny and noisy,” the whale takes him first to an island of parrots: “‘Paul is not a 
parrot,’ said Peter. ‘Paul’s feathers are black and white!’” The whale then takes him 
to an island of penguins but, unlike them, Paul has a colorful beak, so that’s not 
right; next, they visit a toucan, but that’s not Paul, either. Peter is ready to give up 
when they spot a bird flying near some tiny islands: “It was black and white, with 
a colorful beak. It was funny and noisy. . . It was Paul!” Audiences, who know what 
Paul looks like from the outset, will relish the humor of the whale’s mistakes, and 
the search for a bird that fits Peter’s description will engage youngsters in some 
beginning sorting and classification skills. The short, streamlined text and large, bold 
illustrations increase this title’s value for group storytimes as well. Multiple layers and 
shadings of color give Horáček’s mixed media art a textured and dramatic fresco-like 
flair; the puffins’ striking coloring contrasts effectively with the sunny yellows and 
deep blues and greens of the backgrounds, and the compositions are appropriately 
focused on Peter and his pal. The separated friends story, vibrant illustrations, and 
casual introduction to simple deductive reasoning will make this a hit with the 
preschool crowd. Read it in tandem with “A Lost Button” from Lobel’s Frog and 
Toad Are Friends (BCCB 3/71) for additional practice with classification skills.  JH
422 • The BulleTin
howArD, J. J. That Time I Joined the Circus. Point/Scholastic, 2013  262p
ISBN 978-0-545-43381-5 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 10
Still reeling over the death of her father, high school senior Lexi is stunned to 
discover that he was broke, and she’s now left with nothing but a few personal 
belongings and a ticket to Florida, where her mother was last seen working with a 
circus. Mom’s certainly not there now, though, and Louie Vrana, owner of Circus 
Europa, has only vague memories of her brief stint with the troupe. Gruff but soft-
hearted, he offers Lexi some work and a place to sleep; with no better options at 
hand, she slowly pulls herself together, finding rewards in friendship with Vrana’s 
daughters, heartthrob midway-worker Jaime, and eventually, gorgeous womanizer 
Nick, whose mother used to have the fortuneteller act that Lexi takes over. Love 
under the big top is but one thread of Lexi’s romantic life, however, and her cur-
rent circus activities alternate with memories of the weeks leading up to her dad’s 
death, during which she and her best friend Eli became lovers, breaking the heart 
of her other best friend, Bailey, who had been dating Eli. If you’ve lost count, that 
makes three serious love interests and one missing mother, all of which is sorted 
out with a protracted series of revelations and knitted loose ends to secure Lexi’s 
happy ending. If the wrap-up is improbable and awkward, however, the run-up is 
pretty involving, with a good-natured heroine who can appreciate the absurdity of 
her situation, a cast of flawed but humane characters, and lots of circus life detail 
to put a fresh twist to standard YA fare.  EB 
hughes, shirley Hero on a Bicycle. Candlewick, 2013 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6037-6 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6359-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Paolo Crivelli fantasizes about joining his father in the resistance as he rides his 
bike through the Nazi-occupied streets of Florence, Italy during World War II. His 
dad has recently gone underground for his own safety and Paolo’s mother is more 
anxious than ever—worrying about her husband, Paolo’s nighttime bicycle rides 
through a dangerous countryside, her daughter Constanza’s apparent emotional 
withdrawal from the family and her friendly relationships with Nazi occupiers, the 
escalating action as Allied liberators make gains throughout 1944, and now the 
menacing demands of the local partisans that she shelter escaped prisoners of war 
and help them return to their Ally units. Although Paolo and his bicycle exploits 
get top billing, the power of this novel lies in the skillfully interwoven activities of 
the three Crivellis, each of whom keeps innermost thoughts private, and each of 
whom musters daring and split-second decisions that keep the pace lively and read-
ers turning the pages. Hughes offers a far more nuanced view of partisan fighters 
than often appears in children’s World War II dramas—they’re heroic, certainly, 
but they’re also willing to use dire threats and physical force to coerce civilians 
into activities that put them in mortal peril. Skillful plotting, with a number of 
well-placed chapter cliffhangers, and a deftly conveyed sense of place make this a 
strong choice for historical fiction readers.  EB
Jones, ursulA Star Turn. Inside Pocket, 2013 367p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-9084581-6-7 $9.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Ollie travels around 1936 England with the a teen variety act, the Star Turns, try-
May 2013 • 423
ing to avoid abuse by his father, who directs the troupe, and plotting to make his 
escape and turn his life in another direction. At first it seems that training on the 
sly to be an acrobat with another performing group would be the key, but when 
that group dissolves, Ollie’s close to despair. Then he and an American boy named 
Ralph see each other through their train windows, and the boys instantly recognize 
that they look exactly like each other. Ollie brushes it off, but Ralph is obsessed 
with tracking down his double and hops off the train in pursuit. What ensues is an 
old-fashioned, seriocomic cat-and-mouse chase, lavishly and intricately plotted in 
a style reminiscent of Geraldine McCaughrean at full tilt. A steadily accruing cast 
of picaresque characters—from an Irish jig busker, to a tubercular acrobat, to an 
egocentric matinee idol, to a gun-toting, mishap-prone mystery man in black and 
white shoes—lead the boys through myriad twists and turns until the Big Reveal 
and the inevitable happy ending. With a knife-throwing routine gone deadly wrong 
for the opening scene, and enough loopy action to leave readers short of breath, 
nobody’s leaving this show until the final curtain.  EB 
Joseph, lynn Flowers in the Sky. HarperTeen, 2013 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-029794-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223642-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Nina adores her island home in the Dominican Republic, but her mother dreams 
of her moving to New York and marrying a rich American. When she wrongly 
suspects Nina of flirting with a wealthy tourist, she sends the fifteen-year-old girl 
to join her older brother in New York. Nina is initially miserable, especially when 
she realizes that her brother’s business is unlawful. When she meets Luis, though, 
everything changes, and despite her friends’ dismissal of him as a drug-dealing thug, 
she wisely trusts her heart and embarks on a relationship. She also finds a way to 
grow flowers in her concrete environment, opening up an opportunity to literally 
bloom where she has been planted against her will. The story is sentimental yet sweet 
and appealing, reminiscent of West Side Story in its focus on a couple of idealists 
who find beauty in each other against a grim backdrop and despite overwhelming 
loss, grief, and displacement. Nina’s story ends more happily than Maria’s, however, 
so give this to romantic souls for a thoughtful perspective on immigration, family 
ties, and not compromising on either your dreams or your principles.  KC 
KAtz, KAren Now I’m Big!; written and illus. by Karen Katz. McElderry, 
2013 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-3547-6 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7165-8 $12.99   
R 2-4 yrs
Katz departs from her popular board-book format in this picture book featuring 
a multiracial cast of children who note ways they’ve grown up from babyhood to 
toddlers/preschoolers. “I used to be a baby,” the first speaker begins, setting up a 
pattern: on each spread, the verso lists something the child did as a baby (“When I 
was a baby, I had to wear diapers”) while the recto offers a contrasting ability of the 
older child (“NOW I’M BIG! I can wear real underpants and poo in the toilet”). 
This pattern repeats itself on each of the following spreads until a new milestone 
is presented (“NOW I have a new baby sister!”) along with a list of things that 
the older child can do to help the baby “now that I’m BIG!” Although there isn’t 
424 • The BulleTin
anything particularly new here, Katz’s text is effectively smooth and streamlined, 
and the clear, rock-solid pattern of the text will be helpful to toddlers and younger 
preschoolers. A large, bold black font and the simple, uncluttered compositions 
make this very accessible to groups; the vibrant colors of watercolor and gouache 
and Katz’s trademark stylized babies and children give the book a cheerful, friendly 
feel. The thoughtful construction of the text, the chipper illustrations, and the 
age-appropriate topic give this go-to utility for both parents and librarians.  JH
KiMMelMAn, leslie Sam and Charlie (and Sam Too!); illus. by Stefano Tambel-
lini. Whitman, 2013 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-7213-9 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 1-3
Young Sam is expecting his new neighbor, Charlie, to be a boy, but it turns out that 
“Charlie” is Charlene and that Charlie’s sibling Sam (who is soon dubbed “Sam 
Too”) is Charlie’s little sister, Samantha. Sam and Charlie quickly become pals 
anyway, and four short self-contained chapters follow them on their adventures. 
“Sharing” finds the friends arguing over who gets the last bite of prune hamentaschen 
(clearly superior to the alternative apricot ones), “Sick Day” sees Sam cheering up a 
sick Charlie, “The Bad Haircut” has Sam trying to make amends for inadvertently 
insulting Charlie’s new haircut, and “I’m Sorry Day” humorously recaps the previous 
stories as buddies Sam and Charlie discuss Yom Kippur. The plot and the writing 
are kept simple but appealingly realistic as Sam and Charlie negotiate their newly 
formed friendship; when Sam, for example, tells Charlie that her hair looks “electric 
or something” after her new cut, he doesn’t understand why she gets upset (“Sam 
didn’t know what he’d done. ‘I told the truth,’ he said. ‘It does look electric’”). The 
use of Jewish holidays as a backdrop for some stories is refreshingly subtle; eating 
hamentaschen and attending synagogue are clearly as much a part of the kids’ lives 
as going to camp and playing baseball. Tambellini’s digital illustrations in low-key 
hues are cartoonish and casual, and dark-haired Sam and freckled, brunette Charlie 
are an attractive pair; Sam Too, in her ever-present bear hat, is equally charming. 
Kids somewhere between Frog and Toad and beginning chapter books will find 
this bridges that gap nicely.  JH 
Krull, KAthleen The Beatles Were Fab (And They Were Funny); written by 
Kathleen Krull and Paul Brewer; illus. by Stacy Innerst. Harcourt, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-0-547-50991-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Yes, sadly, we have now reached the point at which the Beatles need to be explained, 
and Krull, with her well-trained eye for the foibles of the famous, effectively captures 
the lads’ charm and the insanity that accompanied their most manic performing 
years. In this picture-book group biography, the Beatles’ collectively wry sense of 
humor is as defining a characteristic as skinny ties and mop tops, and Krull allots 
space in her text for each of the performers to re-quote some of his sassier lines. 
(“Q: What do you do when you’re cooped up in a hotel room? George: We ice-
skate”). Coverage is limited to the frantic period of Beatlemania, with a quick nod 
to what went before (the Quarry Men, Hamburg, etc.) and what came after (“As 
they wrote songs that dug deeper into the meaning of life and love, their music was 
becoming too complicated to perform live”). Innerst’s playful, spot-on caricatures 
(the big-headed Beatles resemble bobbleheads) and imaginative scene-setting, richly 
May 2013 • 425
textured in acrylic and ink, add enjoyable atmosphere. Though fans may bristle over 
what’s missing from the appended timeline (Pete Best, for one thing), the chronol-
ogy and additional bibliography will give readers more context. Grandparents and 
near-retirement educators will join kids in giggling over Krull’s playful jibes at the 
starstruck fans and may have a few stories of their own about the Fab Four.  EB
lA vAlley, JosAnne The Vine Basket. Clarion, 2013 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-547-84801-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Since the Chinese government began to encroach upon the coal-rich lands of the 
ethnic Uyghur minority, fourteen-year-old Mehrigul’s farming family has had some 
difficult times. Her older brother ran away to escape prosecution after his involve-
ment in anti-Chinese demonstrations, and now his share of the farming tasks has 
fallen upon his younger sister, forcing her to quit school. When one of Mehrigul’s 
decorative handwoven baskets catches the eye of an American buyer at the local 
market, Mehrigul is offered what seems to be a ridiculous amount of money for 
it, with the promise of more to come if she continues to produce baskets. Instead 
of relieving some of her family’s struggles, however, Mehrigul’s windfall and newly 
appreciated talent only augment the tension in her family as a host of repressed 
resentments roil to the surface. Mehrigul’s drunken, deceitful father steps easily 
into the role of villain, but La Valley sensitively reveals the roots of his pain in the 
loss of both his son and his status as provider for the family. The subtext of political 
advocacy for the Uyghur minority is unmistakable and may lead a few more socially 
minded readers to further explore the conflict, but it’s the carefully honed plot and 
palpable family tensions that will resonate with most youngsters.  EB 
lAiDlAw, s. J. An Infidel in Paradise. Tundra, 2013 308p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-77049-304-9 $19.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-77049-305-6 $10.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Emma is used to moving, since her family has lived in many countries during her 
sixteen years as her ambitious, hard-working mother took jobs at various Canadian 
embassies. Now, though, her dad has left the family for the nanny, and her mother 
has moved the rest of them to Islamabad, Pakistan; Emma, who loves her dad and 
had lots of good friends, and malls, and freedom in her mother’s previous posting 
in the Philippines, is not pleased. Now she is living in a hot, dusty city, and she 
can’t leave the compound without covering every part of her body. The chip on 
her shoulder shows a little too clearly when she meets the locals at her new school, 
and she runs afoul of school royalty by insulting the country and attracting the 
amorous eye of the wealthy, beautiful Mustapha who is betrothed to the queen bee. 
A bubbly American does befriend her, but just when Emma lets her guard down 
to warm to the friendship, embassy bombings around the world whisk her friend 
away. Though Emma is involved in typical teenage problems—parental divorce, 
a difficult relationship with her workaholic mother, finding herself on the wrong 
side of high school politics, and a confusing romantic situation—they play out in 
a most atypical setting, one that both exacerbates her difficulties and impels her 
to grow in unexpected ways. Readers who are at all interested in world affairs and 
what it would be like to try to live a normal teenage life in a political hot spot and/
or as a cultural minority will find this utterly engrossing.  KC 
426 • The BulleTin
lAroChelle, DAviD How Martha Saved Her Parents from Green Beans; illus. by 
Mark Fearing. Dial, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3766-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
Martha’s parents may love green beans, but Martha does not: “Green beans are bad. 
Very bad.” No one realizes just how bad those beans can be, though, until the day 
a green bean gang saunters into town: they terrorize old ladies and teachers and 
kidnap Martha’s parents, holding them hostage. When Martha threatens to eat the 
wrongdoers, the head bean calls her bluff: “‘You will not eat us,’ he said with an 
evil sneer. ‘You have never eaten a green bean in your life.’” Martha makes good 
on her threat, however, and soon puts the beans in their place—in her stomach. 
Her grateful parents never again serve green beans at meals, preferring to stick 
to “broccoli or corn on the cob or a nice leafy salad. Everyone knows that there 
is nothing bad about a nice leafy salad.” The melodramatic humor of this silly 
story will tickle kids’ funny bones, and youngsters who side with Martha’s views 
on green beans (or other vegetables) will be particularly satisfied to see their anti-
veggie stance justified here. LaRochelle’s text is both picturesque and succinct, a 
tasty treat to read aloud. Fearing’s digitally rendered art is drolly comic; his figures’ 
dynamic facial expressions and body positions reflect the story’s goofy, exaggerated 
tone. Diminutive, ginger-haired Martha stands out among the more muted tones 
of the background; the stubble-faced, mustachioed, villainous beans are worthy, 
if lanky, adversaries, and viewers will certainly giggle at the couple of leafy greens 
peering menacingly from the salad bowl in book’s closing spread. Pair this with 
Speed’s Brave Potatoes (BCCB 6/00) for a contrasting view of veggies, one terrible, 
the other triumphant.  JH 
leveen, toM Manicpixiedreamgirl. Random House, 2013 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87060-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87005-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97576-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Ty fell in love with Becca the minute he saw her in ninth grade, sitting alone in 
the cafeteria separating the broken animal crackers from the whole ones, and only 
eating the broken ones. He can’t bring himself to approach her, however, so he 
tries to get information on her from Sydney, a girl he can talk to, and he eventu-
ally finds himself dating Sydney instead of Becca. Two years later, he’s still dating 
Sydney, and still hopelessly in love with Becca. Syd is nothing if not pragmatic: 
she knows who holds Ty’s heart, but she also knows that she has the rest of him, 
and that Becca is not the girl Ty idealizes her to be. In fact, Becca’s so broken that 
even Ty’s love isn’t likely to fix her, a fact that Ty comes to face only gradually, as 
he befriends Becca while continuing, guiltily, to date Syd. Narration alternates 
between the present, where Ty is drinking in the park with his best friends while 
Syd finally breaks up with him, and Ty’s recollections of the previous two years, 
which have been defined by his crush on Becca. He has written endless stories to 
exorcise his romantic demons and further idealize his dream girl, and even though 
he knows that his fantasized Becca is very different from the Becca who smokes 
pot and is always “open for business,” he can’t give up his hopes. This is therefore 
an examination of the Manic Pixie Dream Girl trope rather than reiteration of 
May 2013 • 427
it, but any readers who have lost their hearts to a troubled waif or watched while 
someone else did will relate to Ty’s obsession. In fact, it is the watchers in this tale 
that carry a lot of the interest; Syd, Ty’s sister, and his zany best buds all provide 
admirable support in different ways for their lovelorn pal as he works very hard to 
break his own heart.  KC 
MADDison, KAte The Incredible Charlotte Sycamore. Holiday House, 
2013 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2737-6 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10
Sixteen-year-old Charlotte Sycamore enjoys a privileged upbringing, living in 
Buckingham Palace with her father, the personal surgeon to Queen Victoria. What 
Charlotte really wants, though, is adventure, so she sneaks out at night to practice 
sword-fighting with her servant-class friends, including a handsome young man just 
returned from sea. When Charlotte and her friends are attacked by seemingly rabid 
dogs, one friend is severely injured and she herself is bitten, and Charlotte discovers 
that the dogs are in fact poison-delivering mechanical creatures. Desperate to save 
her friends and herself, Charlotte works to uncover the mystery behind the dogs 
and their poison and discovers a threat to her queen and country. A thoroughly 
engrossing read, this alternative history adventure is an enjoyable mixture of scari-
ness and sweetness. The underlying mystery and Charlotte’s rebellious antics will 
have readers swiftly turning pages to see what happens next, while the plentiful 
period detail and light-touch romance give them a reason to linger. Despite her girl-
power tendencies, Charlotte retains a sense of historical authenticity as she struggles 
with the limits of gender and class. Steampunk elements are delightfully realized, 
intriguing but not overwhelming, making the novel an excellent entry point for 
those who are new to the genre. Likewise fans of Reeve’s Larklight series (Larklight, 
BCCB 2/07) or Carriger’s recent Etiquette and Espionage (BCCB 2/13) will find 
another worthy heroine to root for and—hopefully—more sequels to enjoy.  AM
MAtti, truus Mister Orange; tr. from the Dutch by Laura Watkinson; illus. by 
Jenni Desmond. Enchanted Lion, 2013 159p
ISBN 978-1-59270-123-0 $16.95   
R Gr. 6-10
This Dutch import is set in New York City in 1943, where a young boy named 
Linus finds his life changing when his older brother, Albie, goes to war. In their 
family, responsibilities move up the line while shoes and clothes move down, so 
Linus goes from babysitting the little ones to taking over his other brother Simon’s 
shoes and delivery route for the family grocery store. Simon is sullen and grumpy, 
however, so Albie skips a brother and entrusts his comic-book collection and his 
sketchbook for Linus to look after while he’s gone. Linus finds a superhero that Albie 
has created and begins an ongoing conversation with the character as his anxieties 
grow about the war. He also meets an eccentric artist who orders oranges by the 
crate and shares his vision of the future with Linus when he delivers them. This 
gently paced coming-of-age story effectively captures the period details of Linus’ 
neighborhood during the war, especially the strong pull of a close, hard-working 
family and the fear they share for Albie’s safety mingled with pride over his service. 
Linus’ artist friend, who turns out to be Piet Mondrian, rounds out the emotional 
landscape with his unbridled optimism about a glorious future after the war, a future 
428 • The BulleTin
of light and color and progress that he knows he will never see, but that he hopes his 
work will help bring about. His talks with Linus elicit the pull of hope that Linus 
needs to help him sort through his feelings about the war and growing up; both 
the vagueness and the tenor of his emotions are spot on for Linus’s age and situa-
tion. While this isn’t action-packed, it will appeal to artistic, imaginative souls who 
nurture their own superhero fantasies and believe in the power of art to see them 
through uncertain times. Each section opens with a loose-limbed monochromatic 
charcoal and watercolor illustration; end matter includes more information about 
Mondrian and a bibliography of Mondrian-related resources.  KC 
MCCully, eMily ArnolD Sam and the Big Kids; written and illus. by Emily Arnold 
McCully. Holiday House, 2013 [32p] (I Like to Read)
ISBN 978-0-8234-2427-6 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. K-1
Sam, a little brown bear cub in a blue ball cap, wants to play with the “big kids” (his 
older sister and her friend), but they continually tell him he’s too small. When Sam’s 
sister and her friend row a boat to a little island to get away and the boat drifts off, 
they end up being quite happy that Sam tagged along behind them, as he gallantly 
saves the day by bringing Mom to the rescue. In this short and sweet beginning 
reader, the simple, controlled vocabulary and word repetition assists young readers 
without slowing the plot. The engaging story follows a clear narrative arc, making 
it not only a good choice for beginning readers but also perhaps a decent example 
for beginning story writers as well. The short, crisp sentences are printed in a large, 
clear sans serif font, and the line and watercolor illustrations are attractively simple 
as well as helpful in fleshing out the minimal text. McCully’s brown bear characters 
are comely little critters, and Sam’s sister is particularly winning in her jaunty blue 
head bow. Young kids who know what it’s like to be told “you’re too little” will 
relate to Sam’s story, cheer Sam’s heroism, and delight in their own achievement of 
reading this title all by themselves.  JH
MCKAy, hilAry Lulu and the Dog from the Sea; illus. by Priscilla Lamont. Whit-
man, 2013 [112p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-4820-2 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-3
Animal-loving Lulu met readers first when she fostered a duck egg (in Lulu and 
the Duck in the Park, BCCB 10/12). Now she, her parents, and her cousin/best 
friend Mellie are going on a seaside holiday, and Lulu is intrigued to find that the 
neighborhood boasts a skittish abandoned dog, who cunningly scavenges food 
from garbage cans (and sometimes tables). Despite her parents’ skepticism, Lulu, 
aided by the ever-loyal Mellie, begins to win the trust and affection of the lonely 
pooch, and when the girls find themselves lost in an early morning expedition, it’s 
the dog from the sea who comes to the rescue. Like Lulu’s first outing, this is rich 
in the guileless and eccentric charm that is McKay’s hallmark, and the details of a 
family sorting out the difference between a dream vacation and a real one (Mellie’s 
determination to build and fly a kite is a significant subplot) will ring true to many 
readers. The story is deepened by the tale of the dog himself, a third-person view 
that gives him his own personality and life story (“The dog from the sea liked the 
cottage. Roasted chickens lived in the kitchen there”). As a result, this will appeal 
May 2013 • 429
strongly to young canine fans, who are generally short of solid easy readers to chew 
on, as well as those already won over by high-spirited Lulu. Personable and copious 
spot art conveys the friendly, informal tone of the story.  DS
MCKinlAy, Meg Below. Candlewick, 2013 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6126-7 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6380-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
The small Australian town of Old Lower Grange drowned the day Cassie was 
born, buried underneath a newly developed reservoir as the town recreated itself 
nearby as New Lower Grange. Cassie has always been obsessed with the old town, 
site of so much of her family’s history, and when she’s had enough of swimming in 
the town pool (“It was the seven Band-Aid swim that finally sank me”) she starts 
sneaking into the reservoir over Old Lower Grange to swim there. The receding 
water levels allow her and her classmate Liam to dive down and reach bits of the 
old town, but what they find is strange—an expensive car that would have been 
brand new at the time secreted in an outlying shed. The mayor’s new determina-
tion to keep people out of that side of the reservoir, however, claiming dangers that 
Cassie and Liam know aren’t there, may interfere with their sleuthing. McKinlay 
neatly weaves together an offbeat realistic tale and an accessible mystery, writing 
with calm, easygoing accessibility and a touch of poetry as Cassie and Liam traverse 
the waters to look for a past they never lived. Cassie is credibly haunted by Old 
Lower Grange, and the flooding of the past seems both marvelous and heedless. 
The mystery is within plausible bounds, and it leads to a secret that’s tragic but 
ultimately freeing. This makes the beautifully eerie seem everyday, an impressive 
feat that makes for an easy booktalk and an inviting read.  DS
Messenger, shAnnon Let the Sky Fall. Simon Pulse, 2013 404p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5041-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5043-1 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Seventeen-year-old Vane Weston has little memory of his childhood and no memory 
at all of the tornado that killed his parents ten years ago. He’s always felt different, 
somehow incomplete, and when Audra, a girl who has haunted his dreams since 
the storm, shows up in real life, he finds out why: Audra and Vane are sylphs, wind 
elementals. Vane is a particularly powerful sylph, in fact, and Raiden, the head bad 
guy of the sylphs, is hunting him down to either exploit Vane’s powers or kill him. 
Audra’s got seven days to train Vane to master the four languages of the wind, bal-
ance his powers, and prepare for an all-out wind war that threatens Vane’s town and 
his loved ones. Chapters shift perspective between Vane and Audra, giving readers 
an intimate look at our two heroes and the inevitable romantic relationship that 
develops between them. Unfortunately, this singular focus on the two protagonists 
takes some of the urgency out of Raiden’s threat; secondary characters are rarely 
seen, and if they appear, they’re mostly stock, so the world beyond Audra and Vane 
never comes into focus and the danger to it therefore never seems consequential. 
The pacing also struggles during the earlier portion of the novel, especially during 
Vane’s training sequences. The action picks up when the wind warriors show up for 
battle, though, and the twist ending is a remarkably unpredictable one. This won’t 
necessarily blow readers away, but fans of supernatural romances may appreciate a 
new elemental’s debut.  KQG 
430 • The BulleTin
MorgAn, pAge The Beautiful and the Cursed. Delacorte, 2013 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99095-3 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74311-2 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-98081-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
The drafty halls of L’Abbaye Saint-Dismas are as unwelcoming as the grotesque 
gargoyles that adorn its roof, but Lady Ingrid Waverly and her family, leaving 
behind the scandal that drove them from London society on the eve of the twen-
tieth century, must make the best of their new home. There’s already a problem, 
though: Ingrid’s beloved brother Grayson is missing after having gone ahead of 
the family to secure their new residence. Additionally, the city is uneasy as a string 
of unsolved and increasingly violent murders continues, and Ingrid finds herself 
particularly unnerved by Luc, a handsome abbey servant who seems inexplicably 
angry with her family. Unbeknownst to her, Luc is a gargoyle, a protector of the 
abbey and its occupants, and his fury is derived from the fact that Ingrid’s reckless 
brother has gotten himself captured by demons and placed Ingrid and the abbey 
in danger. This supernatural romance gains an intriguing edge from the shifting 
third-person points of view, which move from Grayson in the Underneath to Luc 
in his gargoyle form to Ingrid and her sister, Gabby, both together as sisters and 
as individuals. Readers therefore become invested in all of the characters, not just 
the two romantic leads, and the various subplots involving secondary characters 
are just as intriguing as the overarching tale. Secrets abound, but they are revealed 
organically and without melodrama, keeping the pace brisk. The romantic entangle-
ments of both Ingrid and Gabby are entirely sigh-worthy, making this a deliciously 
satisfying mix of historical fiction, mystery, and supernatural romance (along with 
a lesson on Parisian architecture) that will have readers hoping for a sequel.  KQG
MoriArty, JAClyn A Corner of White. Levine/Scholastic, 2013 [384p] (The 
Colors of Madeleine)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-39736-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-51021-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
In this genre-blending feat of stylistic energy, Moriarty moves between two palpably 
distinct worlds: the modern day environs of Cambridge, England, and the eccentric 
kingdom of Cello, where the citizens are menaced by colors that attack from the 
sky and cause severe physical and mental injury. Fourteen-year-old Madeleine lives 
in Cambridge, having moved there when she and her mother ran away from their 
obscenely wealthy but unhappy lifestyle to adopt a considerably poorer but not 
all that happier one; now Madeleine has decided it is time to contact her father to 
come rescue them, especially since it seems that her mother may be seriously ill. 
Fifteen-year-old Elliot lives in Cello, and he, too, is in search of his father, who 
may have been carried off by the nasty Purple that killed his uncle, or who may 
have just run off with a schoolteacher. When Madeleine finds a mysterious mes-
sage on a slip of paper tucked in the base of a parking meter, she responds, and she 
and Elliot develop a correspondence across worlds. The large and small pieces of 
their lives intermingle with surprising and beneficial effects, despite the fact that 
Madeleine doesn’t quite believe in Cello, and Elliot could be sentenced to death 
for not reporting the gap between the worlds. The plotting is as innovative and 
May 2013 • 431
riveting as the world-making here, and the characters are drawn with the same rich 
dimensionality you find in Pratchett’s Discworld or one of Diana Wynne Jones’s 
fantasies. Moriarty’s wordsmithery likewise compares favorably with those two 
masters, delighting and surprising readers with quirky turns of phrase, evocative, 
synesthetic metaphors, and swift, effective shifts in register. Give this to readers who, 
like Madeleine, aren’t quite sure of their commitment to secondary worlds but like 
to spice their realities with a little fantasy nonetheless, as well as to those who love 
secondary worlds with a healthy helping of reality on the side.  KC 
northrop, MiChAel Rotten. Scholastic, 2013 246p
ISBN 978-0-545-49587-5 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
When JD returns home after a tough summer to start junior year, he is startled 
to find that his mother has adopted a large and defensive Rottweiler, which was 
rescued from abuse. The nervous dog, who is fearful of men, grows accustomed to 
the boy, and JD gradually warms to the dog, whom he dubs Johnny Rotten (JD 
is a punk fan). As JD picks back up with his friends, they’re keen to meet the new 
member of his household; when JD refuses until Johnny Rotten is a little better 
socialized, JD’s goofy friend Mars pushes the issue and ends up with a bitten hand. 
The bite is minor, but Mars’ low-life family smells money and files a lawsuit—which 
would not only wipe out JD’s family’s finances but result in Johnny Rotten’s being 
put to sleep. While the dog is a big part of the story, it’s even more about young 
guys; Northrop has a keen eye for the way teenaged male relationships can teeter 
uneasily between friendliness and aggression, the dynamics in JD’s group of four 
are sharply observed, and the dialogue has authentic moments of enjoyable wit. 
The book also effectively dangles JD’s known withholding about his summer (he 
actually did a stretch in juvenile detention for, of all things, stealing a bottle of 
perfume) as bait for his suspicious friends as well as for the suspecting reader, and 
it’s credible that that becomes a bone of contention for Mars, who’s aware of JD’s 
condescension. With its guy-centric focus and arresting cover (extreme close-up 
of a damp-muzzled Rottie), this is a testosterone-rich dog story, a book just right 
for animal-loving Chris Lynch fans.  DS 
oh, ellen Prophecy. HarperTeen, 2013 316p
ISBN 978-0-06-209109-3 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Seventeen-year-old Kira guards her young cousin Taejo, the crown prince, secretly 
protecting their small kingdom from demon attacks even as her lone female-warrior 
status, fierce fighting style, and strange yellow eyes have rendered her a virtual out-
cast. When an invading army headed by someone with the power of the Demon 
Lord threatens all Kira has sworn to protect and unexpected traitors appear amongst 
the king’s top advisors, Kira and her cousin must flee; their only chance to save 
themselves and their kingdom is to find the Dragon King’s lost treasure, mystical 
stones that control the elements and release fearsome dragon spirits. The girl-warrior 
story retains its usual ability to entertain, and the pacing is certainly fast enough 
to keep readers from getting bored. Unfortunately, this is a highly derivative title, 
which, aside from its Korean cultural references and occasional vocabulary, offers 
little to differentiate itself from the crowd of similar works. Clunky writing rushes 
readers from one action scene to another without stopping for breath, and there’s 
no underlying motivation or character development. Regardless, readers who enjoy 
432 • The BulleTin
the comfort of familiar tropes and those who like their girl-power adventures with 
an Asian flair in the spirit of Goodman’s Eon (BCCB 2/09) may wish to follow 
Kira as she fights for family and country.  AM 
pAtterson, vAlerie o. Operation Oleander. Clarion, 2013 187p
ISBN 978-0-547-24437-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
It’s difficult to nurture a close relationship with a father who’s off at war, but Jess 
Westmark has found a way to stay connected while her dad is in Afghanistan. Jess 
runs a small grass-roots charity called Operation Oleander, in which she and a 
pair of long-suffering friends collect donated school supplies for a girls’ orphanage 
in Kabul, where Dad and some of his colleagues distribute the supplies and send 
pictures back home of the recipients. It’s a win-win situation, until the orphanage 
is bombed in an attack coordinated with the arrival of the soldiers making the 
delivery. Jess’ father is badly injured and flown quickly to Germany for treatment, 
and her best friend Meriwether’s mother, also on the mission, is killed. Now Meri-
wether, who was never too keen on Operation Oleander to begin with, holds Jess 
responsible for her mother’s death, and the press and military pundits are suggesting 
that military involvement in charitable work actually makes recipients into targets. 
Patterson writes with compassion for both sides of this thorny issue, and her steady 
focus on the emotional trauma of the stateside teens keeps the story from devolv-
ing into a coolly cerebral exercise in anti-terrorism strategy. Moreover, she’s a deft 
hand at pacing, ably conveying the those pivotal moments in which time seems 
to be distorted or suspended—when Jess spots government cars outside her house 
after news breaks of the bombing; when Mom packs to fly off to Germany; when 
Meriwether confides her shame at parting with her mother on bad terms. This slim 
novel casts a long shadow, and readers won’t toss their pocket change in the next 
charity bucket without pausing to consider consequences.  EB
pAyne, Ke Another 365 Days. Soliloquy/Bold Strokes, 2013 [264p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60282-775-2 $11.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
In this sequel to 365 Days, young British teen Clemmie has found true love with 
Hannah, and she is blissed out despite niggling feelings that she really ought to tell 
her parents that she’s gay. When a sexy new art teacher shows up at their school, 
however, Han starts spending more time in the studio and less with Clemmie, 
until finally Han suggests they spend some time apart. Devastated, Clemmie seeks 
comfort with her friend Alice, whom she knows has a major crush on her. Even 
though she doesn’t reciprocate Alice’s feelings, the two start to date, until Han 
decides she wants Clemmie back. To make matters more confusing for Clemmie, 
J, the first girl she ever fell in love with, returns to their school, and starts flirting 
with her. Clemmie is a mess, but through it all, the one thing she knows for sure 
is that she loves Han, and that’s forever, if she can just make it all work. Given the 
diary format, the dense British slang, and the manic focus on relationships, this 
may evoke comparisons with Louise Rennison’s Georgia Nicholson series (Angus, 
Thongs, and Full Frontal Snogging, BCCB 5/00, etc.), but the humor here is milder; 
it’s also, unfortunately, often at Clemmie’s own naïve expense, as she misunderstands 
cultural references and advanced vocabulary, forcing readers to laugh at her, not 
with her, if they get the joke. Mostly, though, this is a straightforward girl-meets-
May 2013 • 433
girl, girl-loses-girl, girl-takes-advantage-of-rebound-girl, girl-gets-played, girl-gets-
true-love-back romance tale, related as it unfolds in real time. The characters aren’t 
deep, but the pleasures of undemanding superficiality aren’t limited to the straight 
world, and readers may enjoy this light-hearted soap opera of various mismatched 
and matched romantic scenarios.  KC
prelutsKy, JACK Stardines: Swim High Across the Sky and Other Poems; illus. by 
Carin Berger. Greenwillow, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-0-06-201464-1 $17.99   
R Gr. 3-7
Prelutsky’s portmanteau poetry (from Scranimals, BCCB 10/02, and Behold the 
Bold Umbrellaphant, BCCB 11/06) returns in sixteen new verses about unexpected 
combinations in the animal world. These mashups are often much more philosophi-
cal than before, as in the jollyfish (who “possess the gift/ of monumental glee”), 
slobsters (“Slobsters are slovenly/ Slobsters are crude”), and swapiti (“No sooner 
have they set up shop/ than swapiti begin to swap”), but more concrete hybrids 
appear as well, such as the fountain lion and the gloose (a blend of glue and goose, 
of course). The poems have the familiar variety of rhyming forms and precision of 
meter that makes them enjoyable to read aloud as well as alone, and the concepts 
continue to be amusing and imaginative. Design pushes toward center stage in this 
volume, with Berger’s elegant arrangements of collaged realia (described as “minia-
ture dioramas”) resembling attractively displayed and sometimes framed museum 
exhibits while the accompanying text appears on yellowing slips of pinned paper. 
The intricate creations are fascinating—the magpipes are a combination of cutout 
old illustrations, including golden horns as the pipe drones, and curling slips of 
musical notation, all on tasteful forest felt. This will inspire artists as much as poets 
and readers (and readers-aloud), so consider allowing kids to respond artistically as 
well as verbally—and keep lots of paper scraps and glue at the ready.  DS
reinhArDt, DAnA Odessa Again; illus. by Susan Reagan. Lamb, 2013 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90793-4 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73956-6 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89788-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
It’s originally just the lure of getting away from her despised younger brother that 
leads fourth-grader Odessa to take the attic as her bedroom in her mom’s new 
post-divorce house. Soon, though, she finds that the attic has a special feature: if 
she stomps right in the middle of the floor, it takes her back in time, twenty-four 
hours the first time, an hour less each succeeding go. Thrilled to have the do-over 
opportunities that any nine-year-old would long for, she rewinds in order to pre-
vent herself from farting in front of the boy she likes, to claim lost money initially 
found by her brother, to take back telling her best friend the time-travel secret. 
Can she find a way to make the magic give her what she really wants—her father’s 
upcoming wedding canceled and her parents back together? Reinhardt takes a 
simple fantastical premise and uses it as the engine for a sharply perceptive and 
sympathetic account of a girl’s struggle through a difficult time. Odessa’s choices are 
absolutely credible and often not very admirable (even when she does finally decide 
to be helpful to her brother, it’s without regard to his wishes), and the economics of 
her magical decision-making are fascinating and authentic (the selection of after-
434 • The BulleTin
dinner dessert is a strong influence). Odessa herself is an interesting character, with 
a tendency toward bullying her brother and impulsively shoving people, but she’s 
also spunky and sympathetic; the book is subtle about her post-divorce distress 
and appropriately gentle with her parental-reconciliation fantasy, which even magic 
can’t grant her. Even readers past Odessa’s age will be intrigued by the possibilities, 
and the book could also absorb listeners as a chapter-by-chapter readaloud. Final 
illustrations not seen.  DS
sAlerni, DiAnne K. The Caged Graves. Clarion, 2013 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-547-86853-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Fifteen years after leaving her home, Verity Boone returns to the small town of Ca-
tawissa, Pennsylvania, recognizing nothing and almost no one. Service in the Civil 
War has left her father cold and distant while Nathaniel McClure, Verity’s betrothed 
and the reason for her return, is shy and unsure, not at all like the witty, charming 
man he has been in his letters. Even more upsetting is what she finds in the local 
cemetery: the graves of her mother and aunt, both of whom died of a mysterious 
illness when Verity was young, are located on unconsecrated ground with huge, 
wrought-iron cages surrounding them. Verity’s questions on the matter only bring 
more silence from her father and vague warnings from her fiancé; undeterred, She 
continues to look for answers but her findings reveal some uncomfortable truths 
about her family and the town. Verity is a true romantic heroine in the vein of Jane 
Eyre, teetering at the edge of social propriety with both her progressive social values 
and her impulsive actions, but remaining authentic and relatable as she struggles 
to balance her desires with what she knows to be right. The hint of supernatural 
activity (noises in the graveyard, strange, prophetic dreams) adds a bit of a chill, 
but since the villains are relatively obvious from the get-go, this is less a gothic 
thriller and more a cozy mystery—a highly successful one at that, with a climactic 
confrontation with the bad guys and an undeniably happy and romantic ending. 
This one’s perfect for a rainy night, a comfy blanket, and a cup of tea.  KQG
shAsKAn, stephen The Three Triceratops Tuff; written and illus. by Stephen Shas-
kan. Beach Lane/Simon, 2013 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4397-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4398-3 $12.99   
R 4-7 yrs
In this amusing retelling of “The Three Billy Goats Gruff,” the goats are replaced 
by a triceratops trio, and the nasty troll here is a Tyrannosaurus rex. Shaskan follows 
the original tale fairly closely: the triceratops are headed for some lovely plants but 
have to cross the T. rex’s valley to get them; the triceratops “clip clomp” through the 
valley, attracting the T. rex’s unwanted attention; the younger two triceratops prom-
ise their bigger and better brothers to the T. rex, who lets them go; and the biggest 
brother smacks the T. rex to kingdom come to get him out of the way. Humorous 
turns of phrase (“Once upon a time, sixty-eight million years ago . . .”) make this 
an entertaining readaloud selection, and teachers and libraries will appreciate the 
usefulness of the folktale connection and dinosaur theme. Shaskan’s digital illustra-
tions suggest block prints; the opaque patches of color are faintly splotchy, and the 
figures are outlined with thick, carved-looking black lines. Sky blues, greens, golds, 
and yellows predominate the palette, while the smallest triceratops provides a pop 
May 2013 • 435
of pale pinkish mauve. The nasty, sharp-toothed T. rex is a clear-cut baddie, and 
viewers will be pleased to see him sailing off towards what appears to be a volcano 
after being swatted by oldest bro. Share this at a dino-themed storytime, pair it with 
Willems’ Goldilocks and the Three Dinosaurs (BCCB 10/12) for a dinosaur/folktale 
duo, or use in a lesson comparing it to “The Three Billy Goats Gruff”; intrepid 
adults could help kids stage a readers’ theater or puppet version afterwards.  JH 
shiMKo, Bonnie You Know What You Have to Do. Amazon Children’s, 
2013[240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-1642-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-6642-9 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Fifteen-year-old Mary-Magdalene Feigenbaum hears a voice in her head command-
ing her to kill people, and she obeys. At first her victims are bullies and abusers, 
but now the voice calls for the blood of those Maggie cares about, including an 
infant she babysits and a childhood friend. Unable to confide in her emotionally 
distant mother or her increasingly self-absorbed best friend, she confronts the voice’s 
demands alone, wondering if she’s inherited evil from the imprisoned father she’s 
never known. As time goes by, though, the murders are declared accidents, no one 
seems to mourn the loss of the dead, and Maggie becomes increasingly convinced 
that she might never be caught. A twisted tale of one girl’s efforts to fight her 
darkest impulses, this intriguing novel unfortunately offers more than it delivers. 
While Maggie seems genuinely appalled by her actions, the vigilante quality of her 
murders and her ability to refuse her voice’s commands when the intended victim is 
innocent undermine the psychological horror of a girl unable to control herself. A 
few close calls ratchet up the suspense, but otherwise the narrative slogs through a 
variety of overplayed teen dramas about overly sexualized boys, callous girlfriends, 
and pregnancy scares. The real draw here is Maggie’s quirky, sometimes humor-
ous narration, as she muses on both typical adolescent troubles and the problems 
associated with being a sociopath, and as she tries to reconcile her innate sense of 
justice with her murderous desires. Readers looking for a genuine scare or an intel-
lectually compelling read might consider looking elsewhere, but those hoping for 
Dexter-lite may wish to have a look.  AM
shurtliff, liesl Rump: The True Story of Rumpelstiltskin. Knopf, 2013 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97794-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97793-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97795-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
A person’s name defines their destiny in the Kingdom, which is unfortunate for 
twelve-year-old Rump, whose name seems only to inspire other people’s potty 
humor. His luck appears to change when he realizes he inherited his late mother’s 
secret ability to spin straw into gold. Magic always comes with a price in the King-
dom, however, and Rump is unable to properly bargain with the gold he creates, 
instead settling for whatever the other person offers—including a firstborn child, 
as offered by the miller’s daughter who, as the original tale goes, gets herself into 
trouble when she claims Rump’s ability as her own. Rump wants nothing to do 
with the bargain and runs away to Yonder, where he hopes to discover his true full 
436 • The BulleTin
name (he believes his mother died before completing its full length) and his real 
destiny. Rump is pretty irresistible as the down-and-out kid who simply refuses to 
give up, and readers who have had their share of bad luck will appreciate his witty 
resourcefulness and his honest frustration. His travels through Yonder yield plenty 
of allusions to classic fairy tales as well as appearances by various mythical creatures, 
most of which turn out to be harmless (and in some cases, adorable), giving the 
whole story a whimsical, playful feel. There’s quite a lot of whimsy, though, since 
the plot meanders, and the convoluted backstory behind Rump’s true name and 
how it is entangled in the spell that weaves gold is more confusing than it is satisfy-
ing. Still, it’s always good to hear the villain’s side of the story, especially when said 
villain turns out to be a rather charming twelve-year-old boy.  KQG 
sMith, Jennifer e. This Is What Happy Looks Like. Poppy/Little, 2013 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-316-21282-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Graham is an internationally recognized movie star. His stardom is accidental, 
though, resulting from his auditioning on a lark for a part in a movie that cata-
pulted him to the A-list; he’s more of an introverted loner than someone who seeks 
the limelight. Ellie lives alone with her mom in small-town Maine and frets about 
money and being found, since she’s the illegitimate daughter of a married politician 
who may be on his way to the White House. After a misspelled email address on 
a new phone brings the two into contact, they develop an online friendship that 
includes sharing the hopes and dreams that don’t necessarily show through in their 
day-to-day lives. When Graham arranges to have his next movie shot on location in 
Maine so that he can meet Ellie, their face-to-face encounter lives up to all of their 
hopes, but Ellie pulls back to avoid media exposure. The problems they face with 
intrusive paparazzi and controlling managers are a bit contrived, especially since 
their real story could have been spun by any half-decent publicist into the stuff 
high school dreams are made of, but readers reared on TMZ will no doubt forgive 
and understand. Graham is fully crush-worthy: loyal, sensitive, and appealingly 
lonely, he’s everything a girl could wish for behind his smoldering good looks and 
hefty bank account. Thus, this frothy romance is unapologetically romantic, shot 
through with wish fulfillment fantasies of all kinds, and it reads with a swiftness 
that belies its page length, making it a perfect summer indulgence; expect it to be 
returned smelling of coconut and with sand between the pages.  KC
stein, DAviD ezrA Ol’ Mama Squirrel; written and illus. by David Ezra 
Stein. Paulsen/Penguin, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-25672-1 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 409, for review.
stellA, leslie Permanent Record. Amazon Children’s, 2013 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-1639-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-6639-9 $7.99   
R Gr. 7-10
A slight build and an Iranian-American heritage make Badi Hessamizadeh the 
target of relentless bullying in his Chicago public school, and he turns his anger 
both outward in vandalism and inward in a suicide attempt before his parents 
decide to enroll him in a small private school. They think a name change to Bud 
May 2013 • 437
Hess will keep him anonymous enough for a new start there, and it works until 
someone starts writing vaguely threatening letters to the school newspaper and 
fingers begin to point to him. His two fellow outcast friends, Nikki and Reggie, 
attempt to help him figure out who the real writer is, but others uncover his past, 
and bullying commences in his new school just as it had in his old one. Badi is 
frustrated; seized by panic attacks and depression, awkwardly crushing on Nikki, 
he decides it’s just easier to become the terrorist they think he is. Although laced 
with ironic asides, laugh-out-loud humor, and wry reflections on high school life, 
Badi’s narration takes us deep inside his anxiety, his hurt, and his rage, exploring the 
inner world of someone whose circumstances have negatively affected his mental 
health and yet have also enabled him to gain insights and perspectives that others 
miss. His path through rage and helplessness is a journey and he knows it, but he 
also knows how easy it is to turn that journey into a dead end. Readers will come 
away from this with a greater understanding of the effects that casual aggression 
and outright bullying can have on a fellow human being, as well as what makes 
for resilience and healing.  KC
sternBerg, Julie Like Bug Juice on a Burger; illus. by Matthew Cordell. Amulet/
Abrams, 2013 [176p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-0190-0 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-3
Having adjusted to her new babysitter (in Like Pickle Juice on a Cookie, BCCB 3/11), 
Eleanor now faces a new obstacle, and this time it’s disguised as a treat: a session 
at the sleepaway camp that her mother adored as a girl. Eleanor is not her mother, 
however, and her early enthusiasm fades quickly at the reality of facing unfamiliar 
food, being stuck in the Guppy group for novice swimmers, and just being so far 
away from home. Eleanor’s tentative yet heartfelt voice comes through as clearly 
as in the first volume, with the short, ragged-right-margin lines as approachable as 
her personality. Sternberg is particularly deft at leaving young-reader-sized room for 
interpretation and extrapolation, especially in Eleanor’s quasi-random friendship 
with her eccentric and unflappable cabinmate Joplin. It’s also a book that wisely 
resists tragedy or triumph; ultimately, Eleanor gets past the worst of her distress, 
and though camp never brings her the joy it did her mother, she finds redemption 
enough in the good things—her friendship with Joplin, her caring for a sweet 
young goat—to end up genuinely and age-appropriately philosophical about the 
experience. That’s a plausible developmental challenge and also a bit of literary one 
as well, but it’s achieved with cozy grace, and readers skeptical of abstract gains 
will be pleased that Eleanor is also rewarded with the dog she’s been yearning for. 
Cordell’s squiggly, energetic line drawings are rich with sympathy as well as humor. 
Many kids will be familiar with the situation where they don’t love something they 
expected to, and they’ll appreciate the guidance on surviving the experience; fans 
of Eleanor from her first outing will definitely want to follow her to camp.  DS
stohl, MArgAret Icons. Little, 2013 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-20518-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-23199-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-12
On a quiet day in 2070, the Icons fell from the sky, silencing major cities around 
the world by stopping the hearts of almost all of the residents with a massive 
438 • The BulleTin
electromagnetic pulse. Though just a baby, Dol survived when her family did 
not. Seventeen years later, she ekes out a living on the outskirts of what used to 
be Los Angeles with the elderly Padre and her friend Ro, who also survived the 
Day as a baby. The Embassy, the human administration in charge of the surviv-
ing population and in cahoots with the invading aliens, kidnaps both Dol and 
Ro and brings them to a training facility where they meet Lucas and Tima, two 
teens who share Dol and Ro’s mysterious tattoos. As the four are interrogated 
and experimented on, they learn two key points: they each have powers related 
to the emotion they were named for (Doloria for sorrow, Furo for rage, Timora 
for fear, and Lucas Amare for love), and their heightened emotions may combat 
the EMPs put out by the Icons. Stohl creates an intricate world that believably 
depicts the way society has adjusted and adapted in the wake of a major invasion. 
Unfortunately, her main characters are little more than stereotypes of the emotions 
they represent, and Dol’s narrative voice is unceasingly dramatic and overreliant 
on flawed, overlong metaphors. The most compelling character is Lucas, who, as 
the son of the Embassy’s Ambassador, is forced to choose between family loyalty 
and the fate of the human race; unfortunately, the story mostly reduces him to 
being merely Dol’s love interest and Ro’s foil. Still, the appeal of a group of teens 
saving the world with their intense emotions may carry readers through to the 
optimistic and series-promising end.  KQG 
sullivAn, MAry Ball; written and illus. by Mary Sullivan. Houghton, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-75936-4 $12.99   
R Gr. K-2
This one-word picture book follows the adventures and dreams of a dog from the 
time his young mistress wakes up to when she returns from school. Our single-
minded canine hero revels in a game of fetch with his beloved red ball until his 
girl has to depart. While she’s gone, he hopefully brings the ball to the little girl’s 
mother, baby sister, and cat, but all in vain; he then dozes off, dreaming ball-themed 
dreams, and not long after he reawakens, the girl returns and they’re back at their 
game again. Though the dream sequence is a needless diversion, the story’s tight 
comic focus and surprisingly eventful narrative make it absorbing and appealing 
for youngsters, and the single word “Ball,” which appears in speech balloons for 
the girl and thought balloons for the dog, is effectively imbued with a range of 
emotion. The illustrations are composed of pencil linework with digital coloring, 
mostly in warm golds and peaches that allow the red ball to stand out; scenes are 
generally bordered in panels that have informal, sketchy borders that could be ei-
ther decorative or amiably moth-eaten. Those words pretty much cover our pooch 
protagonist, too—a squat, well-fed little critter with a pokey snout, he’s endearingly 
real in his eager lack of beauty, and Sullivan deftly captures doggy poses that run 
the spectrum from ecstasy to dejection. While this could also be treated as a picture 
book, this will be a natural decode-alone for kids who are accustomed to parsing 
pictures, and they’ll delight in the ability to read it all themselves.  DS
terry, teri Slated. Paulsen/Penguin, 2013 346p
ISBN 978-0-399-16172-8 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Deemed a threat to humanity for reasons unknown, sixteen-year-old Kyla Davis 
has been given a second chance to be a useful member of society by having her 
memory wiped. At first things seem to go well for newly “slated” Kyla, who’s placed 
May 2013 • 439
with new family and even sees the possibility of a new romance. Then students 
start to disappear: first other slated kids, then a few troublemakers, then those who 
seemed completely innocent. Then Kayla starts to remember things: some small, 
like knowing how to drive, and others much more dangerous. Violent images from 
her past begin to force their way to the surface in nightmares, hinting at a power-
ful secret, and suddenly everything she has is at risk, even her life. Building on 
an intriguing concept, this novel offers readers a chance to consider the power of 
memory and the inescapable influence of one’s past. While Kyla sometimes seems 
almost too insightful, her instincts and innate curiosity make for a refreshing change 
from the often overly naïve heroines of recent YA science fiction, and readers will 
enjoy watching her learn to be crafty in the face of danger and adult deception. 
What truly makes this novel stand out from the dystopian pack, though, is the 
well-crafted suspense. Layers of mystery shroud not only Kyla’s past and the slating 
procedure but also her family, her doctor, her teachers, and a tragic bombing six 
years earlier, and the shifting blend of half-truths, misdirection, and obfuscation 
heightens the suspense. Many of the underlying secrets are left undiscovered, so 
readers will anxiously await sequels to come.  AM
thArp, tiM Mojo. Knopf, 2013 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96445-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86445-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89580-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
High school junior Dylan Jones wants “mojo. Juice. Pull. Clout. Respect,” and he’s 
pretty sure that solving the disappearance of Ashton Browning, daughter of a bank 
CEO and social darling at a private academy across town, is the way to get it. He and 
his best friends, Randy and Audrey, join a search team, and Dylan literally stumbles 
on important evidence, catching the attention of Ashton’s brother, ex-boyfriends, 
and classmates. Suddenly there are more suspects than Dylan can process, and he’s 
drawn into Gangland, a covert fantasy playground for privileged teens with habits 
to satiate and money to burn. Any readers so inclined could engage in a lively argu-
ment over whether Tharp’s rich kids-gone-wild mystery is derivative of, tribute to, 
or weak attempt at the silly but spicy pleasures of Gossip Girl. Nor is it completely 
clear whether lesbian sidekick Audrey and embarrassing goofball sidekick Randy 
are genre send-ups or shopworn stereotypes. Fortunately, there’s enough peril and 
plot twisting to offer mystery fans an engaging read—or, possibly, an invitation to 
investigate the toxic potential of bath salts and diet soda.  EB 
unDerwooD, DeBorAh Part-Time Princess; illus. by Cambria Evans. Disney/
Hyperion, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-1-4231-2485-6 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
A young unnamed girl is, by day, absolutely ordinary, but each night she magically 
becomes a princess and heads off to her other, royal life in which she is clearly the 
star of the kingdom. It’s not all glitter and tea parties (though there is both glitter 
and tea parties), however, as this princess also puts out fires (“A real princess can 
slide down a fire pole in a frilly skirt. No one dreams of telling her it’s too danger-
ous”), wrangles dragons, practices fencing, and plays leapfrog in the “Royal Mud 
Puddle,” frilly skirt or not. After a long night of princess-duty, she returns home 
440 • The BulleTin
and wakes the next morning with glitter in her hair; her mom sports glitter as 
well, and sharp-eyed viewers will have noticed that Mom was the “queen from a 
faraway land” that the girl/princess entertained earlier. Underwood’s text is clear 
and straightforward, and there is both humor and appeal in the details she provides: 
“I dive into a giant tub with hot and cold running bubbles. And a dolphin.” The 
less stereotypical attributes of this princess/girl will give her broader appeal than 
other picture-book princesses, while the kind of girls who love sequins and dress-
up will still get their fashion fill here as well. Evans’ digitally colored mixed-media 
art utilizes a palette heavy on pinks, but pops of aquas and greens provide a bit of 
respite from the roses and fuschias; the full spreads centering on the girl’s various 
adventures are particularly inviting and make for easy sharing. Although this is 
still, at heart, a girly princess story, it’s nice to see a princess who’s more than just 
a fancy tiara and title.  JH
vAnDe velDe, viviAn Frogged. Harcourt, 2013 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-547-94215-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Princess Imogene doesn’t want to be the perfect princess her mother wishes her to 
be, but she also didn’t want to become a frog. Nonetheless, frog she now is, after 
being tricked into a spell-conveying kiss, and the only way to rid herself of the 
spell is the same way she got it—by transferring it to another person, something 
her moral sense will not allow. Her attempts to seek help returning home meet 
with one disaster after another, until she finds herself with a traveling acting troupe 
whose leader is determined to make money off Imogene. Fortunately, Luella, a 
village girl, agrees to take Imogene back home, where Imogene finds a solution to 
her problems as well as a welcome surprise. Vande Velde writes with the crisp dic-
tion of a practiced storyteller who knows her text will likely be read aloud; while 
writing in third person, she nevertheless manages to capture the mannered, wide-
eyed style so appealing to preteens as it comes close to their own storytelling voice. 
Imogene’s distress is therefore rendered with a measure of humor, determination, 
and bravado even as her predicaments move from bad to worse. Equally appealing 
to readers is the fact that the situations she finds herself in are not a result of any 
bad acts on her part; that is, she always tries to do the right, sensible thing, and 
it turns out wrong through no fault of her own, leaving her feeling righteously 
affronted but never defeated. Imogene’s pragmatic feistiness thus makes her an 
admirable heroine, who falls upon hard times but ultimately gets her just reward, 
and who doesn’t like that?  KC 
vAughn, M. M.  The Ability; illus. by Iacopo Bruno. Simon, 2013 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5200-8 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5202-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old Christopher Lane is having a truly terrible time. His soldier father 
has been killed, his grieving mother has become incapable of caring for anyone, 
including herself, and Christopher is tormented daily at school by fellow students, 
teachers, and even the principal. He therefore eagerly accepts an invitation to a 
special new boarding school, and he’s thrilled when he discovers that the school 
intends to teach its students to use special psychic gifts, like telekinesis and telepa-
thy. Not everything about the school is as it seems, though, and Christopher soon 
May 2013 • 441
learns that there is a reason the school has been reopened after a tragic event forced 
it to close decades before. Now everyone associated with the school’s past is having 
their minds destroyed by a mysterious boy, and it’s up to Christopher and his new 
friends to use their skills to uncover who the boy is, who is training him, and why 
they are out to destroy the school’s former students and teachers. Reminiscent of 
early Harry Potter novels with its neglected hero, oddball teachers, eccentric assort-
ment of classmates, and secret school where students learn to harness their pow-
ers, the novel still manages ultimately to feel fresh and original, and the narrative 
strikes a delicate and effective balance between light-hearted wish-fulfillment fun, 
dark moments of heartbreak, and genuine suspense. Occasional chapters from the 
point of view of the Genever brothers, the boys carrying out the evil plot, provide 
readers with a chance to learn more about the secret behind the attacks and create 
a second level of intrigue and suspense. Those looking for a read-alike to Stewart’s 
The Mysterious Benedict Society (BCCB 5/07) will be delighted with Christopher’s 
adventure. Final illustrations not seen.  AM
weulersse, oDile, ad. Nasreddine; tr. from the French by Kathleen Merz; illus. 
by Rébecca Dautremer. Eerdmans, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-0-8028-5416-2 $17.00   
R 6-9 yrs
On his way to the local market with his father, young Nasreddine follows behind 
as his father, Mustafa, rides their old donkey, prompting a rich vizier near the mar-
ket to call Mustafa lazy for riding while his son walks. Mustafa takes the insult in 
stride, but Nasreddine is so ashamed he goes home. Despite Nasreddine’s attempts 
to avoid embarrassment on subsequent market trips (he alone rides the donkey, 
then he and his father ride the donkey together, then he and his father walk while 
the donkey carries only its cargo), each time some group finds fault with their 
transportation, sending Nasreddine home in shame. His father eventually gently 
explains that “people can always find a reason to criticize you if they want to,” lead-
ing Nasreddine to realize that “you can’t be afraid that other people will judge you 
or make fun of you.” Older primary graders and middle graders will appreciate the 
story’s consistent structure, and the lessons that Nasreddine, a traditional figure in 
Middle Eastern folktales, learns will easily translate to young audiences who have 
undoubtedly experienced unjust criticism firsthand. Weulersse’s storytelling is clear 
and measured, and the loving relationship between father and son is warm and reas-
suring. In Dautremer’s elegant and compelling art, rich earth tones capably evoke the 
Middle East setting, and the slightly elongated figures of the adults emphasize the 
impact they have on the diminutive Nasreddine, eye-catching in his scarlet tunic. 
Some scenes utilize an unusual perspective, such as looking down from above or 
up from below at the action, to strong effect as well. Whether partnered with other 
folktales in a classroom or library unit or shared on its own, Nasreddine’s adventures 
are likely to spark some thoughtful discussion among kids.  JH
whitMAn, sylviA The Milk of Birds. Atheneum, 2013 [384p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-4682-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
For Sudanese refugee Nawra, committing to a year of correspondence with an 
American girl means small monetary gifts and a broader view of the world. For K. 
C. Cannelli, writing to an international pen pal will get her mother off her back. 
Neither girl, however, is able to write entirely on her own. Illiterate Nawra relies 
442 • The BulleTin
on her dear friend Adeeba to serve as amanuensis, and K. C. uses voice recognition 
software to compensate for her learning disability. Despite the distance in geography 
and experience, the girls slowly bond through their letters, each finding a sympa-
thetic listener to whom she can confide her fears and offer her support. K. C. is 
dealing with some serious issues—her struggles in school, her parents’ divorce and 
father’s remarriage—and if she were the leading heroine in an all-American problem 
novel, she’d earn her share of sympathy. Her trials, however, pale in comparison 
to those of Nawra, who has been displaced from her home, raped multiple times, 
made witness to the slaughter of many family members, and become the physical 
and emotional support of her traumatized mother. Nawra’s gentle dignity and steely 
resilience in the face of such horror is so delicately portrayed, so much so that K. 
C. and her overbearing mother seem overwrought and overdrawn in comparison. 
Although background on the Darfur civil war is often clumsily integrated (via the 
pedantic Mrs. Cannelli), the plight of the refugees will be eye-opening for many 
readers. A note on Darfur and its Internally Displaced Persons is included.  EB 
wiggins, BethAny Stung. Walker, 2013 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-3418-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Fiona wakes up to discover her house rotting and abandoned—well, not entirely 
abandoned, as a beastly creature that looks an awful lot like her twin brother at-
tacks her. A narrow escape takes her through the sewers, into an abandoned town, 
and eventually to a camp of soldiers where she is immediately imprisoned and put 
into shackles for bearing the Mark. Her captor is also strangely familiar and turns 
out to be her neighbor from before—before a plague wiped out much of the US 
population, before a vaccination turned most of the survivors into mindless, violent 
beasts marked by the vaccine’s tattoo, before her mother decided to put Fiona in 
a medically induced coma for three years and Fiona lost all her memories. There 
is nothing soporific about this dystopian twist on “Sleeping Beauty,” as it places 
readers right in the middle of the action from that first chase scene and doesn’t let 
up: the more Fiona runs, the more enemies she encounters and the more intensely 
palpable her fear and tension become. The backstory of the world comes in bits 
and pieces, through hushed conversations in sewer pipes or overheard military 
plans, a strategy that works (at least until the final chapters, where the information 
is overobvious) to disorient and titillate the reader. The romance between Fiona 
and her captor-turned-savior is as fast as the action and about as logical as the 
pseudo-science that drives the plot, but that’s true to a story that’s a fairy tale at 
heart. Those who enjoy their damsels in distress and their knights in shining armor 
will see this story for the imaginative but still traditional tale that it is beneath all 
the sewer grime.  KQG 
wissinger, tAMerA will Gone Fishing: A Novel in Verse; illus. by Matthew 
Cordell. Houghton, 2013 120p
ISBN 978-0-547-82011-8 $15.99   
R Gr. 2-5
Narrator Sam is looking forward to a day out on the lake, just himself, his dad, 
and lots of hungry, gullible fish. No such luck: his younger sister, Lucy, talks Dad 
into taking her along and packs up enough inappropriate gear for an extended 
vacation. Any kid who’s read a lighthearted family novel will see what’s coming: 
it’s noisy Lucy who gets the first bite and who scores the biggest haul, with Sam 
May 2013 • 443
coming second with one good sized catfish (Dad leaves empty-handed). Sam pulls 
through his jealous funk, though, when Lucy takes her own accomplishment with 
admirable nonchalance, saving her excitement for describing to the family back 
home how hard Sam fought to land his catfish. The trajectory may be predictable, 
but the format is less conventional: all of Sam’s episodes take the form of poems, each 
discreetly labeled by its poetic form, which is then defined at the end of the book. 
The poems are accessible by title (in a table of contents that suggests encouragingly 
tiny chapters), and they are cross referenced with other similarly constructed pieces 
in the separately alphabetized lists of poetry techniques and forms: “HYPERBOLE 
. . . In ‘Can’t Go Fishing Yet Blues,’ ‘Lucy is the slowpoke of the year’ is hyperbole. 
It also occurs in ‘Fish Tales’ when Sam says his fish ‘must’ve weighed a ton.’” An 
occasional conundrum in the back matter may send classroom readers scurrying for 
explanation (why is the limerick also a cinquain, and why isn’t it labeled as such?), 
but most will just enjoy the notion that there are as many ways to tell a tale as to 
catch a fish. Plenty of cartoony graytone line and watercolor artwork embellishes 
the text, and a bibliography of poetry books and websites (with one stray fishing 
book) is appended.  EB
yAMAsAKi, KAtie Fish for Jimmy. Holiday House, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2375-0 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Young Japanese-American brothers Taro and Jimmy can’t really understand what 
all the fuss is about when Pearl Harbor is bombed. Hawaii is awfully far away from 
their parents’ California vegetable market, and Japan is even farther. It quickly 
becomes personal, though, when their father is taken away by two FBI agents, and 
the remaining family is transferred to an internment camp. There Jimmy refuses to 
eat, and his mother and brother grow increasingly anxious that the boy will become 
ill. Taro sneaks his mother’s shears out of the barracks, creeps past the guards, cuts 
his way through the fence, and runs to a mountain pond where he catches fish in 
his hands. Weekly nocturnal fishing trips to the pond revive Jimmy in body and 
spirit, and help Taro fulfill his father’s parting charge to “help your mother and 
take care of Jimmy until I return.” This slim plot, based on a pair of episodes from 
the author’s family, is accessible to a young audience, but the conclusion’s quick 
leap from night fishing to happy family reunion may spark a host of unanswerable 
questions, from how exactly Taro evaded trained guards week after week to how 
his hole in the fence went unnoticed for so long. While the story may be somewhat 
puzzling, the stylized acrylic paintings are evocative and involving, with literal 
renderings of the remote camp interwoven with images from Taro and Jimmy’s 
happy imaginings and nightmarish dreams. A closing note comments briefly on 
the experiences of Yamasaki’s relatives and offers photographs of the internees.  EB
yolen, JAne Grumbles from the Forest: Fairy-Tale Voices with a Twist; written 
by Jane Yolen and Rebecca Kai Dotlich; illus. by Matt Mahurin. WordSong/
Highlights, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-59078-867-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-6
Thirty poems, two for each of fifteen well-known folktales, treat the perennially 
popular topic of the events of the fairy-tale world. Most of the poems are from the 
viewpoint of participants in the stories, and the best are vividly immediate: the sad 
444 • The BulleTin
parents of the runaway gingerbread boy in “From the Kitchen,” the giant’s wife in 
“The Giant Confides in Jack” (“Husband’s pockets are always full/ of freckles and 
toes”). Folktale poetry is a pretty crowded field these days, though, and many of the 
entries are merely recapitulations in verse, lacking the twist promised in the title. 
The art has some lively moments—the human-sized frog frantically bolting from 
the princess, the gingerbread boy being lowered toward a humongous and hungry 
mouth—but too often the thickly painted scenes bury their interesting details in 
dark backgrounds and compositions that are murky and indistinct, lacking sufficient 
contrast to draw focus to the best parts. Singer’s Mirror, Mirror (BCCB 4/10) is a 
fresher folktale poetry outing, but there are still curricular opportunities here, and 
readers (and readers aloud) can home in on the most rewarding entries. A table of 
contents lists the poems by tale and title; an appended spread gives a précis of the 
source stories.  DS
yolen, JAne Wee Rhymes: Baby’s First Poetry Book: illus. by Jane Dyer. Wiseman/
Simon, 2013 112p
ISBN 978-1-4169-4898-8 $19.99   
R 6-24 mos.
Veteran author Yolen offers a combination of her own verses and traditional nursery 
rhymes in this collection of seventy-five poems for the youngest poetry audiences. 
Topics are familiar tot favorites such as food and eating (“Munch, Munch”), beloved 
toys and comfort objects (“Everybody Needs a Teddy Sometimes”), and bedtime 
(“Night Worries”), as well as some acknowledgement of setbacks and obstacles 
(“Oops, Whoops”). The verses don’t always scan well and they’re on the blandly 
adorable side, but they’re sweet and chantable; engrossed youngsters will appreci-
ate the opportunities for playful laptime reads. Dyer’s pencil and watercolor art 
is delicate and personable, with a pretty multiracial cast of babies and caretakers 
(preponderantly female); warm, pale gold predominates as a background color and 
tasteful borders frame the pages, emphasizing the “treasury” flavor of the volume. 
This is rich with adult gift appeal, but there’s genuine appeal in many of the nursery-
rhyme-esque verses, so youngsters—and baby-shower honorees—will warm to this 
collection. Indexes of titles and first lines are appended.  DS
May 2013 • 445
silvey, AnitA Children’s Book-a-Day Almanac. Roaring Brook, 2012 388p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-708-1 $19.99
Based on Silvey’s website of the same name, this light-hearted but informative guide 
lays out the year for literary-minded folk with a focus on books for children and 
young adults. For each of the 365 days, Silvey selects a book to discuss (the selec-
tion is often based on the anniversary of a publication date, the author’s birthday, 
etc.) and gives a brief overview of the book’s significance in a cultural context as 
well as its potential appeal to contemporary readers. Stories and anecdotes of the 
creative publishing process, critical reception, and the like are also included: April 
16, for example, celebrates Gertrude Chandler Warner and discussed how the small 
town of Putnam, Connecticut inspired the author of the Boxcar Children series. 
Sidebars include other significant events in the timeline of children’s literature; three 
indices (title and author, type, and age) make the wealth of information here easily 
accessible. This has solid possibilities as a springboard for daily reading and writing 
activities in the classroom or as simply a book-focused way to start the day.  KQG 
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
446  •  The BulleTin
Acrobats–fiction: Jones
Actors and acting–fiction: Smith
Adventure: Bowman; Clement-
Moore; emerson; Jones; Mad-
dison; Messenger; Oh; Stohl; 
vaughn; Wiggins
Afghan War–fiction: Patterson
African Americans: doeden
African Americans–fiction: Allen; 
draper
Aliens–fiction: emerson
Animals–stories: Stein
Arab-Americans–fiction: Stella
Art: Prelutsky
Art and artists–fiction: Matti
Babies–stories: Katz
Bears–fiction: McCully
BIOGrAPHIeS: doeden; Krull
Birds–stories: Horáček
Birthdays–fiction: French
Blogs–fiction: dahl
Brothers–fiction: Matti
Brothers and sisters–poetry: Wiss-
inger
Bullying–fiction: Stella
Camps and camping–fiction: Balog; 
Sternberg
Cars–fiction: Garland
Chickens–stories: Harrington
China–fiction: La valley
Circuses–fiction: Howard
COnCePt BOOKS: Katz
Crime and criminals: doeden
Crime and criminals–fiction: Clem-
ent-Moore; draper; Gewirtz; 
Maddison; Shimko; tharp; 
vaughn
Current events: La valley; Whitman
dancers and dance–fiction: draper
dinosaurs–stories: Shaskan
divorce–fiction: reinhardt
dogs–fiction: McKay; northrop; 
Sullivan
drug abuse–fiction: Banash
dystopias–fiction: Bowman; Stohl; 
terry; Wiggins
eSP–fiction: vaughn
Ethics and values: Allen; Bowman; 
Harrington; Henkes; Higgins; 
Patterson; Shimko; Stohl; Weul-
ersse
FABLeS: Harrington
Families–fiction: Allen; Banash; 
Hughes; La valley; Laidlaw; 
McKay; McKinlay
FAntASy: Gerstein; Messenger; 
Moriarty; Oh; Shurtliff; vande 
velde
Fate–fiction: Fitzmaurice
Fathers–fiction: Gewirtz; La valley; 
Moriarty
Fathers–stories: Cummings; Ger-
mein; Weulersse
Fishing–poetry: Wissinger
FOLKtALeS And FAIry tALeS: 
Harrington; Shaskan; Shur-
tliff; Weulersse; Wiggins; yolen 
Grumbles
Food and eating–stories: Larochelle
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
May 2013  •  447
Friends–fiction: Auch; Banash; dahl; 
French; Haas; Kimmelman; 
Leveen; northrop; Patterson; 
Sternberg
Friends–stories: Higgins; Horáček
Frogs–fiction: vande velde
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Payne
Gender roles–stories: underwood
Giants–stories: Higgins
GrAPHIC nOveLS: French
Grief–fiction: Howard
HIStOrICAL FICtIOn: Banash; 
Gewirtz; Hughes; Jones; Maddi-
son; Matti; Salerni; yamasaki
History, U.S.: doeden
History, world: Krull
Holidays–fiction: Kimmelman
Horses–fiction: Haas
HuMOr: Allen; Cummings; 
French; Gall; Germein; Laro-
chelle; McKay; Prelutsky; Stein; 
Sullivan; underwood
Identity–fiction: Shurtliff
Imagination–stories: Cummings; 
Gall
Immigrants–fiction: Joseph
Internment camps–stories: yamasaki
Inventors–stories: Gall
Italy–fiction: Hughes 
Jews–fiction: Kimmelman
Jokes–stories: Germein
Language arts: Wissinger; yolen 
Grumbles
Latinos–fiction: Joseph
Letters–fiction: Moriarty
Magic–fiction: reinhardt; Shurtliff; 
vande velde
Memory–fiction: terry
Mice–fiction: Henkes
Missing persons–fiction: tharp
Mothers–fiction: Auch; Fitzmaurice
Mothers–stories: Stein
Music and musicians: Krull
MySterIeS: Clement-Moore; 
Maddison; McKinlay; Salerni; 
tharp
Nature study: Horáček
neighbors–fiction: Kimmelman
nurSery rHyMeS: yolen Wee
Pakistan–fiction: Laidlaw
Parents–fiction: Patterson
Performers–fiction: Jones
Play–fiction: Sullivan
POetry: Prelutsky; Wissinger; 
yolen Grumbles; yolen Wee
Prejudice–fiction: Stella
Princesses–stories: underwood
Quests–fiction: Oh
Readers theater: Shaskan
Reading aloud: Prelutsky; re-
inhardt; vande velde; yolen 
Grumbles
Reading, beginning: Garland; 
Henkes; McCully; Sullivan 
Reading, easy: French; Haas; Kim-
melman; McKay
refugees–fiction: Whitman
relationships–fiction: Howard; 
Leveen; Payne; Salerni; Smith
romance–fiction: Bowman; Joseph; 
Messenger; Morgan; Payne; Smith
royalty–fiction: vande velde
royalty–stories: underwood
runaways–fiction: Auch
School–fiction: dahl; Laidlaw; 
Payne; vaughn
SCIenCe FICtIOn: emerson; 
Fitzmaurice
Secrets–fiction: Gewirtz; McKinlay; 
northrop; Salerni; terry
Sisters–fiction: Morgan
Size–fiction: McCully
Space travel–fiction: Gerstein
SteAMPunK: Maddison
Storytime: Harrington; Katz; 
Shaskan
Sudan–fiction: Whitman
Summer–fiction: Sternberg
Superheroes–fiction: Matti
SuPernAturAL StOrIeS: 
Balog; Clement-Moore; Morgan; 
Stohl
SuSPenSe: Balog; Shimko; terry
Synesthesia–fiction: Auch
time travel–fiction: reinhardt
tOddLer BOOKS: Katz; yolen Wee
towns–fiction: Garland
Transportation: Garland
448  •  The BulleTin
vacations–fiction: McKay
vegetables–stories: Larochelle
verSe nOveLS: Wissinger
voyages and travel–fiction: Gerstein; 
Shurtliff
World cultures: Laidlaw; Weulersse 
World War II–fiction: Hughes ;Matti
World War II–stories: yamasaki
Writers and writing–fiction: Leveen
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Published by  
Th e Johns hopkins University press
exploring literature 
for children.
David L. russell, Ferris sTaTe UniversiTy; karin e. 
Westman and naomi J. Wood, Kansas sTaTe UniversiTy, 
Editors 
The Lion and the Unicorn, an international theme- and 
genre-centered journal, is committed to a serious, 
ongoing discussion of literature for children. The 
journal’s coverage includes the state of the publishing 
industry, regional authors, comparative studies of 
significant books and genres, new developments 
in theory, the art of illustration, the mass media, 
and popular culture. It is especially noted for its 
interviews with authors, editors, and other important 
contributors to the field, as well as its outstanding 
book review section. 
Published three times a year in January, April, and September. 
Volume 37 (2013). ISSN 0147-2593; E-ISSN 1080-6563.
the lion and the unicorn
a criTical joUrnal oF children’s liTeraTUre
annUal individUal sUbscripTions
$40.00 (print); $45.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbscripTions
$125.00 (print); $135.00 (online); 
$175.00 (print & online)
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, 
E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
