ILL 
INOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
7.
5·* -
ki i 
/- 
¾
-ryof Ilnois F
I
vrý
-i
-- 
·
, 
.
*
. "'^
* "Captures a child's sense of wonder
with keen insieht and humor."*
By Elizabeth Fitzgerald Howard
Illustrated in full color by Gail Gordon Carter
joyful ode to a childhood memory. Waiting by the train tracks
I the Big House in Maryland, Mac and Marie are filled with
ment and anticipation as they try to guess what surprise young
e Clem will toss off the Seaboard Florida Limited for
.Howard's evocative writing makes the ordinary act of catch-
eflies imaginatively fresh and turns a conch shell into an exotic
se." -*Boxed review, Booklist
rations are exquisite...A loving tribute to a particular fami-
k is also a genuine piece of social history."
-The 
Horn Book
$14.95 RSBE/0-02-74464-9/Ages 4-7
RSB indicates a side-sewn reinforced 
arcover edition.
F TOUR WINDS PRESS
An imprint of the Macmillan Children's Book Group
866 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022
__
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
July/August 1993
Vol. 46 No. 11
A LOOK INSIDE
339 THE BIG PICTURE
Monster Mama written by Liz Rosenberg; illustrated by
Stephen Gammell
340 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
341 * Punch with Judy written by Avi; illus. by Emily Lisker
343 * The Chicken Gave It to Me written by Anne Fine; illus. by Cynthia
Fisher
347 * Looking for Your Name comp. by Paul B. Janeczko
359 * Cinderella ad. and illus. with phtographs by William Wegman
361 
* Make Lemonade by Virginia Euwer Wolff
363 SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
365 ANNUAL AUTHOR AND TITLE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 54 East Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Carol Fox, Youth Services Consultant, Illinois State Library
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $3.00. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois, and additional mailing offices
© 1993 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Stephen Gammell, from Monster Mama ©1993 by Stephen Gammell and
used by permission of Philomel Books.
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 339
THE BIG PICTURE
Monster Mama
written by Liz Rosenberg; illustrated by Stephen Gammell
Monster Mama is one of those picture books for which the overused word interest-
ing should be reserved. When you first see it, please withhold judgment on the
creepy bleeding-paint effects and eerie characters, because there's a real undertow
of love here creating a tonal balance that will remind kids of nothing more than
the Addams family. Monster stuff doesn't usually appeal to me-I take it too
seriously and get scared-so I was impressed with the way Rosenberg's gory-story
ingredients and Gammell's spattery, spidery art expanded their appeal with each
rereading.
"Patrick Edward was a wonderful boy, but his mother was a monster.
She lived in a big cave at the back of the house." Monster Mama looks the part,
right down to the warts that part her straggly hair and the alarming, moldy colors
that seem to coat her body. Yet she is tender with Patrick Edward, demonstrating
spells and advising, "always use your powers for good, never for evil." When three
bullies attack him on the way home, tie him to a tree, eat his strawberry tarts, and
insult his mother, Patrick Edward's rage knows no bounds. It takes his mother's
magical appearance to rebalance the situation.
The plot has a lot in common with Rosemary Wells' Hazel's Amazing
Mother (BCCB 2/86), but there's a sinister cast that distances it distinctly from
Wells' jovial tenor. And unlike Norman Leach's My Wicked Stepmother, reviewed
in this issue, there's no reassurance here that the adult is not a monster. Is she or
isn't she? Could Monster Mama just be a strange recluse romanticized by her son
despite the fact that her "bad moods terrified the neighborhood"? We don't ever
really know, but the story works either way, and that very ambiguity makes it
operate on two levels-the literal and the symbolic. Genuine ambiguity is rare in
children's books because it can confuse kids, but here the story and art work to-
ward a clarity of theme that will secure audience understanding. After the climac-
tic bully episode is resolved, Monster Mama gathers her son into a madonna-like
hug: "No matter where you go, or what you do," she tells him, "I will be there.
Because I am your mother, even if I am a monster-and I love you." Nothing
could be plainer, and nothing could so belie the threatening aspects of Monster
Mama's appearance and the haunted-house setting.
In fact, this will make a more than unusual Halloween readaloud. Taken
out of context, Gammell's graphic images really are scary. The rainbow range of
colors is offset by textures that suggest things slimy to the touch. Cold blues and
greens run counter to warm pinks and oranges. Expressions of anger and fear are
exaggerated to bizarre proportion. A threat of danger lurks in every picture. How-
ever, Patrick Edward learns how to deal with danger, and part of his support comes
from dangerous-looking Mama. All is not what it seems. Ugly is only as ugly
340 
* THE BULLETIN
does. Harkening back to "Beauty and the Beast," it's not monstrous appearances
we have to watch out for so much as the monsters inside ourselves.
Like Louise Fitzhugh and Sandra Scoppettone's Bang, Bang You're Dead,
a controversial picture book from another era, this will have its detractors. Vio-
lence is never a popular topic, but violence is an eternal verity. It especially incul-
cates our own society in ways that children cannot avoid, and this book grapples
with violence in form as well as content. Books about fear that don't really touch
fear don't fool children, who know when books are dealing with the real thing and
when they're playing it safe. They also know that books are a safe place to play,
even with the real thing. Bullies in the street will always threaten, and kids could
do worse than dream of and draw on a superpower like Monster Mama.
Betsy Hearne, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, C.S. 
Daddy's Climbing Tree. Clarion, 1993 
136p
ISBN 0-395-63032-0 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
From the moment she hears that her adored father has been killed by a hit-and-run
driver, eleven-year-old Jessica vehemently denies his death. She calls her mother a
liar, convinces her younger brother that her father is only hiding, and dismisses the
descending hordes of relatives and friends as badly mistaken. Jessica decides she
will find her father in the place they both loved: her old house with the big back-
yard, which was dominated by the tree that her father climbed as a boy and was
teaching Jessica to climb. With her brother she flees, miscalculating the time it
will take them to hike through the heavily forested state park. At last, when they
reach their old home and Jessica dares to climb the tree without her father's guid-
ance and love, she admits to herself and to her family that her father is gone, but
there's a place where he'll always be deep inside herself. The story has successfully
realized characters (especially five-year-old Tycho, always the unwelcome voice of
reality) and familiar yet consistent metaphors of flight, dark woods, and cradling
limbs of the tree; these aspects will give children lots to think about even as they
feel Jessica's anger and despair. With the exception of a necessary but contrived
overnight stay with a woman who has sought refuge in a forest hovel from the old
folks' home, Adler creates a convincing portrait of two children confronting one of
life's most difficult trials. ELIZABETH HUNTOON
ANDERSON, 
MADELYN 
KLEIN 
Edgar Allan Poe: A Mystery. 
Watts,
1993 
158p 
illus. with photographs 
(Impact Biographies)
ISBN 0-531-13012-6 
$13.90 
R 
Gr. 7-10
There are mysteries about Edgar Allan Poe's life, if not quite enough to warrant
Anderson's subtitle, and it was definitely a life filled with event. This biography
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 
341
makes that fact clear, tracing Poe's history from his childhood with his foster fam-
ily, his mercurial relations with friends and enemies (particularly female friends
and enemies), and his professional life as an editor and writer for various periodi-
cals. Anderson's Poe comes across as charming, financially incompetent, arrogant,
romantic, and totally unreliable. The author, clearly fond of her subject, supplies
endnotes for sources contemporaneous with Poe but not for the more recent criti-
cal work upon which she draws (these are presumably included in the appended
bibliography). The survey of his life is still competent and convincing, however;
conflicting information is clearly outlined, and the busy life of an early American
writer is well-evoked. Readers who've enjoyed Poe's stories or Avi's The Man Who
Was Poe (BCCB 10/89) will find this compelling reading about a satisfyingly
melodramatic life. DS
Avi 
Punch with Judy; illus. by Emily Lisker. 
Bradbury, 1993 
167p
ISBN 0-02-707755-1 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 6-8
There's nothing funny about Punch, the beggar boy whom Joe McSneed finds
jigging on a street corner. McSneed's traveling troupe of mismatched perform-
ers-Twig the juggler, Doc the medicine man, Blodger the acrobat, Zun the ani-
mal trainer, and Mrs. McSneed, also known as the contortionist Queen of
Tipperary--barely tolerate Punch, who performs only the clean-up chores. When
McSneed dies in 1874, just as the country falls on hard times, the McSneeds'
daughter, Judy, vainly tries to lead the troupe as they flee the moral wrath of a
sheriffs posse and perform to smaller and more surly crowds who refuse even to
laugh, let alone pay. During one of these pathetic shows, Punch is unwillingly
forced to revive his inept jig, with interruptions from his pet pig. Punch and Pig
are both a hit. Desperate to survive, the remaining cast choreograph a new show,
a real-life Punch and Judy play. Despite his total lack of talent and his unrequited
love for Judy, Punch succeeds in bringing down the house, literally, as an old
house serving as stage collapses and he howls with pain when Judy strikes him over
and over again with a broken slapstick prop. Punch's story can easily be read as a
colorful, picaresque adventure, a darkly comic version of Sid Fleischman's The
Whipping Boy. More perceptive readers will appreciate Avi's slowly building ex-
ploration of the tragic aspects of comedy, which are emphasized by Lisker's sinister
pen-and-ink drawings. As Twig tells Punch, audiences laugh because "they are
safe in their souls. For once, someone else is fool, not them." ELIZABETH HUNTOON
CARRICK, CAROL 
Whaling Days; illus. by David Frampton. 
Clarion, 1993 
4 0p
ISBN 0-395-50948-3 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
"Since ancient times, people have stood in awe of the whale, the largest creature
that ever lived. They have also made use of the whale to help provide them with
the necessities of life." In the wake of the many books about whale-saving and
watching, here's a rather brave picture book that explains the work of nineteenth-
century whale-hunters, outlining how the whales were found, killed, and carved
for their various valuable products, such as oil, meat, and whalebone. The writing
is direct and informative, perhaps waxing a little enthusiastic when the whale is
killed: "The mist from the whale's blowhole turned pink and then red. 'Stern all!'
the mate shouted. The boat backed clear of the thrashing tail as, mad with pain,
the whale beat the sea." Vivid, it is, and while Frampton's woodcut illustrations
portray the fury of the kill, they have a stylized quality that sets the violence at a
342 
* THE BULLETIN
distance (an effect that will relieve some viewers and enrage others). Like the text,
the pictures are filled with intelligent detail, showing the processing of the whale,
the layout of the whaleboats, and both the drama and hard work of the men who
followed the whales. A glossary, bibliography and index are helpful and reinforce
the fact that this picture book is best suited to older independent readers. RS
CONFORD, 
ELLEN 
Nibble, Nibble, Jenny Archer; illus. by Diane
Palmisciano. 
Little, 1993 
60p 
(Springboard Books)
ISBN 0-316-15371-0 
$12.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Jenny Archer gets her shot at stardom when she taste-tests a new snack food at the
mall-her politely flattering efforts turn out to be taped, and the producer puts her
in a commercial. Jenny's thrilled, feeling on the verge of riches and fame (she
knows a whole career awaits her in commercials), until she discovers she has inad-
vertently eaten and endorsed Nibble Nibble Gerbil Kibble ("If this little girl loves
Nibble Nibble Gerbil Kibble, imagine how much your gerbil will love it"). Teas-
ing ensues, but increased financial compensation puts Jenny back on the hopeful
actress track. The blend of reality and unlikeliness works in the service of the book
here, since commercials are pretty unlikely anyway, and Jenny's exaggerated re-
sponses make for comical and easy reading. There's not much of a climax, but kids
will enjoy this updated Lana Turner story with its rueful twist. DS
CONLY, JANE LESLIE 
Crazy Lady! Geringer/HarperCollins, 1993 
180p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021360-4 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021357-4 
$13.00 
R Gr. 5-8
The "Crazy Lady" of the title is narrator Vernon's raucous alcoholic neighbor
Maxine, who curses the taunting neighborhood kids as she walks down the street
with her retarded son Ronald. Prompted-pushed-by another neighbor, Miss
Annie, who's been tutoring him in reading and grammar, Vernon takes an interest
in Maxine and Ronald, cleaning their yard and watching out for Ronald so Maxine
can go get food stamps. It becomes an unlikely but entirely convincing friendship.
Drunk, Maxine is venomous and desperate; sober, she's a pretty good mother and
not a bad friend: it was she who sent Vernon to Miss Annie in the first place. In its
tone and atmosphere, the book is somewhat reminiscent ofSpinelli's Maniac Magee,
set in a rotting urban landscape where respect, loyalty, and family bonds neverthe-
less manage to thrive. While a heartwarmer, the story is never sentimental and
comes by its emotional effects honestly. Maxine does not reform; in fact, her
bravest act comes at the end when she sends Ronald to live with some relatives in
the country. Vernon's narration, unfolded in retrospect two years after Ronald has
gone, is fast and blunt, and the conversations are lively and true. He'll make kids
care about Ronald and Maxine almost as much as they'll care about him. RS
CULLEN, LYNN 
The Backyard Ghost. Clarion, 1993 
[160p]
ISBN 0-395-64527-1 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Thirteen-year-old Eleanor Cotton has moved to a new town where her family
owns a pizza place. Her older brother and younger sister have made friends quickly,
but Eleanor just isn't fitting in. The only kids who will talk to her are intellectual
Charlie and peculiar Rachel-kids who aren't cool, unlike class-queen Misty Rice.
Eleanor remains fixated on Misty even after Charlie shows her the Civil War ghost
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 343
that he has discovered in her backyard. The ghost is the only variation in an
otherwise formulaic novel: while Eleanor pursues Misty, she just tolerates Charlie
and Rachel's fascination with the ghost. When Misty's true personality is revealed,
Eleanor has to make an ethical decision that is supported by her real friends. The
ghost-twist is appealing, the formula is predictable. KJ
FINE, ANNE 
The Chicken Gave It to Me; illus. by Cynthia Fisher. Joy Street,
1993 
78p
ISBN 0-316-28316-9 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Satirical without getting mean-spirited, this is a witty bit of science fiction based
on several layers of role reversal. Layers is the operative word here, because the
main character is a hen whose book is being read by two kids, Gemma and An-
drew. The "True Story of Harrowing Farm" describes a takeover by little green-
and, it turns out, people-eating-men from an alien planet, who let all the chickens
loose so the cages can be reshaped for humans. The feathered narrator feels sorry
for these captives despite the fact that her own feet are twisted from life in a tight
wire cage, so she stows away on a space ship and makes it her mission to crusade for
more humane treatment of people, whom the little green aliens consider only in
terms of food value. Alternate chapters give Andrew and Gemma a chance to react
to the chicken's unusual manuscript, to comment on it, and to get involved for the
sake of all creatures bred to be eaten. Fine doesn't have to preach here, because the
chicken does it for her, observing outer-space artifacts only too reminiscent of our
own (one advertisement reads "HUNGRY? Just One More Mile to PEOPLE IN
A BASKET") and appearing on television with rhymes to capture "frillions" of
viewers' attention ("If you don't know how to treat 'em,/ Then you shouldn't
really eat 'em"). Fine has handled the technical twists of plot, theme, viewpoint,
and cast with an ingenuity all the more remarkable for the book's brevity. The
takeoffs are consistently clever, even though the fantasy devices, like the escaped
fowl, have a few bare patches here and there: the little green men "spoke perfect
Chicken," but when the chicken overhears the aliens' plot, they wouldn't be speaking
Chicken, so how could she understand them, or, for that matter, write the book in
English? And on her return spaceship trip, the aliens seem to consider eating her,
though they've scorned such a thing initially. These are quibbles, however, in a
book that will entertain at an easy-to-read level even as it inspires discussion. In
fact, kids are going gobble it up. BH
FISCHETTO, LAURA 
Michael the Angel; illus. by Letizia Galli. 
Doubleday,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-385-30844-2 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Fischetto starts with the naming of the great Florentine artist, recounting that his
father "decided to call him Michael the Angel, which in Italian is Michelangelo,"
and she centers on the angel idea when describing the lively and strong-minded
Michelangelo as a child and as a grown man ("What kind of an angel disobeys his
father?" or "gets his nose broken in a fight?"). The simple story-told biography
follows the artist's unruly childhood, careful apprenticeship, and temperamental,
brilliant career as a sculptor and artist. There are few facts, but Fischetto succeeds
in rounding a famous name out into a person in a way most juvenile biographical
fiction doesn't. There are a few textual glitches: Michelangelo is at one point
mentioned as dreaming of leaving Florence ("He even knew where he wished to
344 
* THE BULLETIN
go") but it's not clear if the author is referring to his trip to Rome two pages later,
and the angel metaphor can become a little strained as well. The line-and-water-
color art revels in rich Renaissance earth tones, employing an overhead viewpoint
that allows a contrast with the verdant hills beyond the city. The slightly cubist
city landscapes combine with strong, clean lines and cartoonish human figures to
make Italy seem simultaneously busy and airy. A biographical note and artistic
glossary are included, but no source notes are provided. Like Jane Gardner's Henry
Moore (BCCB 4/93), this gives a good impression of the individualist force behind
the art; couple the two for a then-and-now look at sculptors. DS
FRASER, MARY ANN 
Ten Mile Day and the Building of the Transcontinental Rail-
road; written and illus. by Mary Ann Fraser. 
Holt, 1993 
34p
ISBN 0-8050-1902-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
These days, big-city mayors bet bucketloads of local cuisine on the outcome of
baseball games, but the big bet in 1869 was between the Central Pacific company,
building the first transcontinental railroad (eastward) and its westward-bound part-
ner-rival the Union Pacific, which wagered $10,000 that the Central Pacific could
not lay ten miles of track in one day. They could and did, and Fraser's picture-
book history is a blow-by-blow account of the intensive labor, drama, and technol-
ogy that brought the Union Pacific within four miles of Promontory Point, where
two weeks later, the Golden Spike was ceremoniously driven (and quickly removed).
The text is straightforward and objective, explaining the essential role of Chinese
laborers in the Central Pacific project without glossing over the prejudice they
faced. Well composed and subtly colored paintings with an occasional WPA touch
aptly stretch across the gutter as the tracks stretch across the prairie. Exceptional
background material includes sidebars that elucidate on particulars such as the
Golden Spike and the ethnic composition of the workforce, a reading list and
research note, and a glossary; endpapers feature a good map and drawings of rail-
road tools and supplies. RS
GRAFF, NANCY PRICE 
Where the River Runs: A Portrait ofa Refugee Family; illus.
with photographs by Richard Howard. 
Little, 1993 
70p
ISBN 0-316-32287-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
The three Prek brothers Buttra, Oudom, and Richard live in two worlds, spending
the day in their all-American, multicultural school in an inner suburb of Boston,
and going home to their apartment filled with Cambodian cooking, the Khmer
language, and many traditional customs. In some ways, this is the best kind of
photo-essay, with both words and pictures focused on the small details that make
up the big picture. The writing, though, is stuffed with overlong sentences that
can become confusing: "Food holds a special place in the lives of refugees and
immigrants. This is true not just because they need it to survive and often haven't
had enough of it in the past but because the abundance and variety of the foods
available in the United States often make it possible for them to reproduce or
make the kinds of dishes from their old home that bring them comfort in their
new home." Too, the fervent prose is not always grammatical, as when the author
describes the scars suffered by the boys' mother Sohka: "Both the leech and the
knife left their mark." Still, there's a lot of information here about the dilemmas of
refugees in general, as well as about victims of the Khmer Rouge in particular, and
the black-and-white photos have an offhand family feeling that tethers the text.
RS
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 
345
GRIFFIN, PENI R. Switching Well. McElderry, 1993 
[2 2 4p]
ISBN 0-689-50581-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Two twelve-year-olds, one from 1991 and one from 1891, switch places when
they each make a wish at the same well, in San Antonio, to time-travel. Ada, from
1891, finds contemporary San Antonio a big and confusing place, and is almost
trapped by a child molester until she is rescued and taken to a shelter; Amber,
whose mother works at the shelter, is placed in a hardscrabble rule-bound orphan-
age. The basic appeal of the timeshift story, told in alternating chapters, is en-
hanced by the orphan-of-the-storm experiences of each girl; unfortunately, there's
not much plot beyond the premise. Ada finds one person, a feisty African-Ameri-
can girl named Violet, who believes her story, and it's through Violet, who receives
a surprising inheritance, that the story reaches its neat conclusion. The time-
traveling construct is a little vague, governed by some nixie-like presence in the
well, but fans of the genre will enjoy the switch and the concomitant parallels of
the two girls' travails. RS
HAAS, JESSIE 
Beware the Mare; illus. by Martha Haas. 
Greenwillow, 1993 
64 p
ISBN 0-688-11762-7 
$13.00 
R Gr. 3-5
Lily's grandfather is a livestock dealer, and Lily sees horses come and go, hoping
that one of them will someday be her own. When Gramp brings home Beware,
Lily falls in love: the little bay mare is bright and quick and well-behaved, but
why, then, the ominous name? "If she behaves herself, she's yours," Gramp says to
Lily, who finds Beware more and more desirable as Gramp and Mom test the mare
and ask around to find out if she has a dangerous side. The mystery, which is
happily solved (Beware, if plagued by fly bites, has a very aggressive manner when
asking to be scratched), is slightly silly, but it's not really the point. Lily's absorp-
tion in her new four-footed friend is convincing and appealing, and the descrip-
tions of riding and horsekeeping are detailed enough for young enthusiasts to
imagine themselves there. Haas keeps the focus tight, depicting the characters of
Gramp, Gran, and Mom in a few brisk and distinctive strokes and moving quickly
on to the important stuff. Horse lovers who like their fiction short and easy are
frequently disappointed, but here's a well-written offering that conveys a flavorful
lot in a small space. Homely and appealing black-and-white drawings open each
chapter. DS
HEYMANS, ANNEMIE 
The Princess in the Kitchen Garden; written and illus. by
Annemie and Margriet Heymans; tr. by Johanna H. Prins and Johanna W.
Prins. 
Farrar, 1993 
4 8p
ISBN 0-374-36122-3 
$16.00 
M 
5-8 yrs
Translated from Dutch, this is the story of a young girl, Hannah, whose mother
has died and who can't bear the total absorption of her father in his work to the
neglect of her and her little brother Matthew. She runs away to Mama's walled
kitchen garden across the yard and sends notes instructing Matthew to bring her
various items from the house. This is all complicated by a story within a story and
by the presence of Voice of Mama, who speaks to each of the children on different
pages. The situation itself has some intriguing aspects, but listeners may feel pulled
back and forth even more than they're intended to. Black-and-white spreads alter-
nate with full color, so that the long text and childlike art combine for a frag-
346 
* THE BULLETIN
mented effect, especially in view of the confusing layout. Despite the bibliothera-
peutic intent, let's hope kids don't take the last sentence too literally: "whoever
wants to run away will find, on the other side of the yard, a yellow stone house,
with its door swinging in the breeze." BH
HOPKINSON, DEBORAH 
Sweet Clara and the Freedom Quilt; illus. by James
Ransome. 
Knopf, 1993 
33p
ISBN 0-679-82311-5 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Unlike some African-American historical picture books that are stronger on atmo-
sphere than plot, this one has a fusion of symbol and suspense that will pull kids
into a real story. Learning how to sew has gotten Clara out of the cotton fields and
into the Big House to work for the Missus, but her skill becomes even more im-
portant when Clara covertly begins to work a map to the North into the design of
a quilt. Garnering directions from returned runaways and slaves who have trav-
eled to other plantations, Clara quietly stitches, sometimes waiting for months
until the right piece of information or scrap of cloth presents itself: "I had blue
calico and flowered blue silk for creeks and rivers, and greens and blue-greens for
the fields, and white sheeting for the roads." Eventually, the quilt shows the way
to the banks of the Ohio and Clara is ready to run. While the use of colloquial
speech patterns is inconsistent ("the morning sun was streamin' into the sewin'
room, turning everything all sunflower yellow") and the dialect is sometimes heavy
("Aine you gon' need the quilt where you goin'?"), readers-aloud can comfortably
adapt the language, and the rather lengthy text has a good balance of conversation
and narration. Ransome's full-page and double-spread paintings are filled with
warm, optimistic light, the patterns of the quilt echoed in the details of the land-
scape. The jacket copy states that the story is based upon a "true, little-known
chapter in African-American history," but there is nary a hint of a source or his-
torical note. RS
HUGHES, MONICA 
The Crystal Drop. Simon, 1993 
212p
ISBN 0-671-79195-8 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In the year 2011, much of the earth is in a drought and the other parts are flooded.
After Megan's mother dies in childbirth, leaving Megan and her ten-year-old brother
Ian on their dry, isolated farm, Megan decides the two of them should leave. Their
search for an uncle who, last they heard, was planning to settle near a waterfall,
takes them down a nearly deserted road. Frightening confrontations with desper-
ate survivalists happen when the children seek out water to refill their canteens
("The road's private. The land is ours. I thought I made that quite clear"). The
narrative, from Megan's point of view, clearly details the children's struggle with
the desert environment, but there is a confusing shift when the narration switches
from Megan to Ian and back again. Because a harsh drama is maintained for most
of the book, the happy ending and added romance for Megan give an odd fairy-
tale flavor to an otherwise brutal and realistic story. The utopian ending makes
this a hopeful addition to the many new environmental-apocalyptic stories. KJ
JACQUES, BRIAN 
Salamandastron; illus. by Gary Chalk. 
Philomel, 1993 
391p
ISBN 0-399-21992-7 
$17.95 
R Gr. 4-7
In this fourth tale about Redwall, a monastery-type community run by talking
animals, young Samkin the squirrel and Arula the mole maid leave the abbey on a
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 347
search for a missing sword. Alternating with their story are narratives of other
adventurers-a badger and a hare running away from Salamandastron (a military
stronghold of the evil badgers), an otter and a dormouse searching for the cure to
an epidemic, and the weasel villains traveling with their army of vermin. Typical
of the Redwall series, the bad-guy species are really evil and the good-guy species
are all innocence. The only ambiguous heroes are the warriors of Salamandastron,
who seem to enjoy bloody battles, but whose ferocity is justified because they kill
nasty vermin (rats, weasels, foxes, ferrets, etc.). Jacques handles his intertwining
tales with skill and keeps the suspense level high even though the outcome is pre-
dictable. Although it is part of the series, this volume can stand on its own. KJ
JAM, TEDDY 
The Year of Fire; illus. by Ian Wallace. 
McElderry, 1993 
40p
ISBN 0-689-50566-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Formatted like a long picturebook but with friendly chapter-breaks for indepen-
dent readers, this is an account, originally published in Canada, of an old man's
telling his grandaughter about the fire that swept the area when he was a boy. The
events in the past-galloping through the night on horseback, trying to douse the
conflagration with buckets of water, and attending school in the church for a year
following the schoolhouse's burning down-give an impression of the old days in
terms kids will understand, although the present-day framing and protracted de-
scription detract from the excitement of the fire and may make young readers
restless. The delicate close-coupled line work and gentle watercolor tones of the
art are more suited to the tranquil barn or chilly post-fire scenes than the fire itself,
which seems distanced rather than enlivened by the sudden imposition of orange
on gray. However, it's a nice picture of times past turning into times present, with
a glimpse at country life that children may enjoy. DS
JANECZKO, PAUL B., comp. 
Looking for Your Name: A Collection of Contemporary
Poems. Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
143p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08625-9 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05475-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7 up
What seems a rather sprawling thematic motif of "conflict" assumes a tight focus
as Janeczko assembles hardhitting poems by some relatively unknown, as well as
relatively famous, contemporary poets. As a group, the poems are almost over-
whelmingly intense-occasionally shocking in moments of bitter epiphany, as when
Sheryl Nelms' "the hard way" describes the frying of a Cambodian prisoner in a
copper pit, or Herbert Scott laments a victim of abuse in "The Burnt Child," or
Elliot Fried in "For a Sister Not Yet Dead" assures his sibling that her suicide
attempts will eventually prove successful. There's a tonal range of reflective to sad
to tragic, though humor occasionally glints through, as in James Nolan's "Modern
Times" or Ron Koertge's "The Black Thumb." While some of the poems are by
young adult authors, many show an adult perspective on past experience (Christo-
pher Hewitt's "The Enticing Lane," for instance) but will nevertheless be acces-
sible to teenage readers. AIDS, war, environmental pollution, child abuse, cruelty
to animals, and other bleak subjects get far from bleak treatment. These are rich
poems that will fascinate readers even as they exert stress on them: "how losses and
disasters first attract, but then repel us, all our carefree cells/ shouting out at recess,
Not me! Not me!" (from Ronald Wallace's "Flames"). The 112 poems, mostly
anthologized here for the first time, are indexed by first lines, authors, and titles.
BH
348 
* THE BULLETIN
JOHNSON, PAUL BRETT 
The Cow Who Wouldn't Come Down; written and illus.
by Paul Brett Johnson. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08631-3 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05481-0 
$14.95 
R* 
4-6 yrs
It's heartening, these days, to see a picture book in which story matches strength
with art and both have a fresh tang of humorous child appeal. Johnson has man-
aged a wry narrative about Miss Rosemary, whose cow Gertrude has taken to the
air and won't come down: "There was no telling what people would say.... It's a
known fact cows don't fly." Giddy with nose dives, updrafts, glides, and other
aeronautic feats, Gertrude studiously ignores all of Miss Rosemary's attempts to
command, lure, snag, lasso, and drag her down for milking. Finally, with glasses
askew and dignity dwindling, Miss Rosemary hits on a plan sure to succeed with
any flying cow-or kid. She makes Gertrude jealous with an ersatz substitute
("Help Wanted. Full-Time Cow. Experience Desirable. Apply in Person"). This
Trojan Cow does the trick ("No Cows Needed! Position Filled"), bringing Gertrude
down with a mighty thump . . . though she does start spending a lot of time
around the tractors.... Johnson's illustrations have a genuine pastel innocence far
removed from nostalgic sentimentality. The cow retains an anatomically correct
heft that makes her defiance of gravity very funny indeed. Both the human and
animal facial expressions are telling without overexaggeration, and the painterly
textures lend humorous context to compositions such as Miss Rosemary's behind
falling center-stage off the roof toward a trumpet vine. Play this one off the nurs-
ery rhyme "The Cow Jumped Over the Moon" and the Welsh folktale "The Cow
On the Roof," and you'll have a surefire storyhour lineup. BH
JONES, DIANA WYNNE 
Stopping for a Spell: Three Fantasies; illus. by Jos. A.
Smith. 
Greenwillow, 1993 
14 8p
ISBN 0-688-11367-2 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
An old armchair comes to life as an obnoxious human; a boy inadvertently creates
a sinister Supergranny from four unappealing grandmothers; a malevolent family
friend is finally driven away by the furniture he's insulted throughout his visit.
These three fantasies, each containing six or seven short chapters, show the imagi-
native flair of the author's more complex works, but not the convincing develop-
ment. The first becomes repetitively reliant on Chair Person's quirky characteristics
("er, hn hm" or "snuffle" punctuates his every statement), and the second and
third are unconvincing either in terms of plot (why isn't the main character in
"The Four Grannies" quicker in using his magic machine to undo his earlier wish?)
or character (why don't the parents in "Who Got Rid of Angus Flint?" throw the
visitor out the first time he picks up one of their children by the hair?). Despite
their labored aspects, however, the stories are vivid, and their exaggerated elements
will probably amuse more readers than they annoy. Smith's pen-and-ink sketches
are primarily decorative except for the full-page portraits introducing each story-
these depict the characters' bizarre features with panache. BH
KHERDIAN, DAVID 
Juna's Journey; illus. by Nonny Hogrogian. 
Philomel,
1993 
4 8p
ISBN 0-399-22010-0 
$15.95 
NR 
6-8 yrs
Juna is the Dream Helper of an elf-like race called the Djanigs. One day, he
dreams for himself, and his dream's mysterious message sends him on a journey. A
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 
349
second phrase that he barely remembers has a Hollywood ring to it-"If they help
you, they may come." So of course, everyone whom Juna meets on his way ("River-
Crossing Helper," "Ravine-Crossing Helper," Swamp-Crossing-Sometimes
Helper," etc.) gets Juna across a dangerous obstacle and then joins the traveling
group. Meanwhile, an unexplained "red glow" looms increasingly larger on the
horizon and replaces the dream as "his reason for leaving." Although it could be
that the Djanigs who remained behind are now the victims of a huge fire, that is
never verified. When there are seven companions, they climb into the basket of a
hot-air balloon and float away from the dangerous red below. "Now Juna under-
stood for the first time the true meaning of their journey. But just as in his dream,
there were no words with which to say it." That's too bad, because without the
explanation, the reader has little idea what the story is about. Hogrogian's illustra-
tions show a magical wilderness; the few animals (a bear, a mountain lion, a sea
monster) are much more striking than the stiffer Djanig people, and the art, like
the lengthy text, lacks energy. If this story is meant to be symbolic, the symbolism
is both too oblique and too overt, particularly for the picture book audience, who
will most likely grow restless long before the story is finished. KJ
KIMMEL, ERuc A., ad. 
Three Sacks of Truth: A Story from France; illus. by Robert
Rayevsky. 
Holiday House, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-0921-X 
$15.95 
R 5-8 yrs
This French variant of a Jack tale featuring Petit Jean, the third and youngest son
of a widow, has two parts: Petit Jean wins a princess by bringing the King a perfect
peach, but the King makes Petit Jean prove himself further by herding ten thou-
sand royal rabbits. Kimmel's adaptation retains the tale's enigmatic aspect, as
readers must decide for themselves that Petit Jean is superior to his brothers, the
Queen, the King, and even the princess. Rayevsky's satirical art combines chalk
drawings on dark backgrounds with paintings on light backgrounds for a varied
sequence of double spreads. His characters are thin and angular, their postures as
slyly exaggerated as their expressions. Although this story makes for a long picture
book, it will satisfy both older readers and young listeners with its classic theme:
underdog as hero. KJ
KING, JOHN 
Bedouin. Raintree/Steck-Vaughn, 1993 
48p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Threatened Cultures)
ISBN 0-8114-2304-2 
$14.94 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Unlike Siy's The Eeyou, reviewed below, this book gives a balanced view of a tradi-
tional culture attempting to survive in the modern world. Day explains that many
of the Arab countries romanticize the Bedouin as symbols of nomadic heritage,
but that this respect often dwindles in day-to-day living: "Many Arab towns-
people dislike the Bedouin when they actually meet them." Unfortunately, this
information is reiterated three times, and the book suffers from other occasional
examples of unnecessary repetition. Otherwise, it's a good portrait of a culture in
transition, as various Bedouin tribes throughout North Africa and the Middle East
adjust to changing climactic conditions, new technologies, and governmental taxes
and the conscription of Bedouin men into military service. The book is careful to
explain that there is no one Bedouin way of life and is honest about the simulta-
neous demands of history and contemporary life: "it is important to remember
that today's Bedouin are modern men and women." Large color photos are well
350 
* THE BULLETIN
captioned and placed; appended material includes a glossary, index and brief read-
ing list. RS
LANCE, KATHRYN 
Going to See Grassy Ella. Lothrop, 1993 
134 p
ISBN 0-688-12163-2 
$12.00 
M 
Gr. 5-8
In this madcap, tonally confused version of My Sister Eileen, Peggy Jean (nick-
named "Peej") convinces her sister Annie to fly with her to New York in order to
visit a faith healer (Graciella, "Grassy Ella") who might be able to cure Peej's un-
specified terminal illness. New York is a pretty wild place, as the two girls from
O-h-i-o discover when they meet Ivory, the punk drop-out daughter of a drug
kingpin, who takes the sisters to a Mets game in her chauffeured limo and prom-
ises to drive them to the healer afterwards; unfortunately some rival kingpins kid-
nap Annie and Peej, thinking that the chemo-balded Peej is the shaved-headed
Ivory. It's hard to know exactly how the book intends us to take all this. While
the plot is farcical, the tone and language are middle-school-normal, and while
Peej's disease is the impetus for the adventure, it ultimately has little to do with the
story, although the last page implies she's been cured by Grassy Ella. Even though
the story is never convincing, its slapstick turns are fun to follow, and Peej is an
impetuous heroine who leads the fray. RS
LANDAU, ELAINE Rabies. Lodestar, 1993 
52p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-67403-9 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
With rabies on the increase among wild animals, a book like this should be acces-
sible to kids for their own and their pets' protection. Landau reports on the trans-
mission, nature, and course of the disease, along with various preventative measures
and improved treatments. Her punctuation of the information with anecdotes
will involve readers, starting with the first line: "An eight-year-old girl was playing
in her family's driveway on a crisp autumn day in the quiet New Jersey town of
Sparta. She didn't see the small red fox approach from the surrounding wooded
area." In general, Landau tones down the scare stories, though one tale of a Peru-
vian girl attacked by a rabid vampire bat will send shivers up a few spines. Black-
and-white photographs, a glossary, a list of commendable but somewhat irrelevant
books for further reading, and an index supplement the text. BH
LEACH, NORMAN 
My Wicked Stepmother; illus. by Jane Browne. 
Macmillan,
1993 
26 p
ISBN 0-02-754700-0 
$13.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Tom loved living with Dad until his wicked stepmother appeared on the scene:
"She put a spell on him and he thinks she is young and beautiful, but I know she
is middle-aged and ugly and a horrible witch." The trouble is that, unlike
Rosenberg's considerably less bland Monster Mama, reviewed this month in the
Big Picture, readers know right away that this lovely new wife is treating the narra-
tor much better than anyone else is-certainly better than the friends who make
fun of his Robin Hood and Superman outfits or who make him cry at his own
birthday party. However, it's not until Tom makes his stepmother cry that the
relationship is resolved with a family hug, which turns the wicked stepmother into
a fairy godmother. The plot is a little schematic, but it's good clean bibliotherapy
with equally clean, if somewhat posed, full-color illustrations. Tom's stepmother
may be dressed in black, with old-fashioned button-and-laced ankle boots, but
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 351
there's sympathy written all over her face, and for young listeners who need a dose
of it, the book will prove reassuring. The fairy godmother, after all, turns up
wearing pink. BH
LINDGREN, ASTRID 
The Day Adam Got Mad; tr. by Barbara Lucas; illus. by Marit
T6rnqvist. 
R & S, 1993 
25p
ISBN 91-29-62064-3 
$13.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
"This is the story of the great bull, Adam, who got loose on an Easter day a long
time ago. He might still be loose if only-well, here's what happened." What
happened is actually pretty climactic, as a whole farming community turns out to
watch the standoff in the barnyard, until seven-year-old Karl tames the beast by
scratching him between the horns. Although the translation seems smooth,
Lindgren has an unfortunate habit of interrupting her story with summaries ("He
was a little Swedish farm boy, exactly like a thousand others-blue-eyed, flaxen-
haired, runny-nosed") or asides ("What a foolish situation!") that sometimes dis-
tract from the action and occasionally sound condescending: "Why did Adam get
into such a dangerous mood on that particular day? We may never know. Perhaps
one of the calves said something rude to him in calf talk, or perhaps the cows
teased him." Tdrnqvist's watercolors make up for it, however-no authorial inter-
ruptions there as the idyllically old-fashioned scenes of rural Sweden unfold with
good-humored aplomb. BH
LIPSYTE, ROBERT 
The Chief. HarperCollins, 1993 
22 6 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021068-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021064-8 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Continuing the escapades of Native American boxer Sonny Bear and his African-
American buddy Martin Witherspoon from The Brave (BCCB 11/91), Lipsyte
spins an easy-to-read sports story about Sonny's bid for the heavyweight champi-
onship. The path is blocked by crooks, bigots, and politicos whom Malcolm ob-
serves with smart-mouthed naivete as he attempts to write a book for an independent
study project at college. The subplot of the Moscondaga Nation's resolution of a
gambling conflict fits too neatly into Sonny's personal struggle for a fair win in the
ring; it's the fight scenes that really give this book its tension. Lipsyte is a dynamic
sports writer, with an ability to grip readers to the knockout. It's therefore even
more to his credit that he resists a triumphant wrap-up victory for an ending that
leaves readers knowing Sonny Bear has grown but not knowing whether he'll be-
come the new champ. Sonny's trainer Alfred, his uncle Jake, and a gorgeous fe-
male documentary film-maker are a stock but reliable supporting cast. The
politically correct tone gets a little glib, or is it just plain corny? "Great Warrior,"
says Jake of Muhammad Ali. "Stood for what he believed." But narrator Malcolm,
for all his flip assertions, is a personable sort; and author Lipsyte, for all his mes-
sages, knows how to tell a story. BH
McCoY, J. J. 
Animals in Research: 
Issues and Conflicts. Watts,
1993 
128p 
(Impact Books)
ISBN 0-531-13023-1 
$13.40 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
In this well-organized overview McCoy efficiently summarizes the controversy
surrounding the use of animals in medical research, product testing, and educa-
tional demonstrations. The book includes coverage of the various laws and guide-
352 
* THE BULLETIN
lines that govern the use of animals, as well an outline of the various groups con-
cerned with animal welfare, from the mainstream ASPCA to more radical groups
such as People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals and the Animal Liberation
Front. While McCoy is clearly on the side of those who believe that the benefits of
animal research for humans outweigh the "rights" of the animals involved, he is
also a forthright advocate of humane procedures. The book is dense with informa-
tion, but while its dispassionate approach makes it a good source for term papers,
this also makes it less interesting to read than Pringle's The Animal Rights Contro-
versy (BCCB 12/89). Footnotes, a brief reading list, and an index are appended.
RS
MARINO, JAN 
For the Love ofPete. Little, 1993 
197p
ISBN 0-316-54627-5 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-7
With her mother dead and her father gone, the only family Phoebe knows besides
her grandmother is the British household butler, Bishopp; the African-American
cook, Bertie; and the cook's brother, Billy. When Gram spends longer and longer
periods in an institution, reliving her past glories as an opera singer and blocking
out the present, their money dwindles and Phoebe must make a journey to her
father, who believes Phoebe died at birth along with her mother. Marino gives a
nod here to Great Expectations, as well she should, for the setting is a Gothic house
arrested in time. It is only when Phoebe and the three servants get on the road that
picaresque aspects of life in the contemporary South (Billy has lost his arm in
Vietnam) intrude on Phoebe's sense of loneliness and loss of a childhood home.
At one stop, the group experiences an ugly racist incident; at another, the kindness
of a restaurant owner and the vindictiveness of his alcoholic, card-reading wife
impress the protagonist with new awareness. There's a lot going on here (none of
it very relevant to the title), and the plot verges on stock conventions, but the cast
is vividly developed, as is the setting and mood. Phoebe's narration is consistent
and believable. Despite the epiphanic reunion with her father, readers will be as
reluctant to leave her quirky friends as she is. BH
MELMED, LAURA KRAUSs 
The First Song Ever Sung; illus. by Ed Young. 
Lothrop,
1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08231-9 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08230-0 
$15.00 
R 
3-5 yrs
"'What was the first song ever sung?' said the little boy to his father." We can
predict the nature of the answer, if not its specifics, by the fierce tiger face above
the text. Sure enough, on the next page comes the response under a picture of two
battling Samurai: "'The first song ever sung was a strong son, a man's song, a
warrior's song, a friend's song,' said the father to the little boy." The question-
answer rhythm is ritualistic: from father to brother to sister to grandmother to
grandfather to dog to minnows to birds to mother, who sings him gently to sleep.
Each person answers traditionally, giving Young a chance to flex a variety of moods
with fresh effects that represent a departure from his recent fuzzy-edged velvety
paintings. The shapes and colors are dynamic here, the style more boldly expres-
sionistic than softly suggestive. Even the media seem varied from spread to spread,
each of which takes a viewer by surprise, but the overall strength ensures a cohesive
quality to the book and keeps the verbal pattern from becoming predictably re-
petitive. More chant than story, this will nevertheless hold young listeners, who
may stray from the questions but will stay for the pictures. BH
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 353
MOHR, NICHOLASA 
All for the Better: A Story of El Barrio; illus. by Rudy
Gutierrez. 
Raintree/Steck-Vaughn, 1993 
56 p 
(Stories of America)
ISBN 0-8114-7220-5 
$13.98 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
This short and easy biography of Bronx community activist Evalina Lopez
Antonetty focuses on the subject's childhood years of coming alone from Puerto
Rico to New York during the Depression, adjusting to English and a new school,
and successfully convincing and organizing her proud neighbors to accept food
from government programs. Kids will appreciate Evalina's various struggles, but
the writing is a tad tepid and adulatory: "Everyone remarked on what a thoughtful
and responsible girl Evalina was. Her outgoing personality and good looks en-
deared her to all she met." An epilogue outlines Evalina's adult life, which was in
many ways more interesting then the story told here. For more absorbing entries
in this series see Walter Dean Myers' A Place Called Heartbreak and Joan Kane
Nichols' A Matter of Conscience, reviewed below. RS
MOTHER GOOSE 
The House That Jack Built; illus. by Emily Bolam. 
Dutton,
1993 
25p
ISBN 0-525-44972-8 
$14.00 
R 
3-6 yrs
Polish up your chanting skills for this newly illustrated version of the old cumula-
tive classic. The text is the standard Opie version with its traditional repetitive
allure; the illustrations are as sturdily vigorous as the audience for which they're
intended. Bright, heavily saturated colors create figures and landscape, which are
apparently then cut out and placed over white for even sharper delineation. The
result is an effect of simplicity even with complicated shapes such as lollipop trees
and Jack's rather fine house. The cast of characters accumulates visually and textu-
ally as the characters chase each other up and down vertiginous green-striped hills,
with the final line stringing from the rat (who presumably meets his maker at the
paws of the cat after the celebration ends) through the cow, the wedding couple,
and the jubilant horse and hound (the hound, in fact, is blowing the horn) all
under a green crescent moon. Where Jenny Stow's House (BCCB 5/92) was suf-
fused with South Seas sunshine, this version is charged with eccentric purpose; it's
a hoot for young kids who, looking at this splendid house, may ask you the ques-
tion that the tale doesn't answer: what happens to Jack? DS
MURPHY, CATHERINE FREY 
Alice Dodd and the Spirit of Truth. Macmillan,
1993 
176 p
ISBN 0-02-767702-8 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Alice, spending the summer taking care of her three-year-old niece so that her aunt
can have some peace for her painting, has a little trouble with the truth. She
doesn't mean to lie; she simply wants to make herself seem more interesting. So
she tells Aunt Kate that she won an art contest in school, and when Madame
Merlina, an eccentric old lady who lives nearby, entices Alice into a session with
the ouija board, Alice (like the bane of many a slumber party) pushes the planchette.
This is a likable first novel of a girl's reflective twelfth summer in a woodsy retreat,
and there's a good mix of characters, from Alice's cozy grandfather, to strange
Madame Merlina and her down-to-earth sister Miss Abby, to little Amy, whose
disappearance in a storm provides the book's rather predictable crisis and conclu-
sion. It isn't a new story, but it's a respectable entry in a popular genre, and Alice
is a narrator who will appeal to girls with similar dreams of extraordinariness. RS
354 
* THE BULLETIN
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
A Place Called Heartbreak: A Story of Vietnam; illus. by
Frederick Porter. 
Raintree/Steck-Vaughn, 1993 
71p 
(Stories of America)
ISBN 0-8114-7237-X 
$14.94 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Myers has selected a naturally dramatic subject in Major Fred Cherry, who achieved
his dream of becoming an Air Force pilot only to be shot down near Hanoi and
held captive by the Viet Cong for seven-and-a-half years. And Myers plays this
one just right: no sensational details or exclamatory suspense-heightening are
needed, and he indulges in none. Cherry's story unfolds in simple sentences, paced
for a smooth interweaving of information and story. An almost superheroized
figure, the African-American pilot endured injury, torture, and illness, refusing to
break and determining to hearten the other prisoners of war captured during his
incarceration. Whatever readers have absorbed from their parents' opinions of the
controversial Vietnam conflict, this easy-to-read biography will hold them in its
grip without glorifying war's pain and inhumanity. It's unusual to achieve such
journalistic tonal balance in a book for this age level, and the user-friendly after-
word and notes, plus occasional black-and-white sketches that are somewhat stiff
but competently drawn, will make the book a sure hit-especially with reluctant
readers, and especially with boys, both difficult target audiences. The action-fig-
ure cover will repel librarians and attract kids. BH
NICHOLS, JOAN KANE 
A Matter of Conscience: The Trial of Anne Hutchinson;
illus. by Dan Krovatin. 
Raintree/Steck-Vaughn, 1993 
101p (Stories of
America)
ISBN 0-8114-7233-7 
$14.94 
R Gr. 4-7
A foreword by Alex Haley sets the tone well: "This is not a story about religious
freedom," he says accurately, and this is not a book that (as some do) paints Puri-
tan dissident Anne Hutchinson in golden and saintly tones. The author states that
she worked from John Cotton's letters and diaries and the transcripts of
Hutchinson's trial for heresy, and the result is an historically credible and vivid
image of Hutchinson as a contentious theologian and a devout, intelligent, and
frequently arrogant woman. While focusing on the trial, the book makes clear the
reasons for Puritan immigration and the important doctrinal questions around
which the trial revolved. Nichols wisely lets the historically documented dialogue
do most of the meaning, explaining only as necessary, which keeps the book stream-
lined. While mentioning that gender was a factor, the book chooses to focus less
on Hutchinson's challenge to sex roles (and in fact never mentions her advanced
pregnancy during the first trial) than on her challenge to prevailing Puritan thought.
The language is simple, with footnotes provided for difficult terms; the historical
personages are clearly identified and easy to keep track of; and the debate-really
the railroading of an individual-is absorbing to read. As with other books in the
series, the endnotes laudably distinguish fact from the minimal fiction; wood-
engraving-style illustrations, in period manner, appear throughout. This is an
exciting account that may raise young readers' moral indignation and provide for
interesting discussions and present-day comparisons. DS
OFOSU-APPIAH, L. H. 
People in Bondage: African Slavery Since the 15th
Century. 
Runestone, 1993 
112p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-3150-X 
$14.96 
R 
Gr. 7-12
An African historian educated in Ghana and England writes clearly and specifi-
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 355
cally about the ancient roots of slavery, the African slave trade developed by Euro-
peans and Arabs, the economic importance of slavery to the New World colonies
as well as the Old World, the struggle to abolish the slave trade and slavery itself,
the illegal continuation of the trade, and the effects slavery has had on society to
this day. The text is extremely well organized and well focused in balancing back-
ground with detail. In addition, Ofosu-Appiah writes from a world view rather
than from a U. S.-oriented one, which is unusual in nonfiction published for young
people in this country. Most important, he never talks down to his audience but
writes with a succinct style that assumes a broad age range of readership without
becoming textbookish. The format itself is unimaginative, but the black-and-
white illustrations relieve a somewhat monotonous page design. The only real
drawback to the book is its rather striking lack of documentation, even to the
exclusion of a bibliography (sources for quotes are mentioned in the text, but with-
out page numbers). Ofosu-Appiah presents complex material with taut confi-
dence, however, and the book will be invaluable to students in its international
coverage and broad socio-economic perspective. BH
OGIWARA, NORIKO 
Dragon Sword and Wind Child; tr. by Cathy Hirano. 
Farrar,
1993 
32 9p
ISBN 0-374-30466-1 
$17.00 
M 
Gr. 7-12
Saya had been a wandering six-year-old orphan when she was adopted into the
little village of Hashiba. Now she is fifteen and old enough to accept a marriage
proposal. After she tells her friends that the only proposal she will accept is that of
the unattainable and immortal Prince Tsukishiro, Saya meets him in the forest.
She immediately agrees to travel back to his palace to become one of his many
handmaidens. This fantasy novel, based on Japanese mythology and legend, takes
Western readers through unfamiliar territory, where the People of Darkness are
the simple, homespun heroes who welcome death and the People of Light are the
amoral antagonists who "purify" themselves through human sacrifice. The blend
of Western high-fantasy conventions and Eastern mythology is unwieldy, and of-
ten the background legends are unclear, as when the prince, who is the Sun, and
his sister, the Moon, apparently give in to mythic passion for each other at the end
of every month. It is also peculiar that Saya, who in several previous lifetimes as
the Water Maiden has always killed herself by drowning, is in this lifetime so easily
distracted from suicide. Bouncing between timeless mythic figures, an elaborate
quest motif, and pop psychology ("He just doesn't know how to say no"), the
story, with its overwhelming number of elements, is confusing; on the other hand,
many fantasy fans enjoy the genre precisely because of such overelaboration. KJ
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
Dogs: The Wolf Within; illus. with photographs
by William Mufioz. 
Carolrhoda, 1993 
4 8p 
(Understanding Animals)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8614-691-4 
$14.96
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87614-604-3 
$7.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
This author-artist team's experience with books on various species makes for a
smooth production as they coordinate appealing full-color photographs with facts
on the origin, domestication, behavioral characteristics, and training potential of
dogs. The relationship between Canisfamiliaris and Canis lupus is Patent's theme,
and she draws frequent comparisons between the tame and the wild. Although
there's no systematic coverage of breeds, various ones do enter the discussion-for
356 
* THE BULLETIN
example, in the information on the differences between herding dogs, which are
bred to retain the wolf's chase instinct, and protecting dogs, which are bred to
guard a herd according to pack instincts. Supplemented with black-and-white
diagrammatic drawings, the photos on every page clarify points about canine body
language and contribute to a format that will lure young browsers. With a list of
books for further reading, a glossary, and an index, this is a bread-and-butter book
for the 500s shelf. BH
PATRON, SUSAN 
Maybe Yes, Maybe No, Maybe Maybe; illus. by Dorothy
Donahue. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
87p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08632-1 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05482-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
PK feels stuck, like the jam in a sandwich, between her older and younger sisters:
"On one side was Rabbit, worried about kindergarten and homework. On the
other side was Megan, with her perfect toes and her brilliant ideas." One of PK's
jobs is a nightly ritual of telling stories to Rabbit in the tub, stories PK divines from
the bathroom laundry hamper, "stories that rub off on to sheets and shirts and
jeans," and both girls are worried that their impending move to a new apartment
sans hamper will mean that the stories will be gone forever. Patron's writing is
clipped and clean, and while the book seems more like an exploration of a meta-
phor than it does fleshed-out realistic fiction (while PK talks about telling stories,
we never hear her do so), the relationships among the sisters give an emotional
charge to the abstract theme. RS
PILLING, ANN, comp. and ad. 
Realms of Gold: Myths and Legendsfrom Around the
World; illus. by Kady MacDonald Denton. 
Kingfisher, 1993 
93p
ISBN 1-85697-913-X 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The fourteen stories in this collection are loosely categorized into three sections-
"Earth, Air, Fire and Water," "Love and Death," and "Fools and Heroes." The
tales come from cultures as diverse as West Africa, the Pacific, Norway, and China;
also included are three more familiar tales from Greece ("Persephone," "King
Midas," and "How Perseus Killed the Gorgon"). Although some of the myths
typically lack a cohesive plot, the unfamiliar gods and simple style are an appealing
combination (". .. and here on Earth we know that Ga-oh the giant is having a
happy day"). Occasionally there is an awkward phrase (" ... and he loved Llewellyn's
baby son like a mother"). The watercolor and ink illustrations make for lively half-
pages and borders around a large-print, open text. Although there are no source
notes, this is an attractive book with enough variety of content to add to any
collection of folktales. KJ
PORTE, BARBARA ANN 
A Turkey Drive and Other Tales; illus. by Yossi
Abolafia. 
Greenwillow, 1993 
[6 4 p]
ISBN 0-688-11336-2 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Porte's storytelling family from Taxicab Tales (BCCB 6/92) is back with a new
bunch of anecdotal tales. Daddy the cab driver, Mom the artist, Abigail the narra-
tor, and her little brother Sam (plus a guest appearance by Grandpa and loyal
support from Benton the dog) spin fanciful stories at the drop of a hat. The stories
are fantastic yet homely, with constant reassertion of the storyteller's prerogative
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 
357
("The story doesn't tell that," Daddy firmly responds to a perfectly reasonable
question), and most of them are interestingly prompted by somebody's artwork.
They include exotic adventures, slightly fractured fables, and tall hometown tales,
all of which have a loopy luster that kids will relish as a readaloud or readalone.
Abolafia's cheerfully matter-of-fact line-and-wash drawings give the idiosyncratic
narrative a connection to the real world, but not too strong a one, so kids will still
be able to revel in the sheer pleasure of fiction. DS
ROSENBERG, Liz 
Monster Mama; illus. by Stephen Gammell. 
Philomel,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-399-21989-7 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 339.
SALSITZ, RHONDI VILOTT 
The Twilight Gate; illus. by Alan M. Clark. 
Walker,
1993 
181p
ISBN 0-8027-8213-2 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 6-8
When their widowed mother gets cancer, George, Leigh, and Mindy are sent to
stay with Mom's first husband, Dave Stoner. Older brother George has written
and illustrated a unicorn book to comfort his littlest sister, and the creatures from
the book start appearing in the woods around Stoner's cabin, both the good uni-
corn and the evil weevils (werewolf-men). Although the sinister weevils follow
and sometimes chase the children and their mother, they never quite catch them.
George learns that his drawing has power over the weevils, but Stoner is the real
hero of the book. Things get a little corny when Stoner wrestles with the King of
the weevils and learns that each member of the family has to make a sacrifice in
order to send the weevils away. Although the terror created by the weevils is truly
frightening, the ending is a let-down, even when the characters reveal their sacri-
fices. Middle sister Leigh "must give away her dreams." She tells the unicorn, "I
wanted a horse more than anything in the world. I wanted the freedom and the
beauty." More significantly, Mom "must give up living for dying." The black-
and-white illustrations are dark, intentionally horrific, and unintentionally lurid.
The author is trying to include too much (with a unicorn, werewolf-men, unre-
quited love), making for an awkward fantasy. KJ
SHREVE, SUSAN Joshua T. Bates Takes Charge; illus. by Dan Andreasen. 
Knopf,
1993 
102p
ISBN 0-394-84362-2 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Joshua T. Bates (of The Flunking ofJoshua T. Bates, BCCB 5/84) is in the fifth
grade now. His nemesis Tommy Wilhelm, apparently defeated at the end of the
last book, is back in full and virulent force ("Joshua needs his mommy! Joshua
needs his mommy!"), having formed the NOs-Nerds Out club-with Joshua as
the particular nerd to be excluded. Even harder hit than Joshua is an undersized
new boy, Sean, whom Joshua is supposed to show around. Needy little Sean,
who's dying to be friends with Joshua, is an easy target for the NOs, who make his
life a living hell while Joshua refuses to interfere or tell for fear of incurring Tommy
Wilhelm's wrath. The persecution is frightening and believable, but the resolu-
tion-where Joshua fetches Sean from where he's been tied up by the NOs, then
denounces Tommy in front of a special assembly to the cheers of his classmates-
is unlikely and too simple (although bullied kids may enjoy it as a wish-fulfill-
358 
* THE BULLETIN
ment), nor does it narratively balance the truly harrowing abuse Tommy's been
spewing for the rest of the book. One also wonders whether Tommy, like the
villain in a horror series, will rise again at the beginning of another sequel. Shreve's
sense of grade-school realism and angst makes most of this book taut, uneasy, and
authentic-it's too bad it doesn't get the ending it deserves. DS
SiY, ALEXANDRA 
The Eeyou: People of Eastern James Bay. 
Dillon,
1993 
80p 
illus. with photographs 
(Global Villages)
ISBN 0-87518-549-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The Eeyou, also known as the Cree, live in northern Quebec near the shores of the
Hudson Bay, and their traditional livelihood of hunting and fishing is now threat-
ened by massive plans by the Canadian government for hydroelectric develop-
ment. While Siy's book is informative about the history, problems, and customs
of the northern Canadian tribe of the Eeyou, the chapter titles ("A Rhythm of
Life," "The Ancient Drumbeat," "Respect for All") indicate yet another Rousseauian
vision of a monolithic Native American culture that lived in surpassing bliss until
the incursion of rapacious Europeans. This is not to deny the destructive effect
upon Native peoples by European colonization, nor the right of traditional groups
to determine their own destinies. But there's a sneaky ahistoricism at work here
that tells both Eeyou and Westerners to go back where they came from. Color
photos are plentiful but sometimes dark; activities, a reading list, a directory, and
an index are appended. RS
SPOONER, MICHAEL A Moon in Your Lunch Box; illus. by Ib Ohlsson. 
Holt,
1993 
6 4 p 
(Redfeather Books)
ISBN 0-8050-2209-0 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
These forty-three short poems are varied in style, tone, effects, and quality. Spooner
has a real flair for concrete poetry and his subject-shaped poems are the most in-
ventive, including "Bubblegum," "The First Mosquito," "Tonight the Moon,"
"Walking to School," "Trimming the Tree," and "Nancy's Navel." Also success-
ful are the funny rhymes, as in these verses about fireworks: "And don't drop them
on the/ baby; that's a/ very important rule.// She'll just stick them in her/ mouth,
you know,/ and cover them with drool." Some of the more serious poems get a
little sticky ("Let me close my eyes/ the way a tulip/ folds its petals,/ certain that
they'll open with the dawn"), and a few are too reminiscent of other poets' famous
work ("a hickety rickety white painted pickety. .. fence," of "The Pickety Fence"
by David McCord; "the moon/ is nothing but a giant butter cookie/ that gets
smaller/ bite by bite," of "The Moon's the North Wind's Cooky" by Vachel Lind-
say). On the whole, however, Spooner's got a sense of sight and sound that he
conveys with plenty of originality in his first poetry collection. Ohlsson's gray
drawings play off the navy-blue print with inventive ease, creating a skillfully de-
signed format to host the text. BH
TEWS, SUSAN 
Nettie's Gift; illus. by Elizabeth Sayles. 
Clarion, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-395-59027-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Sarah and her dog Barney walk in the cold autumn afternoon to Grandma Nettie's
farm. Grandma shows Sarah her favorite hickory tree in the same spot where she
had played when she was Sarah's age and then leaves Sarah to gather nuts. Sarah's
loneliness combines with her imagination to create a friend who might well have
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 
359
been her own grandmother when she was a child. Time seems to squeeze together
in this book to allow an opportunity to experience the present and past at once.
The solid, deep-hued but undetailed chalk illustrations and the present-tense tell-
ing of what is more reminiscence than story create a pleasant illusion bordering on
sentimentality. The bit of a trick at the end is Nettie's gift, which unites Sarah's
imaginary world and the reality of Grandma Nettie's warm kitchen. Combine
with Eric Houghton's The Backwards Watch (BCCB 10/92) to discuss the simi-
larities between imagination and fantasy. CAROL Fox
VAN DER LINDE, LAUREL 
The Pony Express. 
New Discovery, 1993 
72p 
illus.
with photographs 
(Timestop Books)
ISBN 0-02-759056-9 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
van der Linde explains the legendary and short-lived Pony Express in a way that
makes the world's enduring fascination with it understandable. 
She traces the
history of cross-country mail routes in the U.S., making it clear why the Pony
Express' comparatively quicker ten-day run was such an important advance; she
explains the poor judgment behind many postal endeavors of the time, including
the Pony Express itself (a large reason for the enterprise's short life); and then she
gets to the good stuff. Anecdotes of heroes, dangerous rides, skirmishes with Na-
tive Americans (with whom the army was at war), and celebratory hoopla make for
lively reading, and there's enough thought and attention to detail to complete the
picture (for instance, the author, an equestrian, points out how important the
ponies' feed was: "More than once, the grain-fed horses of the Pony Express saved
the lives of their riders by being able to outrun the grass-fed ponies of the Indi-
ans"). This is a thoroughly enjoyable account of an exciting piece of American
history, and it will bring the realities of the time into sharp focus for many young
readers. Period photographs of equipment, sample mail, and pony riders and
stations are scattered throughout; a bibliography and index are included. DS
WEGMAN, WILLIAM, ad. 
Cinderella; ad. by William Wegman with Carole Kismaric
and Marvin Heiferman and illus. with photographs by William
Wegman. 
Hyperion, 1993 
[4 0p] 
(Fay's Fairy Tales)
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-349-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-348-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
William Wegman and his wonderful Weimaraners tackle folklore with this canine
Cinderella. There's nothing new in the plot, but the pictorial characterization
speaks volumes: Cinderella's modest and long-suffering spirit has rarely been bet-
ter depicted, and this soulful and noble prince in military navy and gold braid puts
other handsome princes in the shade. There are some glitches in Wegman's elabo-
ration of the story-it's not clear why Cinderella prays over a broken teacup since
nothing seems to come of the prayer, we never hear what happens to the dress she's
apparently making for the ball, and we don't know why Cindy speaks Old French
to the prince. There's also occasional confusion in the photographs: some other
species are represented by dogs (a Weimaraner plays the rat in the cellar), some
species represent themselves, but not always (the cat presumably is playing a cat),
and sometimes the roles are taken by toys (fuzzy mice and rubber lizards); a few
smaller photographs are complicated images shrunk too small for their contents,
so that Cinderella's dropped slipper, for instance, is lost to view. Cinderella's
depressing life, however, is vividly portrayed as she slaves away under stag-at-bay
360 
* THE BULLETIN
tapestries and the baleful eye of the stepmother amid rooms filled with clashing
patterns. The overall effect, down to the plastic foliage and the Advent-calendar-
like castle scenes in the background, is one of watching dogs put on a play, but
they do it enjoyably. Much of this will slide past the usual Cinderella audience,
but readers who thought they were too old for fairy tales will get a kick out of both
the costumed dogs and the satire. DS
WESTHEIMER, DR. RuTH 
Dr. Ruth Talks to Kids: Where You Came From, How
Your Body Changes, and What Sex IsAllAbout; illus. by Diane deGroat. 
Macmillan,
1993 
96p
ISBN 0-02-792532-3 
$13.95 
R Gr. 4-7
With her trademark candid style and without talking down to her young audi-
ence, Dr. Ruth discusses body development and sexuality. Chapters with titles
such as "Your Body," "Sex and Other Kinds of Love," Contraception," Sexual
Abuse," and "How Babies Are Made" are clear and direct. Dr. Ruth believes that
kids should be comfortable with sexuality, theirs and their parents, and that par-
ents should respect their children's privacy. On the other hand, she advises her
readers that "sexual intercourse can lead to disappointment, even unhappiness, if
it's not warm, loving, and joyous. . . . It's such a powerful experience that no
teenagers I know are ready for it." This is just one example from an informative
book that is balanced evenly between openness and caution. Diane deGroat's
pencil illustrations show realistic contemporary kids, including nude drawings of a
developing male and female. Dr. Ruth tells her readers exactly what they want to
know, and an index and reading list add to the book's reference value. KJ
WILCOX, 
CHARLOTTE 
Mummies and Their Mysteries. Carolrhoda,
1993 
6 4 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-87614-767-8 
$17.21 
Gr. 4-8 
R*
This thoughtful photo-essay introduces children to a visible manifestation of death
that arouses compelling curiosity in almost all of us. Broader in scope than books
focusing on ancient Egypt only, Wilcox's account also includes mummies from
the Incan Empire, Native American burial caves and ice graves, Far Eastern tombs,
and European bogs. She describes the techniques of and reasons for mummifying
bodies to prepare for life after death, as well as the accidents that have preserved
bodies naturally. Her tone is respectful, and she addresses the controversial issue
of educational display and scientific research on bodies of persons who have been
revered in life and death by their own peoples. In connecting the emotional inten-
sity of her subject with facts about it, Wilcox deepens our level of engagement with
the information, even though it's limited to basics. Captioned, full-color photo-
graphs on every page inject rich personality into the discussion, while an open
format, arresting cover, and large print will encourage browsers to pick this up for
more than reports. A list of sites where mummies have been found and of muse-
ums where they can be seen concludes the text, which is indexed. BH
WOLFF, ASHLEY 
Stella & Roy; written and illus. by Ashley Wolff. Dutton,
1993 
[24 p]
ISBN 0-525-45081-5 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 3-5 yrs
And the race goes to the . .. slow and steady. Stella, who looks to be about five,
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 
361
challenges her little brother Roy to race to the park's popcorn stand, she on her
three-wheeler "built for speed," Roy on his little wooden four-wheeler "built for
coasting." Although Stella seems to be leaving Roy in the dust ("See you later,
alligator!") she periodically stops to savor the park's delights while Roy rolls right
along and beats big sister to the finish. The story will be especially satisfying for
younger sibs, but everybody will enjoy the visual feast of the park, a cozy paradise
of dogs and joggers, birds and squirrels, not to mention the edifying presence of a
turtle and rabbit. The bold outlining in Wolffs watercolor and linoleum block
paintings gives the pictures a solid security (and a stylish retro feeling) and intensi-
fies the alluring greens of the plant life as well as the bright red of Roy's coveralls
and the sky-blue of Stella's wheels. Perspectives are interestingly varied, with Roy's
view of the race appropriately low to the ground, and endpapers picturing the park
in its entirety are an irresistible invitation to visit. RS
WOLFF, VIRGINIA EUWER 
Make Lemonade. Holt, 1993 
200p
ISBN 0-8050-2228-7 
$15.95 
R* Gr. 7-10
LaVaughn, fourteen, has taken on an afterschool babysitting job for Jolly, a seven-
teen-year-old mother of two, and here's how it is: "The plates are pasted together
with noodles/ and these rooms smell like last week's garbage/ and there isn't a
place I can put my book to study for school/ except places where something else
already is." LaVaughn tells the story of her growing involvement with Jolly's fam-
ily through brief, one or two-page chapters of free verse, a daring and successful
experiment for Wolff, who got so neatly into the thought and speech patterns of a
mentally handicapped narrator in Probably Still Nick Swansen (BCCB 12/88).
LaVaughn is smart and determined to get to college, an ambition aggressively
promoted by her formidable mother. Yet even as she knows there are easier, bet-
ter-paying jobs than babysitting Jeremy (two) and Jilly (a baby), she feels drawn by
Jolly's immense need and rewarded by small epiphanies, as when Jilly crawls all the
way across the dirty kitchen floor for the first time: "I thought about how I was
blaming Jolly/ for having Jilly when she should know better,/ and then here comes
Jilly on her own steam/ all the way across the floor/ to land here like a boat nobody
expected." The poetic structure allows for such moments of unforced lyricism,
but it always flows naturally as speech and doesn't gloss over the dismal circum-
stances ofJolly's life, as when she's fired from her factory job after shoving a pencil
into the hand of a supervisor who's tried to molest her: "Do I hafta wear a SIGN/
says 'NO MORE MEN CLIMBIN' ALL OVER ME,/ LOOK WHAT YOU
DONE ALREADY?" This is tough stuff, and while it's occasionally preachy via
the words of LaVaughn's mother and teachers, the book as a whole remains faith-
ful to LaVaughn's insistent and original voice. RS
WYss, THELMA HATCH 
A Stranger Here. HarperCollins, 1993 
132p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021439-2 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021438-4 
$14.00 
M 
Gr. 6-9
Jada Sinclair doesn't mind spending the summer keeping house for her uncle and
bedridden aunt; it will give her a chance to think about her future, and how differ-
ent she feels from all the other teenage girls in her little Idaho town in 1960. She
soon becomes obsessed with her cousin's dead fiance, Starr Freeman, who was
killed in World War II on the day Jada was born. Starr begins to appear to her,
becoming someone to whom she can breathe her poetic thoughts, and who makes
362 
* 
THE BULLETIN
her feel romantic and unique ("Jada of the exquisite name," he murmurs) rather
than weird and out-of-step. 
While the idea of ghostly amour is appealing, the
characters here remain flat and uninvolving (Jada is a saintly/feisty romance hero-
ine), and the dialogue is stilted and inexplicably averse to contractions ("Did Miss
Millie not come on Saturday?"). The emotional undertones are shallow and con-
fusing: Jada's anxiety about her identity, based on a mild childhood mishap, seems
strained, and there's not much resolution to her visits with the shadowy Starr. It's
not a difficult book, and the components are intriguing, but both individually and
collectively they fail to satisfy; for a richer timeslip romance, try Ruth Park's Play-
ing Beatie Bow (BCCB 4/82). DS
YEP, LAURENCE, comp. 
American Dragons: Twenty-Five Asian American
Voices. 
HarperCollins, 1993 
237p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021495-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021494-5 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Yep breaks this collection of poems, stories, and one short play into thematic sec-
tions-Identity, World War II, In the Shadow of Giants, The Wise Child, Love,
and Guides-which helps to focus the varied voices contained here. He includes
work from the old and the young, the known (Maxine Hong Kingston and Jeanne
Wakatsuki Houston) and the unknown (ten of these stories, according to the copy-
right page, are making their first appearance). Viewpoints represented are those of
Asian Americans with differing ethnic origins: Tibetan Americans, Vietnamese
Americans, Chinese Americans, Korean Americans, Japanese Americans, Thai
Americans all speak about fitting in, growing up, and relating to previous genera-
tions. Young readers probably won't mind the tendency of some stories to be
overexplanatory and a little amateurish, since the thematic focus and sincerity of
emotion keeps the book together, providing a look across worlds and generations
through stories and poems such as Longhang Nguyen's "Rain Music," Lensey
Namioka's "Who's Hu," and Janice Mirikitani's "For My Father." Yep also in-
cludes a futuristic sci-fi story, William F. Wu's "Black Powder," which suggests
that our relationship to our origins and ancestors will remain even when we live in
space. Varied yet controlled, this is an East-meets-West collection that kids will
enjoy. DS
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 
363
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this new index, which
will appear in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In no way meant to be a cataloging aid, this rather
idiosyncratic index is instead intended to lead readers to those books that could fill
a particular gap in a collection, to help teachers and librarians find books that
might be useful in various school or recreational settings, and to help in those
requests for a "love story" or a "scary story." In the case of subject headings, the
subhead "stories" refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those
books intended for independent reading.
African Americans-biography:
Myers
African Americans-fiction: Lipsyte;
Marino
African Americans-history: Ofusu-
Appiah
African Americans-stories:
Hopkinson
Alcoholism-fiction: Conly
Animal rights: McCoy
Archeology: Wilcox
Art history: Fischetto
Asian Americans-fiction: Yep
Aunts-fiction: Murphy
Babysitting-fiction: Murphy;
Wolff, A.
Bedouin: King
BEDTIME STORIES: Melmed
BIOGRAPHIES: Anderson;
Fischetto; Mohr; Myers;
Nichols
Biology: McCoy
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Adler;
Hughes
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Heymans; Wolff, A.
Bullies-fiction: Shreve
Bullies-stories: Rosenberg
Cambodian Americans: Graff
Cancer-fiction: Lance
Chickens-fiction: Fine
Chinese Americans: Fraser
Cows-stories: Johnson
Death-fiction: Adler; Salsitz
Death-stories: Heymans
Depression, The: Mohr
Dogs: Patent
Dogs-fiction: Wegman
Ecology: Carrick
Ethics and values: McCoy
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Kherdian;
Kimmel; Pilling; Wegman
FANTASY: Fine; Griffin; Jacques;
Jones; Ogiwara; Salsitz
Farm life-fiction: Jam
Farm life-stories: Lindgren
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Marino
Fires-fiction: Jam
Food and eating-fiction: Conford;
Fine
France-folklore: Kimmel
GHOST STORIES: Cullen; Wyss
HISTORICAL FICTION: Avi
History, U. S.: Fraser; Hopkinson;
Mohr; Myers; Nichols; Van der
Linde
History: Ofusu-Appiah
Horses: Van der Linde
Horses-fiction: Haas
Immigrants: Fraser; Graff
Japan-fiction: Ogiwara
Literature, American: Anderson
LOVE STORIES: Wyss
Mental retardation-fiction: Conly
364 
* THE BULLETIN
Mothers and sons: Rosenberg
Mothers, teenaged-fiction: Wolff,
V.
Mummies: Wilcox
Native Americans: Siy
Native Americans-fiction: Lipsyte
Nature study: Landau; Patent
New York City: Mohr
New York City-fiction: Lance
Nomads: King
NURSERY RHYMES: Mother
Goose
Orphans-fiction: Griffin
Parks-stories: Wolff, A.
Pet care: Landau
POETRY: Janeczko; Spooner;
Wolff, A.
Pony Express: Van der Linde
Puerto Ricans-biography: Mohr
Railroads: Fraser
Reading aloud: Porte
Reading, easy: Conford; Fine;
Haas; Mohr
Reading, family: Leach; Melmed
Reading, reluctant: Myers; Wolff,
A.
Religious education: Nichols
Safety education: Landau
School-fiction: Shreve
SCIENCE FICTION: Hughes
Sex education: Westheimer
Story hour: Johnson; Kimmel;
Lindgren; Mother Goose;
Pilling; Rosenberg; Wolff, A.
SHORT STORIES: Jones; Yep
Sisters-fiction: Lance; Patron
Slavery: Ofusu-Appiah
Slavery-stories: Hopkinson
Social studies: King; Siy
SPORTS STORIES: Lipsyte
Stepparents-stories: Leach
Storytelling-fiction: Patron; Porte
Summer-fiction: Murphy
Sweden-stories: Lindgren
Television-fiction: Conford
Texas-fiction: Griffin
Theater-fiction: Avi
Time travel-fiction: Griffin
Whales: Carrick
Women's studies: Nichols
Q
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 365
THE
B UL LE T
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
AUTHOR/TITLE INDEX, VOLUME 46
SEPTEMBER, 1992-JULY/AUGUST, 1993
13th Clue. Jonas. 75.
A to Zen. Wells. 127.
Aardema. Anansi Finds a Fool. 138.
Aaseng. Locker Room Mirror. 306.
.Navajo Code Talkers. 104.
Acquainted with the Night. Hotze. 75.
Action Figures. Young. 230.
Ada. My Name Is Maria Isabel. 306.
Adam Mouse's Book of Poems. Moore. 221.
Addie's Long Summer. Lawlor. 78.
Adler, C. Daddy's Climbing Tree. 340.
Adler, D. Picture Book of Anne Frank. 204.
Adrift. Baillie. 5.
Aesop. Town Mouse and the Country Mouse.
138.
Afanasiev. Salt. 139.
Afraid of Hawk. Boy Becomes a Man at
Wounded Knee. 127.
Africa Brothers and Sisters. Kroll. 255.
Africa's Struggle for Independence.
Halliburton. 178.
Agee. Go Hang a Salami. 34.
Ahlberg. Bear Nobody Wanted. 307.
Ajeemah and His Son. Berry. 69.
Al Capsella Takes a Vacation. Clarke. 242.
Albatross. Cousteau Society. 279.
Alberic the Wise. Juster. 180.
Albion's Dream. Norman. 82.
Alborough. Where's My Teddy? 4.
Alcock. Singer to the Sea God. 168.
Alessandra in Between. Kaplow. 180.
Alex in Rome. Duder. 9.
Alexander, B. Inuit. 274.
Alexander, L. Fortune-Tellers. 4.
Alexander, S. Mom's Best Friend. 168.
Ali and the Golden Eagle. Grover. 281.
Ali Baba Bernstein: Lost and Found. Hurwitz.
14.
Alice Dodd and the Spirit of Truth. Murphy.
353.
Alice in April. Naylor. 222.
Alice. Goldberg. 176.
Aliki. Communication. 275.
Alitji in Dreamland. Sheppard. 190.
All for the Better. Mohr. 353.
All Pigs Are Beautiful. King-Smith. 286.
Allen, Jonathan. Who's at the Door? 275.
Allen, Judy. Tiger. 66.
. Whale. 275.
Allen, L. Rollo and Tweedy and the Ghost at
Dougal Casde. 5.
Almost Goodbye. Cresswell. 8.
Alphabeasts. King-Smith. 115.
Alphabet Soup. Gabler. 175.
Amazing Grace. Hoffman. 14.
Amazing Rescues. Shea. 88.
Amenta. Russell Is Extra Special. 104.
American Army of Two. Greeson. 112.
American Dragons. Yep. 362.
Amish Home. Bial. 277.
Amy Elizabeth Explores Bloomingdale's.
Konigsburg. 16.
Amzat and His Brothers. Fox. 210.
Anansi Finds a Fool. Aardema. 138.
Ancient One. Barron. 139.
Ancona. Powwow. 276.
Anderson, M. Edgar Allan Poe. 340.
Anderson, R. Bus People. 35.
Anderson, W. Laura Ingalls Wilder. 105.
Andryszewski. Dust Bowl. 276.
IN
366 
* THE BULLETIN
Angell. Yours Truly. 238.
Animals in Research. McCoy. 351.
Animals. Mado. 184.
Annie... Anya. Trivas. 56.
Annie's Promise. Levitin. 216.
Antarctica. Pringle. 51.
Anyplace but Here. Switzer. 124.
Arctic Spring. Vyner. 331.
Arctic Summer. Matthews. 324.
Are You Flying, Charlie Duncan? O'Donnell.
326.
Arithmetic. Sandburg. 263.
Arnold, C. Dinosaurs All Around. 239.
Arnold, T. Green Wilma. 169.
Art of the Handmade Book. Fennimore. 174.
Asbjornsen. Day Hans Got His Way. 5.
. East o' the Sun and West o' the
Moon. 139.
Askounis. Dream of the Stone. 307.
Assateague. Jauck. 283.
At Christmastime. Worth. 128.
Atwell. Day Hans Got His Way. 5.
Auch. Out of Step. 169.
Aunt Harriet's Underground Railroad in the
Sky. Ringgold. 121.
Author's Day. Pinkwater. 262.
Avalanche. Kramer. 16.
Avi. "Who Was that Masked Man, Anyway?".
35.
. Punch with Judy. 341.
Ayer. Margaret Bourke-White. 67.
Ayres. Matreshka. 67.
Babbitt. Where the Truth Lies. 239-
Baby Alicia Is Dying. McDaniel. 287.
Baby Blues. Wurmfeld. 58.
Back Home. Pinkney. 21.
Backwards Watch. Houghton. 44.
Backyard Ghost. Cullen. 342.
Bad Times, Good Friends. Vogel. 91.
Baillie. Adrift. 5.
.Bawshou Rescues the Sun. 25.
Bakken. Fields and the Hills. 67.
Banks. Mystery of the Cupboard. 307.
Bannatyne-Cugnet. Prairie Alphabet. 105.
Barasch. Rodney's Inside Story. 36.
Bard of Avon. Stanley. 123.
Bare. This Is a House. 6.
Barn Owls. Epple. 144.
Barrett. Nat Turner and the Slave Revolt.
240.
Barron. Ancient One. 139.
Bartone. Peppe the Lamplighter. 277.
Baseball Saved Us. Mochizuki. 290.
Baseball's Biggest Bloopers. Gutman. 316.
Bauer. Squashed. 36.
Baumann. Hungry One. 204.
Bawden. Humbug. 68.
Bawshou Rescues the Sun. Yeh. 25.
Beach for the Birds. McMillan. 322.
Bear Nobody Wanted. Ahlberg. 307.
Beasts of Bethlehem. Kennedy. 115.
Beatty. Who Comes with Cannons? 36.
Beauty and the Beast. Willard. 94.
Becca's Story. Forman. 175.
Bechard. Tory and Me and the Spirit of True
Love. 37.
Bedard. Emily. 140.
Bedouin. King. 349.
Begay. Ma'ii and Cousin Horned Toad. 37.
Behind the Secret Window. Toll. 227.
Beirne. Riders Up! 38.
. Siobhan's Journey. 240.
Belles of the Ballpark. Helmer. 282.
Belting. Moon Was Tired of Walking on Air.
140.
Bendick. Eureka! It's an Automobile! 68.
. Tombs of the Ancient Americans.
277.
. Eureka! It's an Airplane! 68.
Benny and the No-Good Teacher. Zach. 161.
Berger. Where Are the Stars During the Day?
240.
. Where Did Your Family Come From?
240.
. Whole World in Your Hands. 240.
Bernhard. Spotted Eagle & Black Crow. 308.
Bernos de Gasztold. Prayers from the Ark.
105.
Berry. Ajeemah and His Son. 69.
. Future-Telling Lady. 205.
Best Girl. Smith. 225.
Best Wishes. Rylant. 19.
Betancourt. My Name Is Brain Brian. 241.
Beware the Mare. Haas. 345.
Bial. Amish Home. 277.
Bible. Messiah. 69.
. Story of the Creation. 205.
Bierhorst. Woman Who Fell from the Sky.
278.
Big Alfie Out of Doors Storybook. Hughes.
45.
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 
367
Big Lie. Leitner. 150.
Big Men, Big Country. Walker. 332.
Biggest Klutz in Fifth Grade. Wallace. 159.
Billy the Great. Guy. 146.
Birdseye. Soap! Soap! Don't'Forget the Soap!
308.
Blabbermouths. Mantinband 18.
Black Like Kyra, White Like Me. Vigna. 57.
Blackman. Girl Wonder and the Terrific
Twins. 205.
Blacksmith and the Devils. Brusca. 107.
Blessed Are You. Edwards. 245.
Block. Cherokee Bat and the Goat Guys. 6.
Blue Skin of the Sea. Salisbury. 22.
Blumberg. Jumbo. 141.
Boggart. Cooper. 208.
Boice. If You Find a Baby Bird. 170.
Bolden. Mama, I Want to Sing. 13.
Bone from a Dry Sea. Dickinson. 208.
Boodil My Dog. Lindenbaum. 116.
Bootsie Barker Bites. Bottner. 6.
Both Sides Now. Mitchell. 19.
Bottner. Bootsie Barker Bites. 6.
Boy Becomes a Man at Wounded Knee.
Wood. 127.
Boy Who Lived with the Seals. Martin. 323.
Boyd. Chevrolet Saturdays. 309.
Boys Start the War. Naylor. 260.
Bradshaw. Land of Gold. 38.
Brand Is Forever. Scott. 263.
Break with Charity. Rinaldi. 22.
Breast Implants. Gay. 314.
Breathed. Last Basselope. 141.
Bremen Town Musicians. Grimm. 73.
Bresnick-Perry. Leaving for America. 170.
Brett. Trouble with Trolls. 106.
Bridgers. Keeping Christina. 309.
Bridges of Summer. Seabrooke. 53.
Brightest Light. McKenna. 183.
Brimner. Migrant Family. 38.
Broody Hen. Dunrea. 71.
Brooke. Untold Tales. 7.
Brooks. What Hearts. 106.
Brown, J. Almost Goodbye. 8.
Brown, P. Moon Jump. 206.
Browne. Zoo. 206.
Brusca. Blacksmith and the Devils. 107.
Bryan. Sing to the Sun. 39.
Bubble Trouble. Mahy. 80.
Bull Run. Fleischman. 210.
Buller. Mike and the Magic Cookies. 39.
Bunting. Coffin on a Case. 69.
Burgie. Caribbean Carnival. 141.
Bury My Bones But Keep My Words.
Fairman. 245.
Bus People. Anderson. 35.
But No Candy. Houston. 148.
Byars. Coast to Coast. 107.
Cactus. Lerner. 48.
Calabro. Zap! 206.
Calamity Jane. Faber. 71.
California Demon. Singer. 191.
Call. Westall. 159.
Camp Murphy. McKenna. 218.
Captain Cat. Hoff. 318.
Carey. Tsugele's Broom. 207.
Caribbean Carnival. Burgie. 141.
Carl's Masquerade. Day. 109.
Carle. Draw Me a Star. 107.
Carlstrom. Northern Lullaby. 40.
Carmine the Crow. Holder. 148.
Carpenter. L. Frank Baum. 7.
Carrick. Whaling Days. 341.
Carris. Stolen Bones. 309.
Caseley. Chloe in the Know. 241.
.My Father, the Nutcase. 170.
.Sophie and Sammy's Library
Sleepover. 310.
Cassedy. Zoomrimes. 310.
Cavan. Irish-American Experience. 242.
Cavanagh. Panther Glade. 278.
Cech. First Snow, Magic Snow. 69.
Cervantes. Don Quixote and Sancho Panza.
171.
Charbonnet. Boodil My Dog. 116.
Charlie Parker Played Be Bop. Raschkas. 121.
Chef. Florian. 110.
Cherokee Bat and the Goat Guys. Block. 6.
Cherokee Summer. Hoyt-Goldsmith. 252.
Chevrolet Saturdays. Boyd. 309.
Chi-Hoon. McMahon. 288.
Chicken Bucks. Sharpe. 88.
Chicken Gave It to Me. Fine. 343.
Chief. Lipsyte. 351.
Children of Bach. Dillon. 143.
Children of Clay. Swentzell. 226.
Children of the Dust Bowl. Stanley. 55.
Chloe in the Know. Caseley. 241.
Chocolate. My First Kwanzaa Book. 171.
. NEATET
M
to the Rescue! 207.
368 * THE BULLETIN
.Spider and the Sky God. 142
.Talk, Talk. 142
Choi. Echoes of the White Giraffe. 311.
Christmas Witch. Kellogg. 15.
Church Mice and the Ring. Oakley. 119.
Cinderella. Wegman. 359.
Circus Girl. Garland. 247.
Clambake. Peters. 84.
Clark. Endangered Florida Panther. 279.
Clarke. Al Capsella Takes a Vacation. 242.
. Riffraff. 171.
Clifford. Flatfoot Fox and the Case of the
Nosy Otter. 70.
Climo. Korean Cinderella. 311.
Close to Home. Weaver. 266.
Coast to Coast. Byars. 107.
Coerr. Mieko and the Fifth Treasure. 242.
Coffin on a Case. Bunting. 69.
Cole. Magic School Bus on the Ocean Floor.
108.
Coleman. Dreams of Hummingbirds. 242.
Communication. Aliki. 275.
Compost Critters. Lavies. 319.
Compton. Jack the Giant Chaser. 311.
Conford. Nibble, Nibble, Jenny Archer. 342.
Conlon-McKenna. Wildflower Girl. 142.
Conly. Crazy Lady! 342.
Conover. Sam Panda and the Thunder
Dragon. 172.
Conrad. Lost Sailor. 40.
Cookies. Jaspersohn. 253.
Cooney. Operation: Homefront. 108.
Cooper, I. New, Improved Gretchen
Hubbard. 70.
Cooper, K. Why Do You Speak as You Do?
172.
Cooper, S. Boggart. 208.
Cormier. Tunes for Bears to Dance To. 8.
Cotton Mill Town. Hershey. 213.
Cousteau Society. Albatross. 279.
. Manatees. 279.
___ . Otters. 279.
.Whales .279.
Cow Who Wouldn't Come Down. Johnson.
348.
Cowgirl. McGregor. 183.
Coyote Steals the Blanket. Stevens. 296.
Crazy Lady! Conly. 342.
Crespo. How the Sea Began. 312.
Cresswell. Almost Goodbye. 8.
Crews. Shortcut. 40.
Cross, G. Great American Elephant Chase.
312.
Cross, V. Great-Grandma Tells of Threshing
Day. 142.
Crowley. Shack and Back. 243.
Crutcher. Staying Fat for Sarah Byrnes. 244.
Crystal Drop. Hughes. 346.
Cullen. Backyard Ghost. 342.
Cummings. Petey Moroni's Camp Runamok
Diary. 41.
Cut From the Same Cloth. San Souci. 328.
Cwiklik. Stokely Carmichael and Black
Power. 279.
Czernecki. Sleeping Bread. 8.
Daddy's Climbing Tree. Adler. 340.
Daniel's Story. Matas. 289.
Dark-Thirty. McKissack. 117.
Darling. Tasmanian Devil. 41.
Dasent. East o' the Sun and West o' the
Moon. 139.
Davis. If Rock and Roll Were a Machine.
108.
Davol. Heart of the Wood. 173.
Day Adam Got Mad. Lindgren. 351.
Day Hans Got His Way. Asbjornsen. 5.
Day on the Boat with Captain Betty. Murez.
291.
Day. Carl's Masquerade. 109.
de Brebeuf. Huron Carol. 109.
Dear Dr. Bell. St. George. 192.
Dear Mom, in Ohio for a Year. Stowe. 158.
Dear Napoleon, I Know You're Dead, But.. .
Woodruff. 128.
Dear Nobody. Doherty. 143.
Deaver. You Bet Your Life. 313.
Deer Stand. Monson. 186.
DeFelice. Devil's Bridge. 70.
Definitely Cool. Wilkinson. 229.
dePaola. Jingle the Christmas Clown. 42.
___. Tom. 280.
Devil's Bridge. DeFelice. 70.
DeVito. Where I Want to Be. 313.
Dewey. Spiders Near and Far. 313.
Diary of Latoya Hunter. Hunter 114.
Dickinson. Bone from a Dry Sea. 208.
Diego Rivera. Neimark. 154.
Dillon, B. My Stepfather Shrank! 109.
Dillon, E. Children of Bach. 143.
Dinosaurs All Around. Arnold. 239.
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 
369
Do-Over. Vail. 125.
Doctor De Soto Goes to Africa. Steig. 24.
Dog Came, Too. Manson. 220.
Dogs. Patent. 355.
Doherty. Dear Nobody. 143.
. Snowy. 209.
Dolls. Young. 230.
Dolphin. Neve Shalom/Wahat al-Salam. 244.
Don Quixote and Sancho Panza. Cervantes.
171.
Don't You Know There's a War On?
Stevenson. 89.
Dorris. Morning Girl. 42.
Double Vision. Hendry. 317.
Dove. Stewart. 265.
Down Came a Blackbird. Wilde. 197.
Doyle. Knight's Wyrd. 173.
Dr. Gravity. Haseley. 147.
Dr. Ruth Talks to Kids. Westheimer. 360.
Dragon Sword and Wind Child. Ogiwara.
355.
Dragon's Bait. Vande Velde. 126.
Dragon's Pearl. Lawson. 287.
Draw Me a Star. Carle. 107.
Dreadful Sorry. Reiss. 294.
Dream of the Stone. Askounis. 307.
Dream Spinner. Hoppe. 74.
Dreamplace. Lyon. 216.
Dreams of Hummingbirds. Coleman. 242.
Dresses of Red and Gold. Klein. 286.
Drifting Snow: Arctic Search. Houston. 149.
Drucker. Kindertransport. 144.
Drylongso. Hamilton. 43.
Duder. Alex in Rome. 9.
Dunrea. Broody Hen. 71.
Dust Bowl. Andryszewski. 276.
Earliest Americans. Sattler. 329.
Earthquake! Kudlinski. 286.
East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon.
Asbjornsen. 139.
Echoes of the White Giraffe. Choi. 311.
Edgar Allan Poe. Anderson. 340.
Edwards. Blessed Are You. 245.
Eeyou. Siy. 358.
Egg and Seven Socks. Mathews. 323.
Ehlert. Moon Rope. 110.
_ 
. Nuts to You. 245.
Ehrlich. Lucy's Winter Tale. 144.
Elephant Have Right of Way. Leslie-Melville.
17.
Elephant's Wrestling Match. Sierra. 190.
Elijah's Angel. Rosen. 86.
Ellis Island Christmas. Leighton. 16.
Emberley. Go Away, Big Green Monster! 209.
Emily. Bedard. 140.
Emmy. Green. 176.
Endangered Florida Panther. Clark. 279.
Ende. Night of Wishes. 174.
Epple. Barn Owls. 144.
Ernst. Zinnia and Dot. 9.
Eureka! It's an Airplane! Bendick. 68
Eureka! It's an Automobile! Bendick. 68.
Everyone Poops. Gomi. 250.
Ewing. Family Karate. 71.
Exiles. McKay. 80.
Eye for Color. Silver. 225.
Eyes of Kid Midas. Shusterman. 157.
Faber. Calamity Jane: Her Life and Legend.
71.
Fairman. Bury My Bones But Keep My
Words. 245.
Falwell. Feast for 10. 314.
Family Karate. Ewing. 71.
Fantastic Stories. Jones. 284.
Farmer. Thicker than Water. 209.
Father and Son. Lauture. 150.
Feast for 10. Falwell. 314.
Feathers and Tails. Kherdian. 180.
Fennimore. Art of the Handmade Book. 174.
Ferguson. Stardust. 246.
Fields and the Hills. Bakken. 67.
Finding My Voice. Lee. 47.
Fine. Chicken Gave It to Me. 343.
Fire Children. Maddern. 322.
Fire-Raiser. Gee. 111.
First Snow, Magic Snow. Cech. 69.
First Song Ever Sung. Melmed. 352.
First Tomato. Wells. 126.
Fischer. Where Are My Birth Parents? 315.
Fischetto. Michael the Angel. 343.
Fish & Bones. Prather. 188.
Fisher. Galileo. 9.
Fitcher's Bird. Grimm. 212.
Flatfoot Fox and the Case of the Nosy Otter.
Clifford. 70.
Fledglings. Markle. 18.
Fleischman. Bull Run. 210.
.Townsend's Warbler. 10.
Fleming. Lunch. 110.
Flight of the Doves. Macken. 49.
370 
* THE BULLETIN
Florian. Chef. 110.
Flying Free. Hart. 112.
Fool's Gold. Snyder. 226.
Fool's Hill. Hall. 12.
Fool's War. Kisling. 181.
For Every Child, a Better World. Kermit the
Frog. 318.
For the Life of Laetitia. Hodge. 213.
For the Love of Pete. Marino. 352.
Forman. Becca's Story. 175.
Fortune-Tellers. Alexander. 4.
Fox on Stage. Marshall. 153.
Fox. Amzat and His Brothers. 210.
Frank Thompson. Stevens. 123.
Frankenstein's Hamster. Griffiths. 11.
Fraser. Ten Mile Day. 344.
Freedom's Children. Levine. 216.
French. Once Upon a Time. 246.
Fritz. World in 1492. 111.
From Archetype to Zeitgeist. Kohl. 115.
Funny You Should Ask. Terban. 193.
Future-Telling Lady. Berry. 205.
Gabler. Alphabet Soup. 175.
Galileo. Fisher. 9.
Gardner. Henry Moore. 246.
Garland, M. Circus Girl. 247.
Garland, S. Silent Storm. 247.
Garth Pig Steals the Show. Rayner. 327.
Gay. Breast Implants. 314.
Gee. Fire-Raiser. 111.
Geisert. Pigs from 1 to 10. 176.
Geller. Who's On First? 72.
George on His Own. Lawlor. 320.
Geras. Pictures of the Night. 248.
_ 
.. Watching the Roses. 111.
Gerson. Why the Sky Is Far Away. 42.
Gerstein. Story of May. 248.
Get On Board. Haskins. 213.
Get the Message. Skurzynski. 295.
Getting Rid of Rhoda. Littke. 217.
Ghost of Popcorn Hill. Wright. 333.
Ghost of Whispering Rock. Robinson. 156.
Ghost Song. Price. 155.
Gibbons. Say Woof. 10.
_ 
. Stargazers. 145.
Gift of the Nile. Mike. 142.
Gikow. For Every Child, a Better World. 318.
Gilgamesh the King. Zeman. 160.
Gilmore. Jason and the Bard. 280.
Girl Who Changed Her Fate. Marshall. 153.
Girl Who Loved Caterpillars. Merrill. 82.
Girl Wonder and the Terrific Twins.
Blackman. 205.
Giver. Lowry. 257.
Glass Angels. Hill. 73.
Gleeson. Koi and the Kola Nuts. 211.
Gleitzman. Misery Guts. 249.
. Worry Warts. 249.
Go Ask Giorgio! Wittmann. 95.
Go Away, Big Green Monster! Emberley. 209.
Go Hang a Salami, I'm a Lasagna Hog. Agee.
34.
Goble. Lost Children. 315.
. Love Flute. 112.
Godden. Great Grandfather's House. 249.
.Listen to the Nightingale. 72.
. Prayers from the Ark. 105.
Going to See Grassy Ella. Lance. 350.
Goldberg. Alice. 176.
Goldin. Magician's Visit. 223.
Golem and the Dragon Girl. Levitin. 321.
Gomi. Everyone Poops. 250.
Gonna Sing My Head Off! Krull. 47.
Good-bye to the Trees. Shiefman. 264.
Goodbye, Vietnam. Whelan. 57.
Gopher Takes Heart. Scribner. 224.
Gottlieb. Seeing Eye Willie. 43.
Grab Hands and Run. Temple. 265.
Graff. Where the River Runs. 344.
Grandaddy and Janetta. Griffith. 250.
Grant. Shadow Man. 145.
Grass Songs. Turner. 331.
Gravelle. Where Are My Birth Parents? 315.
Great American Elephant Chase. Cross. 312.
Great Deeds of Heroic Women. Saxby. 156.
Great Grandfather's House. Godden. 249.
Great Peace March. Near. 261.
Great Rabbit and the Long-tailed Wildcat.
Gregg. 316.
Great-Grandma Tells of Threshing Day.
Cross. 142.
Great-Uncle Dracula. Harvey. 113.
Greek Myths for Young Children. Williams.
94.
Green Beans. Thomas. 195.
Green Wilma. Arnold. 169.
Green. Emmy. 176.
Greene, Carol. Reading about the Peregrine
Falcon. 281.
__. Reading about the River Otter. 281.
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 371
Greene, Constance C. Odds on Oliver. 211.
Greenwald. Rosy Cole Discovers America!
146.
Greeson. American Army of Two. 112.
Gregg. Great Rabbit and the Long-tailed
Wildcat. 316.
Gregory. Happy Burpday, Maggie McDougal!
11.
Griffin. Switching Well. 345.
___. Treasure Bird. 177.
Griffith. Grandaddy and Janetta. 250.
Griffiths. Frankenstein's Hamster. 11.
Grim and Ghastly Goings-on. Heide. 12.
Grimm. Bremen Town Musicians. 73.
_ Fitcher's Bird. 212.
. One Gift Deserves Another. 11.
Grover. Ali and the Golden Eagle. 281.
Gutman. Baseball's Biggest Bloopers. 316.
Guy. Billy the Great. 146.
Gypsyworld. Thompson. 24.
Haas. Beware the Mare. 345.
.Skipping School. 177.
Hahn. Wind Blows Backward. 281.
Haley. Mountain Jack Tales. 146.
Hall, B. Fool's Hill. 12.
Hall, L. Windsong. 177.
Halliburton. Africa's Struggle for Indepen-
dence. 178.
Hamilton. Drylongso. 43.
.Many Thousand Gone. 212.
Han. Sir Whong and the Golden Pig. 316.
Hang Out the Flag. Marko. 184.
Happy Birthday, Martin Luther King.
Marzollo. 185.
Happy Burpday, Maggie McDougal! Gregory.
11.
Harmony Arms. Koertge. 77.
Harris. Solay. 317.
Harrison. Twilight Struggle. 12.
Hart. Flying Free. 112.
Hartman. Silliest Joke Book Ever. 250.
Harvey, D. Secret Elephant of Harlan Kooter.
113.
Harvey, J. Great-Uncle Dracula. 113.
Haseley. Dr. Gravity. 147.
Haskins. Get On Board. 213.
Hausherr. What Instrument Is This? 44.
Hautzig. Riches. 148.
Heart of the Wood. Davol. 173.
Heath. Sofie's Role. 114.
Heide. Grim and Ghastly Goings-on. 12.
Heiferman. Cinderella. 359.
Helfman. On Being Sarah. 178.
Helmer. Belles of the Ballpark. 282.
Hendry. Double Vision. 317.
Henkes. Words of Stone. 114.
Henry Moore. Gardner. 246.
Henry. Misty's Twilight. 13.
Here Comes the Mail. Skurzynski. 23.
Hero of Lesser Causes. Johnston. 254.
Hershey. Cotton Mill Town. 213.
Heslewood. Introducing Picasso. 282.
Hesse. Letters from Rifka. 44.
Hest. Weekend Girl. 251.
Hewett. Tiger, Tiger, Growing Up. 282.
Hey You, Sister Rose. Strauch. 265.
Heymans. Princess in the Kitchen Garden.
345.
Higginsen. Mama, I Want to Sing. 13.
Highest Form of Killing. Rose. 52.
Hill. Glass Angels. 73.
Hindley. Piece of String Is a Wonderful
Thing. 283.
Hinton. Ishi's Tale of Lizard. 73.
Hirschfelder. Rising Voices. 13.
Hiser. Sixth-Grade Star. 178.
Hodge. For the Life of Laetitia. 213.
Hodges. Don Quixote and Sancho Panza.
171.
Hoff. Captain Cat. 318.
Hoffman. Amazing Grace. 14.
Hol. Tippy Bear's Christmas. 74.
Holder. Carmine the Crow. 148.
Holocaust Lady. Sender. 54.
Hoofbeats. McFarland. 258.
Hopkins. Questions. 14.
. Through Our Eyes. 179.
Hopkinson. Sweet Clara and the Freedom
Quilt. 346.
Hoppe. Dream Spinner. 74.
Hopper. I Was a Fifth-Grade Zebra. 251.
Hotze. Acquainted with the Night. 75.
Houghton. Backwards Watch. 44.
House That Jack Built. Mother Goose. 353.
Houses. Morris. 118.
Houston, G. But No Candy. 148.
Houston, J. Drifting Snow. 149.
How a Shirt Grew in the Field. Ushinsky. 91.
How an Airport Really Works. Sullivan. 297.
How It Feels To Live With a Physical
Disability. Krementz. 46.
372 
* THE BULLETIN
How the Sea Began. Crespo. 312.
Hoyt-Goldsmith. Cherokee Summer. 252.
Hudson. Pass It On. 252.
Hughes, M. Crystal Drop. 346.
Hughes, S. Big Alfie Out of Doors Storybook.
45.
Hull. Prose Anthology of the Second World
War. 283.
Humbug. Bawden. 68.
Hummingbirds. Tyrrell. 195.
Hungry One. Baumann. 204.
Hunter. Diary of Latoya Hunter. 114.
Huron Carol. de Br6beuf. 109.
Hurwitz. Ali Baba Bernstein: Lost and Found.
14.
.Up & Down Spring. 252.
I Hate My Hero. Shannon. 87.
I Speak for the Women. McPherson. 218.
I Spy Christmas. Marzollo. 81.
I Spy. Micklethwait. 186.
I Was a Fifth-Grade Zebra. Hopper. 251.
I Was a Teenage Professional Wrestler. Lewin.
321.
I'll See You in My Dreams. Jukes. 285.
I'm Not Telling. Thesman. 194.
Ice Cream Store. Lee. 116.
If It Hadn't Been for Yoon Jun. Lee. 256.
If Rock and Roll Were a Machine. Davis.
108.
If You Find a Baby Bird. Boice. 170.
If Your Name Was Changed at Ellis Island.
Levine. 256.
In My Father's House. Rinaldi. 223.
In the Month of Kislev. Jaffe. 75.
In the Time of Trouble. Weaver-Gelzer. 228.
Ingoglia. Sacajawea and the Journey to the
Pacific. 179.
Inside the Zoo Nursery. Smith. 191.
Introducing Picasso. Heslewood. 282.
Inuit. Alexander. 274.
Invisible Dog. King-Smith. 255.
Irish-American Experience. Cavan. 242.
Iroquois. Wolfson. 298.
Irwin. Original Freddie Ackerman. 15.
Isadora. Lili at Ballet. 253.
Ishi's Tale of Lizard. Hinton. 73.
Island Christmas. Joseph. 76.
Island Light. Wells. 126.
It's Hard to Read a Map with a Beagle on
Your Lap. Singer. 330.
Jack Creek Cowboy. Johnson. 214.
Jack the Giant Chaser. Compton. 311.
Jacques. Salamandastron. 346.
Jaffe. In the Month of Kislev. 75.
Jake. Jones. 149.
Jam. Year of Fire. 347.
Janeczko. Looking for Your Name. 347.
Janice VanCleave's Animals. VanCleave. 228.
Janice VanCleave's Gravity. VanCleave. 228.
Janice VanCleave's Molecules. VanCleave.
228.
Jason and the Bard. Gilmore. 280.
Jaspersohn. Cookies. 253.
Jauck. Assateague. 283.
Jeffrey Strangeways. Murphy. 20.
Jennens. Messiah. 69.
Jingle the Christmas Clown. dePaola. 42.
Johnson, A. Julius. 284.
.Toning the Sweep. 318.
Johnson, J. Lift Every Voice and Sing. 254.
Johnson, N. Jack Creek Cowboy. 214.
Johnson, P. Cow Who Wouldn't Come
Down. 348.
Johnson, S. Sort of Sisters. 15.
Johnston. Hero of Lesser Causes. 254.
Jonas. 13th Clue. 75.
Jonathan and His Mommy. Smalls-Hector.
157.
Jones, D. Stopping for a Spell. 348.
Jones, R. Jake. 149.
Jones, T. Fantastic Stories. 284.
Jordan. Winter of Fire. 214.
Joseph. Island Christmas. 76.
Joshua T. Bates Takes Charge. Shreve. 357.
Jukess. I'll See You in My Dreams. 285.
Julius. Johnson. 284.
Jumbo. Blumberg. 141.
Jump at de Sun. Porter. 51.
Juna's Journey. Kherdian. 348.
June 29, 1999. Wiesner. 93.
Junior Kroll. Paraskevas. 291.
Juster. Alberic the Wise. 180.
Kanu of Kathmandu. Margolies. 80.
Kaplow. Alessandra in Between. 180.
Kasza. Rat and the Tiger. 254.
Kathy's Hats. Krisher. 46.
Katie's Trunk. Turner. 125.
Kaye. Real Heroes. 285.
Keeper of the Universe. Lawrence. 320.
Keeping Christina. Bridgers. 309.
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 373
Kellogg. Christmas Witch. 15.
Kelly 'n' Me. Levoy. 151.
Kennedy. Beasts of Bethlehem. 115.
Kermit the Frog. For Every Child, a Better
World. 318.
Kherdian. Feathers and Tails. 180.
___. Juna's Journey. 348.
Kid's Guide to How To Stop the Violence.
Terrell. 193.
Killilea. Newf. 45.
Kimmel. Three Sacks of Truth. 349.
Kindertransport. Drucker. 144.
King's Equal. Paterson. 154.
King. Bedouin. 349.
King-Smith. All Pigs Are Beautiful. 286.
.Alphabeasts. 115.
. Invisible Dog. 255.
. Lady Daisy. 215.
. Pretty Polly. 45.
. Sophie's Tom. 76.
Kisling. Fool's War. 181.
Kismaric. Cinderella. 359.
Kiss Me, Janie Tannenbaum. Sachs. 122.
Klara's New World. Winter. 25.
Klein. Dresses of Red and Gold. 286.
Knight's Wyrd. Doyle. 173.
Knitwits. Taylor. 158.
Koertge. Harmony Arms. 77.
Kohl. From Archetype to Zeitgeist. 115.
Koi and the Kola Nuts. Gleeson. 211.
Koller. Primrose Way. 149.
Komodo! Sis. 330.
Konigsburg. Amy Elizabeth Explores
Bloomingdale's. 16.
Korean Cinderella. Climo. 311.
Korman. Twinkie Squad. 77.
Kramer, S. A. To the Top! 319.
Kramer, Stephen. Avalanche. 16.
. Lightning. 16.
Krementz. How It Feels To Live With a
Physical Disability. 46.
Krisher. Kathy's Hats. 46.
Kroll. Africa Brothers and Sisters. 255.
Krull. Gonna Sing My Head Offl 47.
___. 
Lives of the Musicians. 256.
Kudlinski. Earthquake! 286.
L. Frank Baum. Carpenter. 7.
Lady Daisy. King-Smith. 215.
Lance. Going to See Grassy Ella. 350.
Land of Gold. Bradshaw. 38.
Landau. Rabies. 350.
Langone. Spreading Poison. 319.
Langton. Salt. 139.
Larrick. Night of the Whippoorwill. 77.
Lasky. Surtsey. 181.
Last Basselope. Breathed. 141.
Last Oasis. Pace. 262.
Laura Ingalls Wilder. Anderson. 105.
Lauture. Father and Son. 150.
Lavies. Compost Critters. 319.
Lawlor. Addie's Long Summer. 78.
.George on His Own. 320.
Lawrence. Keeper of the Universe. 320.
Lawson. Dragon's Pearl. 287.
Le Guin. Ride on the Red Mare's Back. 47.
Le Tord. Peace on Earth. 116.
Leach. My Wicked Stepmother. 350.
Learning to Swim in Swaziland. Leigh. 214.
Leaving Eldorado. Mazzio. 259.
Leaving for America. Bresnick-Perry. 170.
Lee, D. Ice Cream Store. 116.
Lee, M. Finding My Voice. 47.
.___ 
If It Hadn't Been for Yoon Jun. 256.
Leigh. Learning to Swim in Swaziland. 214.
Leighton. Ellis Island Christmas. 16.
Leitner. Big Lie. 150.
Lemonade Babysitter. Waggoner. 92.
Lent. Molasses Flood. 151.
Lerner Publications Company. Ukraine. 215.
Lerner. Cactus. 48.
Lesbian and Gay Rights. McCauslin. 152.
Leslie-Melville. Elephant Have Right of Way.
17.
Let Freedom Ring. Livingston. 182.
Letter from Phoenix Farm. Yolen. 19.
Letters from a Slave Girl. Lyons. 79.
Letters from Rifka. Hesse. 44.
Letting Swift River Go. Yolen. 26.
Levin. Mercy's Mill. 182.
Levine. If Your Name Was Changed at Ellis
Island. 256.
.Freedom's Children. 216.
Levitin. Annie's Promise. 216.
.Golem and the Dragon Girl. 321.
Levoy. Kelly 'n' Me. 151.
Lewin. I Was a Teenage Professional Wrestler.
321.
Lewis. Hungry One. 204.
Life in the Desert. Seymour. 87.
Life's a Funny Proposition, Horatio. Polikoff.
21.
374 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Lift Every Voice and Sing. Johnson. 254.
Lightning. Kramer. 16.
Lili at Ballet. Isadora. 253.
Lindbergh. Travel Far, Pay No Fare. 78.
Linden. One Smiling Grandma. 182.
Lindenbaum. Boodil My Dog. 116.
Lindgren. Day Adam Got Mad. 351.
Lipsyte. Chief. 351.
Listen to the Nightingale. Godden. 72.
Littke. Getting Rid of Rhoda. 48.
. Mystery of Ruby's Ghost. 217.
Little Pig. Ramachander. 85.
Little Water and the Gift of the Animals.
Taylor. 193.
Littlewood. Scarecrow! 48.
Lives of the Musicians. Krull. 256.
Living in Secret. Salat. 224.
Living with a Single Parent. Rosenberg. 188.
Livingston. Let Freedom Ring. 182.
Lizzie Borden Trial. Rappaport. 155.
Loch Moose Monster. Williams. 229.
Locker Room Mirror. Aaseng. 306.
London. Owl Who Became the Moon. 183.
Look Alive. Scott. 23.
Looking for Your Name. Janeczko. 347.
Lost Children. Goble. 315.
Lost Sailor. Conrad. 40.
Lourie. Yukon River. 48.
Love Flute. Goble. 112.
Low Tide. Mayne. 220.
Lowry. Giver. 257.
Lucy's Winter Tale. Ehrlich. 144.
Lunch. Fleming. 110.
Lutzeier. Wall. 151.
Lyon. Dreamplace. 216.
Lyons. Letters from a Slave Girl. 79.
Ma'ii and Cousin Horned Toad. Begay. 37.
Macdonald, C. Speaking to Miranda. 79.
Macdonald, J. Knight's Wyrd. 173.
Machotka. Outstanding Outsides. 287.
Macken. Flight of the Doves. 49.
MacLean. When the Mountain Sings. 184.
Macy. Whole New Ballgame. 288.
Maddern. Fire Children. 322.
Mado. Animals. 184.
Maestro. Story of Money. 219.
Magic Circle. Napoli. 260.
Magic School Bus on the Ocean Floor. Cole.
108.
Magic Spring. Rhee. 327.
Magician's Visit: Passover Tale. Peretz. 223.
Magorian. Not a Swan. 18.
Mahy. Bubble Trouble. 80.
Maizon at Blue Hill. Woodson. 128.
Make Lemonade. Wolff. 361.
Make Me a Peanut Butter Sandwich and a
Glass of Milk. Robbins. 52.
Malcolm X. Myers. 222.
Mama, I Want to Sing. Higginsen. 13.
Mammolina. O'Connor. 261.
Manatees. Cousteau Society. 279.
Mango. Portrait of Miranda. 218.
Manson. Dog Came, Too. 220.
Mantinband. Blabbermouths. 18.
Many Thousand Gone. Hamilton. 212.
Margaret Bourke-White. Ayer. 67.
Margolies. Kanu of Kathmandu. 80.
. Warriors, Wigmen, and the Crocodile
People. 289.
Maria. Taylor. 56.
Marino. For the Love of Pete. 352.
Markle. Fledglings. 18.
. Rainy Day. 220.
Mairko. Hang Out the Flag. 184.
Marshall, J. Fox on Stage. 153.
Marshall, L. Girl Who Changed Her Fate.
153.
Martha Speaks. Meddaugh. 82.
Martin. Boy Who Lived with the Seals. 323.
.Storyteller's Story. 19.
Marvin Redpost: Kidnapped at Birth? Sachar.
52.
Marvin Redpost: Why Pick on Me? Sachar.
189.
Mary Cassatt. Turner. 195.
Marzollo. Happy Birthday, Martin Luther
King. 185.
.I Spy Christmas. 81.
Masters. Watching Silence. 81.
Matas. Daniel's Story. 289.
.Sworn Enemies. 258.
Mathews. Egg and Seven Socks. 323.
Matreshka. Ayres. 67.
Matter of Conscience. Nichols. 354.
Matthew and the Sea Singer. Walsh. 297.
Matthews. Arctic Summer. 324.
Maybe Yes, Maybe No, Maybe Maybe.
Patron. 356.
Mayfield Crossing. Nelson. 222.
Mayne. Low Tide. 220.
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 375
Mayo. Meet Tricky Coyote! 290
.That Tricky Coyote! 290.
Mazer. Out of Control. 259.
Mazzio. Leaving Eldorado. 259.
McCampell. Who Do You Think You Are?
327.
McCann. What's French for Help, George?
257.
McCauslin. Lesbian and Gay Rights. 152.
McColley. Walls of Pedro Garcia. 218.
McCoy. Animals in Research. 351.
McCully. Mirette on the High Wire. 49.
McDaniel. Baby Alicia Is Dying. 287.
McDermott. Raven. 322.
. Zomo Rabbit. 17.
McFarland. Hoofbeats. 258.
McGraw. Tangled Webb. 322.
McGregor. Cowgirl. 183.
McKay. Exiles. 80.
McKenna. Brightest Light. 183.
.Camp Murphy. 218.
McKissack. Dark-Thirty. 117.
. Sojourner Truth. 152.
McMahon. Chi-Hoon. 288.
McMillan. Beach for the Birds. 322.
. Mouse Views. 258.
McPherson. I Speak for the Women. 218.
Meddaugh. Martha Speaks. 82.
Meet Tricky Coyote! Mayo. 290.
Melinda Zone. Willey. 229.
Melmed. First Song Ever Sung. 352.
Mercy's Mill. Levin. 182.
Merriam. Singing Green. 185.
Merrill. Girl Who Loved Caterpillars. 82.
Messiah. Bible. 69.
Meyer. Where the Broken Heart Still Beats.
82.
Michael the Angel. Fischetto. 343.
Michel. Water. 324.
Michener. South Pacific. 83.
Micklethwait. I Spy. 186.
Mieko and the Fifth Treasure. Coerr. 242.
Migrant Family. Brimner. 38.
Mikaelsen. Sparrow Hawk Red. 324.
Mike and the Magic Cookies. Buller. 39.
Mike.. Gift of the Nile. 142.
Mikolaycak. Orpheus. 83.
Miller. Where Does It Go? 50.
Minstrel and the Dragon Pup. Sutcliff. 226.
Mirette on the High Wire. McCully. 49.
Miriam's Well. Ruby. 294.
Mirror, Mirror. Thesman. 194.
Misery Guts. Gleitzman. 249.
Mississippi Challenge. Walter. 159.
Misty's Twilight. Henry. 13.
Mitchell. Both Sides Now. 19.
Mochizuki. Baseball Saved Us. 290.
Moe the Dog in Tropical Paradise. Stanley.
89.
Mohr. All for the Better. 353.
Molasses Flood. Lent. 151.
Mollel. Princess Who Lost Her Hair. 142.
Molly Donnelly. Thesman. 331.
Mom's Best Friend. Alexander. 168.
Money Games. Weiss. 333.
Monsell. Toohy and Wood. 117.
Monson. Deer Stand. 186.
Monster Mama. Rosenberg. 357.
Moon Bridge. Savin. 189.
Moon in Your Lunch Box. Spooner. 358.
Moon Jump. Brown. 206.
Moon Lady. Tan. 90.
Moon Rope. Ehlert. 110.
Moon Was Tired of Walking on Air. Belting.
140.
Moore. Adam Mouse's Book of Poems. 221.
.Sunflakes. 186.
Mori. Shizuko's Daughter. 291.
Morning Girl. Dorris. 42.
Morpurgo. Twist of Gold. 221.
Morris. Houses and Homes. 118.
. Puddle Jumper. 324.
.Tools. 118.
Moss Pillows. Wells. 126.
Mother Goose. House That Jack Built. 353.
Mountain Jack Tales. Haley. 146.
Mouse Views. McMillan. 258.
Mummies. Wilcox. 360.
Murez. Day on the Boat with Captain Betty.
291.
Murphy, C. Alice Dodd and the Spirit of
Truth. 353.
Murphy, J. Jeffrey Strangeways. 20.
Murrow. Twelve Days in August. 325.
My Buddy. Osofsky. 50.
My Father, the Nutcase. Caseley. 170.
My First Kwanzaa Book. Chocolate. 171.
My Name Is Brain Brian. Betancourt. 241.
My Name Is Marfa Isabel. Ada. 306.
My Stepfather Shrank! Dillon. 109.
376 
* THE BULLETIN
My Wicked Stepmother. Leach. 350.
Myers, A. Red-Dirt Jessie. 50.
Myers, W. Malcolm X. 222.
. Place Called Heartbreak. 354.
. Sort of Sisters. 15.
. Young Martin's Promise. 259.
Mystery of Ruby's Ghost. Littke. 217.
Mystery of the Cupboard. Banks. 307.
Nakawatari. Sea and I. 118.
Napoli. Magic Circle. 260.
.Prince of the Pond. 153.
Nat Turner and the Slave Revolt. Barrett.
240.
Navajo Code Talkers. Aaseng. 104.
Naylor. Alice in April. 222.
_ 
.Boys Start the War. 260.
Near. Great Peace March. 261.
NEATET 
to the Rescue! Chocolate. 207.
Neimark. Diego Rivera. 154.
Nelson. Mayfield Crossing. 222.
Nettie's Gift. Tews. 358.
Neve Shalom/Wahat al-Salam. Dolphin. 244.
New, Improved Gretchen Hubbard. Cooper.
70.
Newf. Killilea. 45.
Nibble, Nibble, Jenny Archer. Conford. 342.
Nichols, Janet. Women Music Makers. 118.
Nichols, Joan. Matter of Conscience. 354.
Night of the Moonjellies. Shasha. 54.
Night of the Whippoorwill. Larrick. 77.
Night of Wishes. Ende. 174.
Nightjohn. Paulsen. 187.
No Tigers in Africa. Silver. 23.
Norman. Albion's Dream. 82.
Northern Lullaby. Carlstrom. 40.
Not a Swan. Magorian. 18.
Nutrition. Patent. 187.
Nuts to You. Ehlert. 245.
Nye. This Same Sky. 119.
O'Brien. Princess and the Beggar. 325.
O'Connor. Mammolina. 261.
O'Donnell. Are You Flying, Charlie Duncan?
326.
O'Shaughnessy. Somebody Called Me a
Retard Today. 120.
Oakley. Church Mice and the Ring. 119.
Ocean World. Sis. 88.
Oddballs. Sleator. 295.
Odds on Oliver. Greene. 211.
Ofosu-Appiah. People in Bondage. 354.
Ogiwara. Dragon Sword and Wind Child.
355.
On Being Sarah. Helfman. 178.
Once Upon a Time. French. 246.
One Gift Deserves Another. Grimm. 11.
One Smiling Grandma. Linden. 182.
Operation: Homefront. Cooney. 108.
Oppenheim. One Gift Deserves Another. 11.
Orfe. Voigt. 92.
Original Freddie Ackerman. Irwin. 15.
Orpheus. Mikolaycak. 83.
Osborne. Spider Kane and the Mystery at
Jumbo Nightcrawler's. 326.
Osofsky. My Buddy. 50.
Otters. Cousteau Society. 279.
Our Endangered Planet: Antarctica. Winckler.
25.
Out of Control. Mazer. 259.
Out of Step. Auch. 169.
Outstanding Outsides. Machotka. 287.
Owl Who Became the Moon. London. 183.
Pace. Last Oasis. 262.
Pacific Crossing. Soto. 122.
Panther Glade. Cavanagh. 278.
Paraskevas. Junior Kroll. 291.
Parnall. Water Pup. 292.
Pass It On. Hudson. 252.
Patent. Dogs. 355.
. Nutrition. 187.
Paterson. King's Equal. 154.
Patron. Maybe Yes, Maybe No, Maybe
Maybe. 356.
Paulsen. Nightjohn. 187.
Peace on Earth. Le Tord. 116.
Peddler's Dream. Shefelman. 122.
Peel. Uptime, Downtime. 20.
People in Bondage. Ofosu-Appiah. 354.
Peppe the Lamplighter. Bartone. 277.
Peretz. Magician's Visit. 223.
Pet Hamsters. Wexler. 196.
Peter Spier's Circus! Spier. 192.
Peter. Walker. 332.
Peters. Clambake. 84.
Petey Moroni's Camp Runamok Diary.
Cummings. 41.
Petit. Seventh Walnut. 51.
Petrouchka. Werner. 93.
Pfeffer. Twin Troubles. 120.
Phantom of the Lunch Wagon. Pinkwater.
85.
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 
377
Picture Book of Anne Frank. Adler. 204.
Pictures of the Night. Geras. 248.
Piece of String Is a Wonderful Thing.
Hindley. 283.
Pierce. Wild Magic. 188.
Pigman and Me. Zindel. 129.
Pigs from 1 to 10. Geisert. 176.
Pilkey. When Cats Dream. 20.
Pilling. Realms of Gold. 356.
Pinkney. Back Home. 21.
Pinkwater. Author's Day. 262.
. Phantom of the Lunch Wagon. 85.
Place Called Heartbreak. Myers. 354.
Plunkett. Sir Whong and the Golden Pig.
316.
Points. Assateague. 283.
Polikoff. Life's a Funny Proposition, Horatio.
21.
Pony Express. van der Linde. 359.
Porte. Turkey Drive. 356.
Porter. Jump at de Sun. 51.
Portrait of Miranda. Mango. 218.
Pots and Pans. Rockwell. 224.
Powell. Turtle Watchers. 154.
Powwow. Ancona. 276.
Prairie Alphabet. Bannatyne-Cugnet. 105.
Prather. Fish & Bones. 188.
Prayers from the Ark. Bernos de Gasztold.
105.
Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgivings. Stoddard.
124.
Pretty Polly. King-Smith. 45.
Price. Ghost Song. 155.
Primrose Way. Koller. 149.
Prince of the Pond. Napoli. 153.
Princess and the Beggar. O'Brien. 325.
Princess in the Kitchen Garden. Heymans.
345.
Princess Who Lost Her Hair. Mollel. 142.
Pringle. Antarctica. 51.
Prose Anthology of the Second World War.
Hull. 283.
Puddle Jumper. Morris. 324.
Pullman. White Mercedes. 326.
Punch with Judy. Avi. 341.
Qualey. Revolutions of the Heart. 292.
Questions. Hopkins. 14.
Quindlen. Tree that Came to Stay. 85.
Rabies. Landau. 350.
Radunsky. Square, Triangle, Round, Skinny.
120.
Rainy Day. Markle. 220.
Ramachander. Little Pig. 85.
Rana. Roller Birds of Rampur. 293.
Rappaport. Lizzie Borden Trial. 155.
Raschka. Charlie Parker Played Be Bop. 121.
. Yo! Yes? 262.
Rat and the Tiger. Kasza. 254.
Rathe. Wreck of the Barque Stefano. 86.
Raven. McDermott. 322.
Rayner. Garth Pig Steals the Show. 327.
Reading about the Peregrine Falcon. Greene.
281.
Reading about the River Otter. Greene. 281.
Real Heroes. Kaye. 285.
Real McCoy. Towle. 227.
Realms of Gold. Pilling. 356.
Red Thread. Young. 299.
Red-Dirt Jessie. Myers. 50.
Regguinti. Sacred Harvest. 84.
Reiss. Dreadful Sorry. 294.
Revolutions of the Heart. Qualey. 292.
Rhee. Magic Spring. 327.
Rhodes. Sleeping Bread. 8.
Riches. Hautzig. 148.
Ride on the Red Mare's Back. Le Guin. 47.
Riders Up! Beirne. 38.
Riffraff. Clarke. 171.
Rinaldi. Break with Charity. 22.
. In My Father's House. 223.
Ringgold. Aunt Harriet's Underground
Railroad in the Sky. 121.
Rising Voices. Hirschfelder. 13.
Robbins. Make Me a Peanut Butter Sandwich
and a Glass of Milk. 52.
Roberts. Sticks and Stones, Bobbie Bones.
294.
Robinson. Ghost of Whispering Rock. 156.
Rochman. Who Do You Think You Are? 327.
Rockwell. Pots and Pans. 224.
Rodgers. Our Endangered Planet: Antarctica.
25.
Rodney's Inside Story. Barasch. 36.
Roller Birds of Rampur. Rana. 293.
Rollo and Tweedy and the Ghost at Dougal
Castle. Allen. 5.
Rose. Highest Form of Killing. 52.
Rosen. Elijah's Angel. 86.
.South and North, East and West. 121.
Rosenberg, L. Monster Mama. 357.
Rosenberg, M. Living with a Single Parent.
188.
378 
* THE BULLETIN
Rosenthal. Where on Earth? 189.
Rosy Cole Discovers America! Greenwald.
146.
Ruby. Miriam's Well. 294.
Rude Giants. Wood. 333.
Rudolph. How a Shirt Grew in the Field. 91.
Ruemmler. Smoke on the Water. 156.
Russell Is Extra Special. Amenta. 104.
Rylant. Best Wishes. 19.
Sacajawea and the Journey to the Pacific.
Ingoglia. 179.
Sachar. Marvin Redpost: Kidnapped at Birth?
52.
._ Marvin Redpost: Why Pick on Me?
189.
Sachs, E. Kiss Me, Janie Tannenbaum. 122.
Sachs, M. Thirteen Going on Seven. 328.
Sacred Harvest. Regguinti. 84.
Salamandastron. Jacques. 346.
Salat. Living in Secret. 224.
Salisbury. Blue Skin of the Sea. 22.
Salsitz. Twilight Gate. 357.
Salt. Afanasiev. 139.
Sam Panda and the Thunder Dragon.
Conover. 172.
San Souci. Cut From the Same Cloth. 328.
._ Tsar's Promise. 53.
Sandburg. Arithmetic. 263.
Sattler. Earliest Americans. 329.
Save My Rainforest. Zak. 58.
Savin. Moon Bridge. 189.
Saxby. Great Deeds of Heroic Women. 156.
Say Woof! Gibbons. 10.
Scarecrow! Littlewood. 48.
Schade. Mike and the Magic Cookies. 39.
Schwartz. Stories To Tell a Cat. 190.
Scieszka. Stinky Cheese Man. 53.
Scott, A. Brand Is Forever. 263.
Scott, E. Look Alive. 23.
Scrabble Creek. Wittmann. 230.
Scribner. Gopher Takes Heart. 224.
Sea and I. Nakawatari. 118.
Seabrooke. Bridges of Summer. 53.
Secret Elephant of Harlan Kooter. Harvey.
113.
Seeing Eye Willie. Gottlieb. 43.
Sender. Holocaust Lady. 54.
Service. Stinker's Return. 329.
Seventh Walnut. Petit. 51.
Seymour. Life in the Desert. 87.
Shack and Back. Crowley. 243.
Shadow Man. Grant. 145.
Shalant. Shalom, Geneva Peace. 23.
Shalom, Geneva Peace. Shalant. 23.
Shannon. I Hate My Hero. 87.
Sharpe. Chicken Bucks. 88.
Shasha. Night of the Moonjellies. 54.
Shea. Amazing Rescues. 88.
Shefelman. Peddler's Dream. 122.
Sheppard. Alitji in Dreamland. 190.
Shiefman. Good-bye to the Trees. 264.
Shirley. Frank Baum. 7.
Shizuko's Daughter. Mori. 291.
Shock Waves. Westwood. 196.
Shortcut. Crews. 40.
Shreve. Joshua T. Bates Takes Charge. 357.
.Wait for Me. 54.
Shusterman. Eyes of Kid Midas. 157.
Sierra. Elephant's Wrestling Match. 190.
Silent Storm. Garland. 247.
Silliest Joke Book Ever. Hartman. 250.
Sills. Visions: Stories about Women Artists.
224.
Silver. Eye for Color. 225.
. No Tigers in Africa. 23.
Sing to the Sun. Bryan. 39.
Singer to the Sea God. Alcock. 168.
Singer, B. Rising Voices. 13.
Singer, M. California Demon. 191.
. It's Hard to Read a Map with a Beagle
on Your Lap. 330.
Singing Green. Merriam. 185.
Sinykin. Slate Blues. 264.
Siobhan's Journey . Beirne. 240.
Sir Whong and the Golden Pig. Han. 316.
Sis. Komodo! 330.
. Ocean World. 88.
Sixth-Grade Star. Hiser. 178.
Siy. Eeyou. 358.
Skipping School. Haas. 177.
Skirt. Soto. 55.
Skurzynski. Get the Message. 295.
. Here Comes the Mail. 23.
Slate Blues. Sinykin. 264.
Sleator. Oddballs. 295.
Sleeping Bread. Czernecki. 8.
Smalls-Hector. Jonathan and His Mommy.
157.
Smith, D. Best Girl. 225.
Smith, R. Inside the Zoo Nursery. 191.
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 379
Smoke on the Water. Ruemmler. 156.
Snowy. Doherty. 209.
Snyder. Fool's Gold. 226.
Soap! Soap! Birdseye. 308.
Sofie's Role. Heath. 114.
Sojourner Truth. McKissack. 152.
Solay. Harris. 317.
Somebody Called Me a Retard Today.
O'Shaughnessy. 120.
Sophie and Sammy's Library Sleepover.
Caseley. 310.
Sophie's Tom. King-Smith. 76.
Sort of Sisters. Johnson. 15.
Soto. Pacific Crossing. 122.
___. Skirt. 55.
South and North, East and West. Rosen. 121.
South Pacific. Michener. 83.
Space Travellers. Wild. 298.
Sparrow Hawk Red. Mikaelsen. 324.
Speaking to Miranda. Macdonald. 79.
Speedwell. Turnbull. 91.
Spider and the Sky God. Chocolate. 142.
Spider Kane and the Mystery at Jumbo
Nightcrawler's. Osborne. 326.
Spiders Near and Far. Dewey. 313.
Spier. Peter Spier's Circus! 192.
Spooner. Moon in Your Lunch Box. 358.
Spotted Eagle & Black Crow. Bernhard. 308.
Spreading Poison. Langone. 319.
Square, Triangle, Round, Skinny. Radunsky.
120.
Squashed. Bauer. 36.
St. George. Dear Dr. Bell. 192.
Stanley, D. Bard of Avon. 123.
.Moe the Dog in Tropical Paradise. 89.
Stanley, J. Children of the Dust Bowl. 55.
Stardust. Ferguson. 246.
Stargazers. Gibbons. 145.
Staying Fat for Sarah Byrnes. Crutcher. 244.
Stealing Home. Stolz. 158.
Stefoff. Women of the World. 296.
Steig. Doctor De Soto Goes to Africa. 24.
Stella & Roy. Wolff. 360.
Stevens, B. Frank Thompson. 123.
Stevens, J. Coyote Steals the Blanket. 296.
Stevenson. Don't You Know There's a War
On? 89.
Stewart. Dove. 265.
Sticks and Stones, Bobbie Bones. Roberts.
294.
Stine. Story of Laura Ingalls Wilder. 157.
Stinker's Return. Service. 329.
Stinky Cheese Man. Scieszka. 53.
Stoddard. Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgivings.
124.
Stokely Carmichael and Black Power.
Cwiklik. 279.
Stolen Bones. Carris. 309.
Stolz. Stealing Home. 158.
Stones of Muncaster Cathedral. Westall. 266.
Stopping for a Spell. Jones. 348.
Stories To Tell a Cat. Schwartz. 190.
Story of Laura Ingalls Wilder, Pioneer Girl.
Stine. 157.
Story of May. Gerstein. 248.
Story of Money. Maestro. 219.
Story of the Creation. Bible. 205.
Storyteller's Story. Martin. 19.
Stowe. Dear Mom, in Ohio for a Year. 158.
Stranger Here. Wyss. 361.
Strauch. Hey You, Sister Rose. 265.
Sullivan. How an Airport Really Works. 297.
Sunflakes: Poems for Children. Moore. 186.
Surtsey. Lasky. 181.
Sutcliff. Minstrel and the Dragon Pup. 226.
Sweeney. Tiger Orchard. 297.
Sweet Clara and the Freedom Quilt.
Hopkinson. 346.
Swentzell. Children of Clay. 226.
Switching Well. Griffin. 345.
Switzer. Anyplace but Here. 124.
Sworn Enemies. Matas. 258.
Talbott. Your Pet Dinosaur. 90.
Tales from the Bamboo Grove. Watkins. 126.
Talk, Talk. Chocolate. 142.
Tan. Moon Lady. 90.
Tangled Webb. McGraw. 322.
Tasmanian Devil. Darling. 41.
Taste of Salt. Temple. 91.
Taylor, C.. Little Water and the Gift of the
Animals. 193.
Taylor, T. Maria. 56.
Taylor, W. Knitwits. 158.
Teddy Bears. Young. 230.
Temple. Grab Hands and Run. 265.
. Taste of Salt. 91.
Ten Mile Day. Fraser. 344.
Terban. Funny You Should Ask. 193.
Terrells. Kid's Guide to How To Stop the.
Violence. 193.
380 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Terris. Twilight Struggle. 12.
Teton Sioux. Wolfson. 298.
Tews. Nettie's Gift. 358.
Thank You, Santa. Wild. 94.
That Tricky Coyote! Mayo. 290.
Thesman. I'm Not Telling. 194.
. Mirror, Mirror. 174.
. Molly Donnelly. 331.
.Who Am I, Anyway? 194.
Thicker than Water. Farmer. 209.
Think of a Beaver. Wallace. 297
Think of an Eel. Wallace. 297.
Thirteen Going on Seven. Sachs. 328.
This Is a House. Bare. 6.
This Same Sky. Nye. 119.
Thomas, E. Green Beans. 195.
Thomas, J. When the Nightingale Sings. 194.
Thompson. Gypsyworld. 24.
Three Sacks of Truth. Kimmel. 349.
Through Our Eyes. Hopkins. 179.
Tiger Orchard. Sweeney. 297.
Tiger, Tiger, Growing Up. Hewett. 282.
Tiger. Allen. 66.
Tippy Bear's Christmas. Hol. 74.
To the Top! Kramer. 319.
Tolan. Witch of Maple Park. 125.
Toll. Behind the Secret Window. 227.
Tom. dePaola. 280.
Tombs of the Ancient Americans. Bendick.
277.
Toning the Sweep. Johnson. 318.
Toohy and Wood. Monsell. 117.
Tools. Morris. 118.
Tory and Me and the Spirit of True Love.
Bechard. 37.
Towle. Real McCoy. 227.
Town Mouse and the Country Mouse. Aesop.
138.
Townsend's Warbler. Fleischman. 10.
Travel Far, Pay No Fare. Lindbergh. 78.
Treasure Bird. Griffin. 177.
Tree that Came to Stay. Quindlen. 85.
Trivas. Annie ... Anya. 56.
Trouble with Trolls. Brett. 106.
Tsar's Promise. San Souci. 53.
Tsugele's Broom. Carey. 207.
Tunes for Bears to Dance To. Cormier. 8.
Turkey Drive. Porte. 356.
Turnbull. Speedwell. 91.
Turner, A. Grass Songs. 331.
. Katie's Trunk. 125.
Turner, R. Mary Cassatt. 195.
Turtle Watchers. Powell. 154.
Twelve Days in August. Murrow. 325.
Twilight Gate. Salsitz. 357.
Twilight Struggle. Harrison. 12.
Twin Troubles. Pfeffer. 120.
Twinkie Squad. Korman. 77.
Twist of Gold. Morpurgo. 221.
Tyrrell. Hummingbirds. 195.
Ukraine. Lerner. 215.
Untold Tales. Brooke. 7.
Up & Down Spring. Hurwitz. 252.
Uptime, Downtime. Peel. 20.
Ushinsky. How a Shirt Grew in the Field. 91.
Vail. Do-Over. 125.
Van Allsburg. Widow's Broom. 56.
van der Linde. Pony Express. 359.
VanCleave. Janice VanCleave's Animals. 228.
.Janice VanCleave's Gravity. 228.
.Janice VanCleave's Molecules. 228.
Vande Velde. Dragon's Bait. 126.
Vennema. Bard of Avon. 123.
Vigna. Black Like Kyra, White Like Me. 57.
Visions. Sills. 224.
Vogel. Bad Times, Good Friends. 91.
Voigt. Orfe. 92.
Vyner. Arctic Spring. 331.
Waggoner. Lemonade Babysitter. 92.
Wait for Me. Shreve. 54.
Walker, K. Peter. 332.
Walker, P. Big Men, Big Country. 332.
Wall. Lutzeier. 151.
Wallace, B. Biggest Klutz in Fifth Grade. 159.
Wallace, K. Think of a Beaver. 297.
. Think of an Eel. 297.
Walls of Pedro Garcfa. McColley. 218.
Walsh. Matthew and the Sea Singer. 297.
. When Grandma Came. 196.
Walter. Mississippi Challenge. 159.
Warriors, Wigmen, and the Crocodile People.
Margolies. 289.
Watching Silence. Masters. 81.
Watching the Roses. Geras. 111.
Water Pup. Parnall. 292.
Water. Michel. 324.
Watkins. Tales from the Bamboo Grove. 126.
Weather Report. Yolen. 299.
Weaver. Close to Home. 266.
Weaver-Gelzer. In the Time of Trouble. 228.
JULY/AUGUST 1993 
* 
381
Weekend Girl. Hest. 251.
Wegman. Cinderella. 359.
Weiss, A. Money Games. 333.
Weiss, E. For Every Child, a Better World.
318.
Wells, Rosemary. First Tomato. 126.
. Island Light. 126.
. Moss Pillows. 126.
Wells, Ruth. A to Zen. 127.
Werner. Petrouchka. 93.
Westall. Call. 159.
. Stones of Muncaster Cathedral. 266.
Westheimer. Dr. Ruth Talks to Kids. 360.
Westwood. Shock Waves. 196.
Wexler. Pet Hamsters. 196.
Whale. Allen. 275.
Whales. Cousteau Society. 279.
Whaling Days. Carrick. 341.
What Hearts. Brooks. 106.
What Instrument Is This? Hausherr. 44.
What's French for Help, George? McCann.
257.
Whelan. Goodbye, Vietnam. 57.
When Cats Dream. Pilkey. 20.
When Grandma Came. Walsh. 196.
When the Mountain Sings. MacLean. 184.
When the Nightingale Sings. Thomas. 194.
Where Are My Birth Parents? Gravelle. 315.
Where Are the Stars During the Day? Berger.
240.
Where Did Your Family Come From? Berger.
240
Where Does It Go? Miller. 50.
Where I Want to Be. DeVito. 313.
Where on Earth? Rosenthal. 189.
Where the Broken Heart Still Beats. Meyer.
82.
Where the River Runs. Graff. 344.
Where the Truth Lies. Babbitt. 239.
Where's My Teddy? Alborough. 4.
White Mercedes. Pullman. 326.
Who Am I, Anyway? Thesman. 194.
Who Comes with Cannons? Beatty. 36.
Who Do You Think You Are? Rochman. 327.
"Who Was that Masked Man, Anyway?". Avi.
35.
Who's at the Door? Allen. 275.
Who's On First? Geller. 72.
Whole New Ballgame. Macy. 288.
Whole World in Your Hands. Berger. 240.
Why Do You Speak as You Do? Cooper. 172.
Why the Sky Is Far Away. Gerson. 42.
Widow's Broom. Van Allsburg. 56.
Wiesner. June 29, 1999. 93.
Wilcox. Mummies. 360.
Wild Magic. Pierce. 188.
Wild. Space Travellers. 298.
Thank You, Santa. 94.
Wilde. Down Came a Blackbird. 197.
Wildflower Girl. Conlon-McKenna. 142.
Wilkinson. Definitely Cool. 229.
Willard. Beauty and the Beast. 94.
Willey. Melinda Zone. 229.
Williams, M. Greek Myths for Young
Children. 94.
Williams, Sheila. Loch Moose Monster. 229.
Williams, Sherley. Working Cotton. 58.
Wilson. Blacksmith and the Devils. 107.
Winckler. Our Endangered Planet: Antarctica.
25.
Wind Blows Backward. Hahn. 281.
Windsong. Hall. 177.
Winter of Fire. Jordan. 214.
Winter. Klara's New World. 25.
Witch of Maple Park. Tolan 125.
Wittmann. Go Ask Giorgio! 95.
. Scrabble Creek. 230.
Wolff, A. Stella & Roy. 360.
Wolff, F. Woodcutter's Coat. 197.
Wolff, V. Make Lemonade. 361.
Wolfson. Iroquois. 298.
.Teton Sioux. 298.
Woman Who Fell from the Sky. Bierhorst.
278.
Women Music Makers. Nichols. 118.
Women of the World. Stefoff. 296.
Wood, A. Rude Giants. 333.
Wood, T. Boy Becomes a Man at Wounded
Knee. 127.
Woodcutter's Coat. Wolff. 197.
Woodruff. Dear Napoleon, I Know You're
Dead, But.... 128.
Woodson. Maizon at Blue Hill. 128.
Words of Stone. Henkes. 114.
Working Cotton. Williams. 58.
World in 1492. Fritz. 111.
Worry Warts. Gleitzman. 249.
Worth. At Christmastime. 128.
Wreck of the Barque Stefano. Rathe. 86.
Wright. Ghost of Popcorn Hill. 333.
382 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Wurmfeld. Baby Blues. 58.
Wyss. Stranger Here. 361.
Year of Fire. Jam. 347.
Yeh. Bawshou Rescues the Sun. 25.
Yep. American Dragons. 362.
Yo! Yes? Raschka. 262.
Yolen. Letter from Phoenix Farm. 19.
.Letting Swift River Go. 26.
.Weather Report. 299.
You Bet Your Life. Deaver. 313.
Young Martin's Promise. Myers. 259.
Young, E. Red Thread. 299.
Young, R. Action Figures. 230.
. Dolls. 230.
. Teddy Bears. 230.
Your Pet Dinosaur. Talbott. 90.
Yours Truly. Angell. 238.
Yukon River. Lourie. 48.
Zach. Benny and the No-Good Teacher. 161.
Zak. Save My Rainforest. 58.
Zap! Calabro. 206.
Zeman. Gilgamesh the King. 160.
Zindel. Pigman and Me. 129.
Zinnia and Dot. Ernst. 9.
Zomo the Rabbit. McDermott. 17.
Zoo. Browne. 206.
Zoomrimes. Cassedy. 310
"The cut-paper collages
are dramatic, colorful,
and easy to see, mak-
ing this title useful
for reading aloud
to older groups as
well as for the
transitional reader."
-Booklist
In this humorous and
lyrical folk tale from Rwanda,
Africa, award-winning author Verna Aardema
retells the story of Sebgugugu, a man whose greed and glut-
tony leads to disaster for himself and his family.
Author of numerous children's books, Verna Aardema is best
known for Why Mosquitoes Buzz in People's Ears, a 1976 Cal-
decott Medal Winner. Artist Nancy Clouse is an art teacher
and the author/illustrator of Puzzle Maps U.S.A.
I _ Og
* "A grand addition to a notable oeuvre,
with a powerful contemporary message."*
THE LOST CHILDREN
By Paul Goble
Illustrated in full color by the author
* "As Goble explains, 'This story is based on a sacred Blackfoot myth, telling
the origin of the Pleiades.'...Goble's distinctive style is used with such imagina-
tion that it never grows stale." -- *Pointer, Kirkus Reviews
"Goble tells this story with earnest simplicity, a gentle cadence to his words
imbuing the text with particular significance. His illustrations -
dazzling in
color, crisp and clean in design - prove typically arresting." -Publishers Weekly
"The artwork clearly sets the tale within the native American culture, yet the
inclusion of modern telephone poles and cars in the last scene indicates that the
message of the myth has relevance today, speaking to any culture that fails to
care for all its children." -Booklist
$14.95 SBE/O-02-736555-7/A11 ages
SBE indicates a reinforced hardcover edition.
BRADBURY PRESS
An Affiliate of Macmillan, Inc., 866 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022
' Starred In School Library Journal
and ALA Booklist
"Vernon's story is an involving one
that reveals the enormous capacity of teens for both cruelty
and compassion. Its truth reveals the pain of exclusion and the
liberation of acceptance and love.. .a much needed insight
into adolescents with special needs." -SLJ
Ages 10 up. $13.00* (021357-4); $12.89t (021360-4)
Previous Jane Leslie Conly novels
RACSO AND THE
RATS OF NIMH
Pictures by Leonard Lubin
Ages 9-12.
$13.00* (021361-2)
$12.89t (021362-0)
Harper Trophy paper ed.
$3.95 (440245-2)
HarperCohins ISBN prefix: 0-06.
rade and paper ad 
tLlbraed.
Pulh's pries onand 
no way
reflect the prices at which available
from any other souxce.
R-T, MARGARET, AND
THE RATS OF N]iNE
Pictures by Leonard Lubin
Ages 9-12.
$i4.00o 
(021363-9)
$13.89t (021364-7)
Harer Trophy paper ed.
$3 
(440387-4)
/4
A Laura Geringer Book
i HarperCollinsChildren 'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
SECOND CLASS
POSTACE
PAUI
CHAMPAIGN, IL
University a
54 East Gre
Champaign
U.SA.
REruoN POI
t
