UB
ILLINGI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Inforiation Science
University of Illinois Press
xn
t3
TER DEAN MYERS
trations by
istopher Myers
"Arrested and charged with
ler, 16-year-old Steve Harmon
riting a screenplay of his
eal. Interspersed with his
idwritten journal entries,
ve's script ... 
[balances]
room drama and a sordid
etting with flashbacks to the
that resulted in a shopkeeper's
A novel that in both form
>ject guarantees a wide
dience ... a natural to get
reading -
and talking."
-Starred review /The Horn Book
W-' "This riveting courtroom drama ... 
[presents] an
insightful look at a teenage suspect's lost innocence."
-Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly
"Myers combines an innovative format, complex moral issues,
and an intriguingly sympathetic but flawed protagonist in ...
a fascinating portrait of a terrified young man wrestling with
his conscience." -Highlighted 
review / ALA Booklist
Ages 12 up. $15.95TR (0-06-028077-8); $15.89LB (0-06-028078-6)
Walter Dean Myers' HarperCollins books include
Scorpions * 1989 Newbery Honor Book
Ages 12 up. $15.95TR (0-06-024364-3); $15.89LB (0-06-024365-1);
$4.95PB digest-size (0-06-440623-7); $4.95PB rack-size (0-06-447066-0)
www.harperchildrens.com
± HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks . 10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
T H E B u L L E T I N
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS 
September 1999
Vol. 53 No. 1
A LOOK INSIDE
3 
THE BIG PICTURE
What If? by Frances Thomas; illus. by Ross Collins
4 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
4 
* Burger Wuss by M. T. Anderson
9 
* Ramona's World by Beverly Cleary; illus. by Alan Tiegreen
11 
* Jack on the Tracks: Four Seasons ofFifth Grade written and illus. by
Jack Gantos
21 
* Zooman Sam by Lois Lowry; illus. by Diane de Groat
28 
* Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets by J. K. Rowling; illus. by
Mary Grandprd
29 
* Tarzan ad. by Robert San Souci; illus. by Michael McCurdy
37 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
38 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Janice N. Harrington, Reviewer (JNH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1999 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Ross Collins from What If? ©1999. Used by permission of Hyperion Books
for Children.
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 3
THE BIG PICTURE
What If
by Frances Thomas; illus. by Ross Collins
We see a wide range of monsters around here, ranging from ferocious to friendly,
carnivorous to cuddly, so it takes more than just another set of horrible horns to
turn our heads. In Little Monster, What If offers one of the most photogenic-
illustrationogenic?-beasties we've seen in awhile, and he exudes the irresistible
charm of vulnerability.
Little Monster's particular vulnerability is the fear of abandonment, which is
apparently every bit the problem for fictional monsters that it is for real children.
LM's worried about the unknown, quizzing his mom on the possibility of his
waking up to a "big ... black... hole in the middle of the floor" that gets bigger
and bigger and bigger, leading to a series of increasingly terrible events ("and then
there wasn't a ceiling and the sky was all horrible and I fell down and down and
down .... And then the house caught on FIRE!") ending with "falling forever and
ever and ever," all because when he called his mother, she didn't answer, and she
couldn't come and help him because she had gone away.
That's a terrific set of genuine fears-holes, fire, falling, and ultimately aban-
donment-with the authentic face of childhood. For many small children, holes
are the dark corners where nonexistence breeds, just waiting to suck kids in and
nullify them; fires are angry power without any control, capable of destruction
from the most innocuous starts (there is also, for good measure, a "big, big spider"
crawling through Little Monster's nightmare scenario). The illustrations keep
these fears in check, but they don't diminish them. The hole is big, large enough
to engulf Little Monster and his bed in one swallow (we see it from above while
Little Monster peers over the brink) as it gapes across the spread's gutter, and when
our hapless hero finds the fire he falls through a red world of flames. Immediately,
however, he also falls back into a safe reality, wherein his calmly comforting mother
agrees that his imagined events would be scary but takes charge with a different
scenario: waking up to a breakfast of pancakes followed by an outing notable for
the purchase of festive balloons and tasty treats and a cozy return to home and bed,
which option Little Monster finds preferable indeed.
The text balances the fears and consolation well: Thomas manages both a sooth-
ingly incantatory quality in the I-thou dialogue and an individual turn of phrase
without straying from the lexicon of credibility. (It's a particularly nice touch
when Mother spins her way through similes, talking about buying "a red balloon
like a red jewel," a "green balloon like the green sea," and "a blue balloon like the
blue sky," and Little Monster insists also on a lovely purple balloon that's "like ... a
lovely purple balloon.") In Collins' oversized illustrations, the clean sweeps of
color balance the creative monstrosities of mother and son, who evince bug eyes
4 
* THE BULLETIN
worthy of Victoria Chess, but their benign anteaterly snouts, stripy ears, feet, and
tails, and friendly knobbly horns make them a species unto themselves, cuddly and
homely and absurd. Little Monster's body language is as eloquent as his spoken
words: he's prick-eared in alarm at his plummet, he bounces gleefully off of the
porch at the start of the outing, he gazes, slightly ruefully, at his flaming marsh-
mallow (which, in the secure evening scene with Mother present, is all that the
destructive power of fire can manage), and he flops, ears sagging and limbs weighted
down with somnolence, on the arm of the chair before heading to bed. Gently
iimaginative without being coy or fluffy, this is a solid reminder of parental love
and security that will be warmly welcomed by sleepy little monsters. (Imprint
information appears on p. 34.)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, DAVID A. 
How Tall, How Short, How Faraway; illus. by Nancy
Tobin. 
Holiday House, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1375-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs ..
Adler's succinct text combines with Tobin's bold, clear illustrations to introduce
the concept of measurement to youngsters. The lesson begins with basic ques-
tions: "How tall are you? How long is your block? How faraway is your school?"
The book then travels to ancient Egypt to begin its exploration, focusing on the
ancient units of measurement: digit, palm, span, and cubit. After inviting his
readers to make measurements using their own fingers, hands, and arms, the au-
thor addresses the issue of standards ("In the past, people often used one man's
cubit or steps as a standard. That man was usually the people's leader or king").
The title then examines the customary (inch-pound) and metric systems of mea-
surement (with an opportunity for readers to create their own rulers by copying
from the book) and takes a brief foray into odometers. Though the pages on the
odometer seem crowded and less clear than the other visual explanations in the
book, the art, thickly bordered cartoons with strong colors whose orderly modula-
tion suggests computer graphics, presents concepts clearly and concretely. White
text is superimposed on the illustrations (which often include subtle collage-print
backgrounds) but isn't lost in the detail. Kids will revel in the adventure of mea-
suring objects with their appendages, as well as competing to see who has the
longest stride. Any way you measure it, this one will go the distance. EAB
ANDERSON, M. T. 
Burger Wuss. 
Candlewick, 1999 
[192p]
ISBN 0-7636-0680-4 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
The life of the fast-food wage-slave is the lot of many teens, but that existence
hasn't gotten its due in young-adult literature-until now. When his beloved
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 5
girlfriend succumbs to the lure of a "handsome and dangerous" employee of the
Kermit O'Dermott franchise, Anthony plots revenge and takes on a counter job at
O'Dermott's. Anthony's nemesis, Turner, proves to be a difficult but worthy
target: he cunningly and repeatedly sets Anthony up for trouble, torments him
about the loss of Diana, and, despite his passionate loyalty to O'Dermott's, steals
from the cash register on Anthony's watch. Anthony then forms an alliance with
rebel Shunt, a burger-flipper whose Burger Proletariat seeks to undermine fast-
food organizations from the inside, and our hero uses the alliance for his own ends
by fomenting a war between O'Dermott's and Burger Queen and sabotaging a
visit from the head elf, Kermit O'Dermott himself. Anthony's narration has an
overheated yet comic desperation that sends the rat-a-tat sentences into french-
fried orbit. His underlying pain at the loss of Diana gives the relentless satire some
ballast, and the malevolent Turner is a villain of such satisfying hateability that
readers will unhesitatingly support Anthony's campaign against him. Subject-
wise, this is a far cry from Anderson's vampiric Thirsty (BCCB 4/97), but with its
fast-paced humor, schlemiel-fights-back theme, and frenetic fast-food atmosphere
this too will sate the reading appetite of hungry YAs. DS
BLOCK, FRANCESCA LIA 
Violet & Claire. Cotler/HarperCollins, 1999 
[176p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027750-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027749-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Violet is a would-be screenwriter and filmmaker seeking actors
with the star-power of a James Dean or Marilyn Monroe; enter Claire, a young
woman who believes in fairies and who has the luminescence necessary to light up
the screen. The two become fast friends, Violet protecting the vulnerable Claire,
Claire caring for the thorny Violet. They cut school, go on adventures to transves-
tite bars and rock clubs, and look for themselves anywhere but home. Violet falls
willing sexual prey to rock-and-roll icon Flint Cassidy and winds up working for
his agent; Claire falls for a sensitive poetry-workshop leader who apparently makes
a habit of seducing his students. Separated by doomed love affairs, parties, and
drugs, the girls drift apart, until Violet straightens out and goes after Claire, who
has fled to the desert. The novel is divided into three sections ("Violet"; "Claire";
"Violet & Claire") with scenes noted as in a screenplay ("Ext: High School Quad,
Day"). The novel lacks momentum, relying on sensational high points to move
the loosely connected incidents along; one-note characterizations (the men are all
opportunistic slime and the mothers are vacantly ineffective) trivialize the emo-
tional content of an already sketchy plot. Although there is the occasional flash of
imagistic magic, readers seeking the spark ofWeetzie et al. will find only flickering
shadows of it here. Still, the friendship between Violet and Claire has promise,
and that may be enough to redeem this title for Block's many fans. JMD
BLUME, JUDY, ed. 
Places I Never Meant to Be: Original Stories by Censored
Writers. 
Simon, 1999 
[20 8p]
ISBN 0-689-82034-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
A dozen entries from writers who have been the targets of censorship attempts
comprise this short story collection. The contributors are a stellar list of well-
known YA authors: Norma Fox Mazer, Julius Lester, Rachel Vail, Katherine Pater-
6 
* 
THE BULLETIN
son, Jacqueline Woodson, Harry Mazer, Walter Dean Myers, Susan Beth Pfeffer,
David Klass, Paul Zindel, and Chris Lynch are all represented by stories written
specifically for this collection (the late Norma Klein is represented by a story writ-
ten in 1959, selected by her husband). Particular stories stand out: in Julius Lester's
"Spear" a young man decides against living the life his mother and his ancestry
have ordained for him; Rachel Vail's "Going Sentimental" depicts two friends who
make a pragmatic choice about losing their virginity; Walter Dean Myers' "The
Beast Is in the Labyrinth" heartbreakingly presents John, who is torn between his
past, his family, and his possible future; and in Susan Beth Pfeffer's "Ashes," a
young woman realizes her beloved, charming father is the ne'er-do-well her mother
always said he was. While the stories themselves are, for the most part, individually
intriguing, the collection suffers from a disheartening tonal sameness that ulti-
mately makes it unsuccessful as an anthology. Still, the authors' notes about cen-
sorship add a thought-provoking dimension to the collection, as does Blume's
introduction, and the stories themselves are emotionally intense. All proceeds from
the sale of this title go to the National Coalition against Censorship. JMD
BOND, REBECCA Just Like a Baby; written and illus. by Rebecca Bond. 
Little,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-10416-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-4 yrs
An extended family prepares for their new baby by laboring on the forthcoming
addition's cradle: Father builds it, Grandfather paints it, Grandmother sews a
quilt for it, Brother makes a mobile to hang over it, and Mother moves it to its
proper spot beneath the windows. Each, after completing his or her task, tries out
the inviting cradle just for a second and sleeps "just like a baby," with each sleeper
first admiring the cumulative work done on the cradle before settling in for a nap;
when the baby comes, fulfilling all their hopes, she follows their lead and sleeps
"just like a baby." While the text may go on a bit for the babies of the audience, the
baby-preparation story is cozy and the cumulation suitably lulling (though the
cradle's novelty makes one wonder what Brother slept in as an infant). The acrylic
art has a rough-hewn texture appropriate to a story of craftsmanship, and Bond
indulges in some intriguing fish-eye perspectives when looking at the cradle that
emphasize its importance as well as preventing the loving images from tipping into
sweetsiness. The riot of naive colors sometimes sails too close to ugly overcrowd-
ing, but the art generally has a homey charm that's in keeping with the soft ideali-
zation of a bedtime story. This might offer additional service as a pre-baby read to
an older sibling, especially if a grandparent gets in on the reading act. DS
BRADLEY, KIMBERLY BRUBAKER 
One-of-a-KindMallie. Delacorte, 1999 
[144p]
ISBN 0-385-32694-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
In a companion book to Ruthie's Gift (BCCB 5/98), Bradley explores the character
of Matilda Graber, one of ten-year-old twins Hallie and Mallie, living in a rural
Indiana farming town during World War I. After spending her life as a carbon
copy of Hallie (minus Hallie's chipped tooth), wearing matching outfits, having
the same best friend (Ruthie), and wearing the same hairstyle, Mallie decides she
wants to be unique. It's a difficult summer for Mallie as she struggles to create her
own identity separate from but still connected to her twin. When her mother
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 
7
receives a piano and Mallie discovers, with the help of the new mail-order bride,
Mrs. Jenkins, her facility for playing, Mallie begins to create the individual iden-
tity she desires. Unfortunately, the characterizations are on the flat side, and fast-
paced this isn't (Mallie's growth doesn't begin until over halfway through the book).
Nonetheless, Bradley explores an aspect of growing up that any child, twin or not,
will be drawn to, and kids ready for something a little longer than the American
Girls stories may find this a useful step up. EAB
BUNTING, EVE 
Blackwater. Cotler/HarperCollins, 1999 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027843-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027838-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Brodie was looking forward to summer and its promises, including the possibility
of going to the movies with the beauteous Pauline Genaro; unfortunately he's
saddled with his creepy cousin Alex, who at twelve is a year younger than Brodie
and requiring of supervision, which puts an end to summer dreams. When Brodie
sees Pauline lazing by the river with raffish Otis McCandless, jealousy inspires
some riverside roughhousing ("Pauline was the wishbone out of the Thanksgiving
turkey, and Otis and I were pulling to see who'd win") that turns to tragedy when
the swiftly running river claims Pauline and Otis. Alex rushes to report Brodie,
with deliberate falsehood, as a hero who tried to save the kids rather than an insti-
gator of the tragedy, and Brodie struggles with the horrific difference between the
truth and the belief of his family, friends, and neighbors. Bunting deftly conveys
Brodie's gnawing, corrosive guilt and his recoiling not just from what he did but
from his unwilling bond with troubled Alex, who relishes fanning the flames of the
drama. Though the events are a bit programmatic (an anonymous eyewitness
leaves messages urging Brodie to tell the truth, and eventually he does come clean),
the book makes the ethical dilemma as intense and suspenseful as any physical
action, and the characterization of Brodie, a good kid who just can't muster the
moral strength to swim against the current of public opinion, is sympathetic and
credible. Kids not quite up to the complexities of Killing Mr. Grffin but looking
for a darker ethical drama than Bauer's On My Honor (BCCB 10/86) will find this
a gripping alternative. DS
CALHOUN, DIA 
Firegold; illus. by Herve Blondon. 
Winslow, 1999 
[28 6p]
Trade ed. ISBN 1-890817-10-4 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-890817-28-7 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
The people of the Valley and the people of the Mountains, the Dalriada, are mor-
tal enemies, each preferring to exist with little or no contact with the other. Jonathon
Brae is Valley, but he is unlike other Valley dwellers, set apart from his peers by the
belief that, because of the unique color of his eyes, he will go mad. After his
mother is killed by a Dalriada war party retrieving a stolen horse, Jonathon begins
to seek answers to questions his parents have always refused to discuss. His search
leads him into the mountains, to the Dalriada, and the secret of his own family
origins. Calhoun has created a compelling mythology for two warring cultures,
once one, now separate, and the boy who seeks to reunite them. Jonathon is a
believable young adult hero, a confused adolescent at odds with his father and
endangered by what he doesn't know. Characterizations are strong and motiva-
8 
* 
THE BULLETIN
tions emotionally credible: Jonathon's quest to find his place in the world is fueled
by grief at his mother's death; his discovery of his Dalriada roots and his trium-
phant completion of the Ridgewalk (the Dalriada initiation into adulthood) leads
him back to the Valley to settle all that remains undone. The plot bristles with
scenes of suspenseful action and potential danger, building toward Jonathon's fi-
nal reconciliation with his father. It is a credit to Calhoun's plotting and charac-
terization that the emotional resolution of her hero's return to the quiet Valley has
as much resonance as his successful completion of the perilous Ridgewalk. JMD
CAMP, LINDSAY 
Why?; illus. by Tony Ross. 
Putnam, 1999 
[26p]
ISBN 0-399-23396-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-7 yrs
Lily drives her father to distraction by repeatedly asking "Why?" Irritation turns to
pride, however, when Lily and her irrepressible questioning stop a spaceship of
earth-invading extraterrestrials, the Thargons: "Tremble, Earthlings! We have
come to destroy your planet!" Well, maybe not, since Lily follows every alien di-
rective with "Why?" Cartoon blocks of colored-pencil drawings in blues, greens,
and yellows fill inviting double- and single-page scenes, while Lily's wings of or-
ange-red hair provide an eyecatching counterpoint throughout the visual narra-
tive. The dot-eyed human and alien figures are expressive, humorous, and
emotionally engaging. Energetic shading, irregular lines, and vigorous hatching
texture the illustrations with depth, movement, and contour. The straightforward
narrative, told outside the frames of the cartoons, balances the balloons of dialogue
between Lily and her father. Among themselves, of course, the Thargons speak
Thargonian, but the endpapers offer a cipher-key to decode their language-those
who do so will find one Thargon asking a flower "What is your name?" or another
wondering why Lily's cat doesn't speak. Fortunately, the Thargons go home be-
fore teatime, Lily is an unvanquished hero, her father's love is unconditional, and
the story's closure will satisfy both children and adults. Readers seeking an enjoy-
able readaloud, a bedtime melodrama, or an excuse for code-breaking may find
that this story gives the right answers-so why not? JNH
CARLSON, LORI MARIE, comp. 
You're On!: Seven Plays in English and
Spanish. Morrow, 1999 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-688-16237-1 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Carlson offers those interested in performing plays in English and/or Spanish a
collection of short dramas suited to a range of ages and situations. All seven plays
are by twentieth-century Hispanic playwrights and five are published here for the
first time. New plays include two realistic dramas about immigrants in America:
one by Gary Soto and another by Denise Ruiz, a young woman who won a prize
for a previous play written when she was a New York City high school student.
Other more magically realistic selections include a lyrical dream play by librarian
Pura Belpre, a Christmas fantasy by novelist Oscar Hijuelos, a mime play by Ar-
gentinian modernist poet Alfonsina Storni, and a comic play by Federico Garcia
Lorca that revolves around a Spanish folktale. None of the plays presents insur-
mountable difficulties for staging. Elena Castedo's fable-like play could be per-
formed spontaneously in the elementary or middle-school classroom since it requires
minimal costuming and few props and because it accommodates almost any num-
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 9
ber of students. Each play appears first in English and then in Spanish, regardless
of which is the play's original tongue, but the translations are clearly marked and
students of either language will appreciate the opportunity to cross-check their
reading. Students and teachers at many levels should be able to find something in
this compilation to help them dramatize their own or others' experiences. FK
CLEARY, BEVERLY 
Ramona's World; illus. by Alan Tiegreen. 
Morrow,
1999. 
[19 2p]
Library ed. 
ISBN 0688-16818-3 
$14.93
Trade ed. 
ISBN 0688-16816-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
After a long literary absence, Ramona Quimby returns. Now a fourth-grader,
she's excited at the prospect of a new school friend, Daisy; she's engrossed in the
business of being a big sister to baby Roberta; she's also beset by the classic Quimby
problems of family and school (her fourth-grade teacher finally lays down the law
on that famous Ramona spelling). Ramona devotees will note the increasing promi-
nence of Yard Ape (aka Danny), presumably as a result of his significance in the
televised Ramona series; it's also interesting to see Susan of the boingy curls again
and to acquire some additional understanding of Susan's militantly virtuous char-
acter (she's forbidden to eat the cake at Ramona's birthday party because her mother
considers birthday cake unsanitary). Cleary doesn't strain the series continuity by
hammering home newly contemporary details (though Beezus does go hog-wild
and get her ears pierced without permission); instead, there's a snug and solid old-
fashionedness to Ramona's titular world that makes it safely insular without being
offputtingly out of touch. That and sympathetic but briskly humorous portrayals
of what could be their own troubles are what readers want from Ramona; they'll be
very pleased to have another title from which to get it. Alan Tiegreen's fluid and
energetic sketches don't take their subjects overseriously but are nonetheless re-
spectful of their growth. DS
CUTLER, JANE 
'Gator Aid; illus. by Tracey Campbell Pearson. 
Farrar,
1999 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-374-32502-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Because Edward Fraser has been creeping around blissfully imitating the crocodile
in Peter Pan, his family is skeptical when he claims to have seen an alligator in the
local park's lake. Everyone else believes with a vengeance, however, and the alliga-
tor grows in reported size (Edward's mother dryly notes that things can grow fast
"once they get on the news") and acquaintanceship (a media frenzy erupts in the
park as limelight-seekers of all stripes are inspired to reptilian closeness). Soon a
gen-u-wine gator-hunter (and his feisty granddaughter) is called in, and Edward
begins to fear for the playful baby alligator. Cutler has two big pluses going for
her: a completely original plot, and a sunny, individual style that keeps the pro-
ceedings brimful of life. The spirited family interchanges and spot-on observa-
tions of second-grader Edward's actions ("He remembered to cross his fingers behind
his back before saying, 'I never lie'") are balanced by a larger and more satiric
picture of the publicity circus and story expansion; underneath it all, however, is
the vindication of Edward, who didn't lie, who did see an alligator, and who is
proven truthful in front of friends-and his big brother. There's real craftsman-
10 
* THE BULLETIN
ship under the lighthearted humor, and kids will be happy to see Edward's honor,
general order, and the baby alligator restored. DS
DALDRY, JEREMY 
The Teenage Guy's Survival Guide. Little, 1999 
136p 
illus.
Paper ed. ISBN 0-316-17824-1 
$8.95 
R 
Gr. 6-12
Girls are offered quite a few cheery guides to girlhood and life, but guys aren't so
often favored with such literary mentoring. Daldry redresses that lack in this breezy
paperback filled with creative emphatic fonts and a peanut gallery (including a
bold young man in shades and his wide-eyed and nervous counterpart) comment-
ing on the action throughout. The book's first section, "Surviving Love and Sex,"
is its biggest, packed with detailed advice about meaty matters such as how to
negotiate the first kiss, how not to be a jerk when you break up with a girl, and
what to do if your mom finds your porn collection ("Shrivel up and die?" asks the
worried guy). Other sections include "Surviving All the Changes in Your Body,"
"Surviving Teenage Ups and Downs," and "Surviving Teenage Social Life." Gay
kids aren't that likely to make it through the fifty pages of intense girl-discussion
to the accepting mention of homosexuality, and Daldry's casualness of style occa-
sionally leads to some contradictions (he first says there's no wrong way to split up,
and he then goes on to describe the wrong ways to split up) or confusion (the
section addressing the funding of dates rather implies that one can invite a girl out
and then stick her with the check). The matter-of-fact intimate confidences, how-
ever, tread where few books have gone before, making this a helpful big brother to
Harris' It's Perfectly Normal (BCCB 10/94). Buy an extra copy and leave it around
where the girls congregate too-they'll relish investigating how the other half sees
the world. DS
FINKELSTEIN, NORMAN H. 
The Way Things Never Were: The Truth about the
"Good Old Days." 
Atheneum, 1999 
104p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-81412-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
For children pummeled by adult reminiscences on the salad days of their youth,
Finkelstein provides ammunition to launch a counterattack. Eight topical chap-
ters take on such issues as health and safety, the environment, crime, and educa-
tion, demonstrating with statistics and "expert" opinions that the 1950s and '60s
weren't everything that aging memories sometimes crack them up to be. Finkelstein
rightly notes some of the cloudier facets of these earlier decades: polio, the Cold
War, lower graduation rates, poorer nutritional knowledge, lingering segregation
in the aftermath of Brown vs. Board of Education. However, in dispelling one set
of myths he inadvertently introduces another, portraying current social conditions
as a comparative Camelot. Lauding the medical community's victory over child-
hood diseases such as measles and polio, he blatantly ignores the post-'60s threat of
AIDS; indicting the "lead-fuel-guzzling, smoke-belching automobiles of the 1940s
and 1950s," he fails to note the aggregate environmental impact of the vastly greater
number of cleaner emission autos now on the roads; bashing the lack of cultural
diversity in post World War II suburbia, he turns a blind eye to the tenacity of
ethnic enclaves in "once-vibrant" cities. Kids whose research into the 1950s and
'60s hasn't extended beyond Nickelodeon reruns will find this title an eye-opener,
but more critical readers will quickly perceive that this is just one side of a very
tangled argument. Photos, documentary notes, and a list for further reading are
included. EB
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 11
FLEMING, CANDACE 
A Big Cheesefor the White House: The True Tale ofa Tremen-
dous Cheddar; illus. by S. D. Schindler. 
Kroupa/DK Ink, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2573-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
There's no question in the minds of the citizens of Cheshire, Massachusetts that
they produce the young nation's finest cheese, so it's no surprise that civic pride is
piqued when they learn that the town of Norton's cheese is being served at Presi-
dent Jefferson's table. To bring the excellence of their product forcibly to Jefferson's
attention (and of course to upstage their rivals), Cheshire-ites overcome obstacle
after obstacle to make a wheel stupendous enough to grace the White House. No
cheese press big enough to squeeze it? Use the cider press. No hoop big enough to
hold it? The blacksmith can turn one out. No sledge big enough to convey it?
Elder John Leland's horse-drawn sleigh can manage the job. News of the coming
cheese arrives at the White House before Leland and his cargo, and fifteen foot-
men are at hand to haul the wheel into the amazed president's dinner party, where
the honor of Cheshire is roundly vindicated. Schindler's line and watercolor cast
are lighthearted enough to capture the joyous absurdity of the undertaking yet
literal enough to preserve the kernel of historic truth at the heart of the tale (ex-
plained in a concluding note) and to respect the townspeople's determination.
Where there's a will, there's a whey. EB
GANTOS, JACK Jack on the Tracks: Four Seasons ofFifth Grade; written and illus.
by Jack Gantos. 
Farrar, 1999 
[192p]
ISBN 0-374-33665-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Jack, hero of Heads or Tails (BCCB 7/94), Jack's New Power (12/95), and Jack's
Black Book (12/97), returns here in an account of the year before his other adven-
tures, when his family first moves to Florida. This is a Jack awestruck by his
father's certainty in all matters ("And even when his lectures got him hot under the
collar, it just meant that he cared enough to keep me from being a moron all my
life"), tormented by his older sister ("She called me a crybaby, a wimp, a candy
butt, a sissy, a pantywaist, a sniveler, and a mama's boy"), and determined to
better himself (he earnestly explores his senses in a composition about a friend's
eating a tapeworm). His struggle for maturation is enhanced by Gantos' efferves-
cent writing style and grasp of the gross and horrifying (in addition to his friend's
tapeworm-which turns out to be spaghetti-Jack finds philosophy in a case of
hookworm and proves to be doom for each of three family cats in turn). This will
reel kids right in without condescending to them, and you could start them on this
volume and move them up through Jack's adventures chronologically-especially
if you were prepared for a tapeworm-eating readaloud. DS
GARDEN, NANCY 
The Year They Burned the Books. 
Farrar, 1999 
24 7p
ISBN 0-374-38667-6 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Jamie is the editor of the high-school newspaper; her dear friend and fellow paper-
staffer, Terry, has privately informed her that he has changed from Maybe gay to
Probably gay, and the arrival of a beautiful new photographer makes Jamie think
she's moving from Maybe a lesbian to Probably a lesbian. Her private life may be
conflating with her public position, however, when an outspoken new school board
12 
* THE BULLETIN
member goes after the school's policy on condom distribution, teaching of sexual
education, inclusion of books mentioning sex in the school library-and the re-
sponses of the school newspaper, under Jamie's leadership, to these actions. Jamie,
Terry, and other newspaper staff respond to new strictures by publishing an un-
derground newspaper, which, in light of increasing tension in the community,
begins to make them personal targets. The plot components here are getting pretty
worn around the edges (see Andrew Clements' The Landry News, BCCB 6/99, for
another recent renegade-newspaper story), and Garden's occasional attempts to
add some nuanced viewpoint never really succeed, leaving the ethical deck heavily
stacked; the good characters' earnest high-mindedness and sensitive longings are
also rather heavily hammered home. The crusade and anti-crusade dynamic still
makes for energizing reading, however, and the book wisely avoids tying things up
too neatly by giving Jamie a girlfriend (the beautiful photographer is straight, and
she remains merely a loyal platonic friend). Readers with an activist bent may
revel in the righteous anger of the censorship drama. DS
GORMAN, CAROL 
Dork in Disguise. HarperCollins, 1999 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024867-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024866-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
If Bill Nye the Science Guy ever inspired a novel, it's this one about Jerry Flack,
the sixth-grade science whiz who reinvents himself as one of the cool kids at his
new middle school. He's assisted by Brenda, a self-assured classmate who sees
through his disguise ("It takes one to know one," she says) and has the wisdom to
let Jerry sort through his feelings on his own. It takes Jerry 150 pages to realize
he'd rather spend time with Brenda and her friends than with Cinnamon, a lovely
and popular-but-dopey redhead, whose admiration of his more-or-less successful
disguise and of his inventive lies inspires him to keep his participation on the
science team a secret. While some of the "cool" characters are stereotypically shal-
low, in other ways the book gives realistic attention to the preteen school scene,
especially the way hormones can affect the ability of smart kids to make smart
choices. Gorman also works in some way-cool science facts that, though presented
in a dry Q & A form in the science team competition scene, come to life in Jerry's
science project: a hovercraft built from a vacuum-cleaner engine. Go ahead and
encourage kids to try this at home. FK
GOURLEY, CATHERINE 
Welcome to Felicity's World, 1774; illus. by David
Henderson, Laszlo Kubinyi, Susan McAliley et al. 
American Girl,
1999 
58p 
(The American Girls Collection)
ISBN 1-56247-768-4 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Among the latest additions to the extensive American Girls product line is a series
of historical guides serving as companions to each of the girls' novels. Felicity's
World begins with a cogent thumbnail sketch of the political background of the
American Revolution, continues with three chapters of social history focusing on
domestic life (various types of homesteads, women's occupations and girls' tasks,
clothing, medicine and health, the daily routine typical of young ladies of Felicity's
privileged rank), and concludes with a chapter on the war itself and the life of
soldiers and female camp followers. While the bulk of the information offered
here can be found in other age-appropriate sources, the lavish photo illustrations
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 
13
and period pictures, organization that encourages both browsing and close read-
ing, and intriguing details of times past (from dolls in coffins that reflect the high
child mortality rates, to the colonial custom of throwing stockings at the bride, to
the gibbeting of executed criminals) make this particularly attractive to readers
engaged by Felicity's series. Excerpts from letters and diaries of colonists and anec-
dotes from the lives of more august historic figures (the Washingtons' courtship,
Jefferson's grief at his wife's death) breathe life into photos of artifacts and may
suggest ways of extending doll play beyond dress-up and tea parties. EB
GRIFFITH, HELEN V. 
How Many Candles?; illus. by Sonja Lamut. 
Greenwillow,
1999 
[2 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16259-2 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16258-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Alex (the dog) and the cat (the cat), from the easy reader Alex and the Cat (BCCB
12/97), make an appearance in picture-book form in order to celebrate the birth-
day of Robbie, Alex's young owner. Alex has made a cake for the occasion, but his
limited intellectual powers are challenged when he tries to figure out how many
candles he'll need as the cat, in a riff on the idea of "dog years," starts leading him
through some questionable concepts of age ("Ten years in a boy is the same as
seventy years in a cat"). A turtle chimes in ("Seventy years is nothing") and some
gnats offer their perspective ("Nothing lasts that long"), leaving Alex no wiser than
he was to start with but resulting in a merry chase for the cat. Griffith maintains
the effective contrast between Alex's eager simplicity and the cat's laconic conde-
scension (you can almost see the rolling of feline eyes) as he scrambles poor Alex's
brains, and while the final diversion doesn't offer a satisfying closure to the math
questions, the promise of cake will probably serve to smother any audience reser-
vations. Lamut uses the canvas' rough surface for texture, cleverly also employing
it as a frame to the illustrations, giving a geometric rectangle-on-rectangle preci-
sion to the spreads that underscores the mathematical theme. She doesn't over-
look humor or character, either: Alex's worried visions pop up in thought bubbles
containing geriatric cats and ever-multiplying candles, and the fluid line of Alex's
cheerful countenance contrasts with the cat's lithe and enigmatic mien as well as
with the straightforward botanical detail of their outdoor milieu. When the little
ones start rattling on about dog years, break this out for some well-timed temporal
silliness. DS
GROVE, VICKI 
The Starplace. Putnam, 1999 
[224p]
ISBN 0-399-23207-9 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Frannie's life is tightly bounded by small-town Oklahoma conventions and by her
own insecurities until the arrival of Celeste, in 1961 the first black student at
Quiver Junior High, changes Frannie's world and makes her question some famil-
ial and local assumptions about race. Frannie also finds herself drawn to Celeste,
whose poise she envies, and as the two girls develop a friendship, she becomes
intrigued by Celeste's father's quest to uncover buried family history, history
wrapped inside a dark Quiver secret. Frannie's narration sounds credibly self-
conscious and sheltered, and it also provides some quietly drawn portraits of the
uneasy and disguised racism of the area ("I could sort of remember there being
14 
* THE BULLETIN
stuff about Negros and schools in our seventh grade social studies book, but the
teacher skipped over that section because none of us were Negro so we didn't need
to know it"). Celeste is overly saintly, however, and the friendship between the
two girls tips into the sentimental; the history sometimes trades social impact for
melodrama, and Groves' chronology of Celeste's family story is problematic. The
account of Frannie's emerging conscience, increasing awareness of history, and
developing friendship with Celeste is compelling, however; readers will enjoy fan-
cying themselves retroactive heroes. DS
HEIDE, FLORENCE PARRY 
The House of Wisdom; by Florence Parry Heide and
Judith Heide Gilliland; illus. by Mary Grandprd. 
Kroupa/DK Ink, 1999 
[40p]
ISBN 0-7894-2562-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 3-5
Ishaq, the son of the chief translator for ninth century Caliph al Ma'mun, is fasci-
nated by the prestigious center for books and learning in which his father content-
edly labors, but he does not feel the passion for research that draws scholars from
all over the world to the Caliph's House of Wisdom in Baghdad. Hoping to
someday join the Caliph's trade caravan, he applies himself to his studies so that he
can understand and appreciate the foreign lands and customs he will encounter,
and he finally makes the journey. Among treasure and rare texts the caravan brings
back to the House of Wisdom, Ishaq discovers writings his father identifies as a
heretofore unknown work of Aristotle; fired with imagination from his world trav-
els, Ishaq now devotes himself to studying the Greek philosopher and hopes to
become a bridge to the future: "Maybe someday someone from another land,
speaking another language, will be searching as I am. And maybe ... I can light
his way." In a concluding note Heide expands on the purpose of the House of
Wisdom and the historic contributions of Ishaq, his father, and the al Ma'mun;
although her remarks shed light on why this is all so important to Western thought,
they do little to bring kid appeal to so esoteric a topic. Pastel illustrations present
a bazaar of garishly hued images crammed to the point of distraction, and although
Heide's text ambles gracefully along with poetic earnestness, it conveys little in-
sight into Ishaq's intellectual awakening. A pronunciation guide is included. EB
HELLER, NICHOLAS 
Ogres! Ogres! Ogres!: A Feasting Frenzy from A to Z; illus. by
Jos. A. Smith. 
Greenwillow, 1999 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16987-2 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16986-4 
$15.93
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When we "take a peek through the trap door" we see "insatiable ogres feasting on
fabulous foods from A to Z," starting with Abednego, who "adores anchovy but-
ter," which leads us to Beulah, who "blows bubbles in her chocolate," and so on
until Zuleika "zips zealously through her asparagus" and leads us back around to A
again. The oral pleasures experienced by the cavalcade of omnivorous monsters
are depicted in text offering similar pleasures, with lip-smacking alliteration and a
pleasant linkage in the last word. The pre- and post-alphabet framing stanzas are
extraneous, however, and they emphasize the absence of momentum in the text's
listing of ogre after ogre. The illustrations too fall short of the saturnalian glee one
might hope for: the subjects look more like your slightly goofy neighbor than
creatures of fearsome aspect and ravenous appetite, and the food never attains the
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 
15
delicious and chaotic excess that would fulfill young viewers' secret wishes (nor is
it clear why bits of famous masterpieces, such as Rembrandt's self-portrait, are
tucked into some of the illustrations). Still, Abednego et al. are an amusing collec-
tion of characters, and youngsters who would themselves enjoy being loose in the
kitchen without a superego may wish to snack on this. DS
HENKES, KEVIN 
The Birthday Room. 
Greenwillow, 1999 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-688-16733-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Ben isn't as delighted as his parents would like him to be over their gift for his
twelfth birthday-an empty, well-lit room to be used as an art studio. Although
he enjoys art and shows considerable promise, what he'd really like is a trip to
Oregon to visit Uncle lan, his mother's estranged brother whom Ben cannot re-
member. Mom harbors what Ben regards as an irrational mistrust of Ian, appar-
ently blaming him for an accident in which Ben lost a finger at the age of two, but
she reluctantly agrees to take him for the visit. During their stay, Ian is reassured
that he hasn't ruined his nephew's life, the adult siblings achieve rapprochement,
and Ben allows his interest in art to blossom under his uncle's gentle tutelage.
Henkes' tale unfolds slowly, and readers expecting dramatic confrontations and
startling revelations of family secrets will observe instead a gradual release of re-
sentment and guilt and a quiet acceptance of family with all their warts and flaws.
A subplot involving the risky pregnancy of Ian's wife, Nina, and a trio of friendly
neighbor children bent on welcoming the baby with an appropriate gift supplies
enough action and tension to carry readers along as the family resolves its prob-
lems at their realistically languorous pace. EB
HERTENSTEIN, JANE 
Beyond Paradise. Morrow, 1999 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-688-16381-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Louise Keller and her missionary parents have barely settled into the Baptist com-
pound on the Philippine island of Panay before the war in Europe extends its reach
into the Pacific. Her father, on church business in Manila, is cut off from his
family as the Japanese gain hold of one island after another; compound residents
struggle to preserve some normalcy, even as they drill for attack and eventually go
into hiding in the mountains. When Panay is taken, their hideaway is discovered
and all enemy nationals are forced into concentration camps. Louise passes through
her late teens within the camps, forced to socialize at close quarters with persons
the like of which her strict Baptist family has never known. Rumors, privation,
separation from her father, and fear of the unknown wear hard on her, and when
her mother mentally collapses under pressure, Louise loses her last shred of family
support. The drama inherent in Louise's plight is never fully realized within this
novel. Although flashes of genuine emotion erupt (suppressed anger boils over
when Louise receives a long-awaited letter from her stateside older sister, filled
with details of a brimming social life), underdeveloped incidents are, by and large,
simply strung together. Nonetheless, life under occupation in the wartime Pacific
is a topic rarely treated in children's literature; pair and contrast this with Graham
Salisbury's story of troubled Japanese-American existence on hotly defended Ha-
waii, Under the Blood-Red Sun (BCCB 11/94). EB
16 
* THE BULLETIN
HEWETT, LORRI 
Dancer. Dutton, 1999 
21 4 p
ISBN 0-525-45968-5 
$15.99 
R Gr. 6-10
Stephanie is a devoted and promising student of ballet, consecrated to her art
despite being the only African-American in her class. She's beset by pressure,
however: her own pressure to be the best when a new student outshines her, her
family's pressure to consider college rather than post-graduation ballet, and the
social pressures at her tony private school, where as the janitor's daughter she re-
ceives a scholarship. Stephanie's talent is encouraged by Miss Winnie, charismatic
former ballerina who danced in postwar Europe because American ballet compa-
nies wouldn't accept black dancers (George Balanchine told her that "ballerinas
should have skin the color of a freshly peeled apple"), and Stephanie is drawn to
Miss Winnie's resentful but attractive nephew Vance, who excels in ballet under
his aunt's tutelage but yearns to break away to his own world of club dance. Hewett
has an unerring grasp of the ballet novel, nurturing an intense hothouse atmo-
sphere of rehearsal, obsession, romance, and intriguing practical details that will
make balletomanes pirouette with delight. Stephanie's ambivalence over her situ-
ation at school possesses the same kind of febrile angst and blends in effectively,
and the book makes repeated but never preachy points about ballet's problematic
limitations in the name of homogeneousness in dancers (there's an intriguing ob-
servation about the Dance Theatre of Harlem's practice of dyeing pointe shoes to
match their wearer's skin tones, thereby extending the artistic line of the body).
Lovers of this classic literary choreography will relish seeing this appealing young
dancer in the starring role. DS
HOBBIE, HOLLY 
Toot e&'Puddle: You Are My Sunshine; written and illus. by Holly
Hobbie. 
Little, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-36562-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
Those redoubtable piglet buddies Toot and Puddle (from Toot 6e Puddle, BCCB
2/98) are back: "The sun was shining, the birds were singing, blossoms were
bursting... and Toot was moping." Nothing Puddle does can shake Toot out of
his funk-his ears are too big, his eyes are too small, he's too pink ("You can't be
too pink," says Puddle). Although Toot's smile pops out when Puddle makes him
a "five-berry cobbler with heaps of whipped cream," it takes a thunderstorm to
really cheer him up ("Sometimes you need a big whopping thunderstorm to clear
the air," says Puddle). A very slightly acerbic sense of humor manifests itself here
and there as Toot simply refuses to be jollied out of his doldrums, and it's that
humor that keeps Hobbie's woodland friends from cloying. Watercolors featuring
cotton puff clouds in blue skies, sunny yellow kitchens, and sylvan glades sit lightly
on the pages, providing backdrops against which Puddle and friends attempt to
modify the sour Toot's behavior. Young listeners will cheer the efforts of Toot's
buddies to lift his spirits, even as they recognize his moody disaffection. JMD
HOLM, JENNIFER L. 
Our Only May Amelia. 
HarperCollins, 1999 
253p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028354-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027822-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
A Finnish-American community in Washington State in 1899 is the setting for
this story of twelve-year-old May Amelia, the only girl in a family of seven older
brothers. May Amelia chafes against being a "Proper Young Lady" and longs for
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 
17
the freedom of her brothers, so much so that she is constantly getting into trouble.
Narrated by May Amelia, each chapter relates an incident in her young life, from
boating on the Nasel River, to being chased up a tree by a bear, to taking care of
her newborn baby sister. May Amelia tells her story in a conspiratorial style, with
dialogue absorbed into the main narrative instead of being set off by quotation
marks. While this gives a casual, family-storytelling feel to the text, stylistically it
lacks emotional differentiation; the result is a sequence of incidents without em-
phasis or high points. Because of the discrete nature of the chapters, however, the
novel lends itself to reading aloud, which mitigates the somewhat measured pace
and tonal sameness of the text. May Amelia is an admirable, often humorous
character, and the picture she provides of life in her community is a vibrant one.
Her impressions of her neighbors, her relationships with her parents and brothers,
and her descriptions of daily life on this not-often-seen terrain contain involving
details and realistic emotions. Give this to your readers who have outgrown the
Little House books and are seeking new frontiers. JMD
HOLTWIJK, INEKE 
AsphaltAngels; tr. by Wanda Boeke. 
Lemniscaat/Front Street,
1999 
184p
ISBN 1-886910-24-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Recently translated from the Dutch, this novel is a fictionalized account of the life
of Alex, a thirteen-year-old boy living on the streets of Rio de Janeiro. Alex, who
goes by the nickname Crusoe (after Robinson Crusoe), comes to the city after he's
kicked out of his poor rural home by his stepfather after the death of Alex's foster
mother. The horrifying facts of life on the street are not glossed over in this novel:
the reader and the naive Alex learn about its dangers and moral compromises to-
gether. Through it all Alex maintains a sense of himself as "different" from his
peers, distancing himself as much as possible from their thieving, prostitution, and
glue-sniffing, and at one point describing them as "animals." He succeeds to a
remarkable extent, finding a guide and protector his first day on the street and
falling in with the gang who provides the book's title later on. The subject matter
is by its nature involving, and teen readers are old enough to be moved by the
younger kids' pathetic games and to imagine themselves in Alex's situation. But
the novel's journalistic style-a mix of realism and sentimentality-has surpris-
ingly little emotional depth, and it offers little of the flavor of the city. A glossary
provides literal translations of selected place names and adds some information to
that available in context. The author's afterword provides background about the
street children of Brazil and explains what is being done to help them. In spite of
its weaknesses as a novel, young adults will find this a readable, fact-based intro-
duction to an important subject, one that provides sensitive readers with a balance
of emotional involvement and intellectual distance. FK
HOOBLER, DOROTHY 
The Ghost in the Tokaido Inn; by Dorothy and Thomas
Hoobler. 
Philomel, 1999 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-399-23330-X 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Set in eighteenth-century Japan, this is historical fiction with a suspenseful edge.
Seikei, son of a tea merchant, longs to become a samurai, despite the fact that that
aim is high above his station. On a business trip with his father to Edo, the Shogun's
city, Seikei meets samurai Lord Hakuseki, a coarse, unrefined man with more
18 
* THE BULLETIN
sense of self than sense of honor. When Lord Hakuseki is robbed of a priceless gem
meant as a gift for the Shogun, legendary Judge Ooka is called in to investigate.
Seikei becomes Ooka's willing assistant in the investigation, and his inquiries lead
him to a troupe of Kabuki players and the mysterious actor, Tomomi. The Hooblers
recreate the setting of Japan under the Shogun, depicting the cultural and social
hierarchy against a dramatic backdrop of theatrical and festival events. Precise
characterization, suspenseful plot twists, and a pace defined by swift and some-
times violent action make this a lively period thriller. Readers will appreciate the
clues discovered by the investigating Seikei, along with the strong foreshadowing
that only makes the climax that much more resonant. By the conclusion, all that
is hidden is revealed, honor is avenged, and Seikei achieves his impossible dream.
Young adults will close this book with a sense of having finished a whopping good
yarn. JMD
HORTON, JOAN 
Halloween Hoots and Howls; illus. by JoAnn Adinolfi. 
Holt,
1999 
26p
ISBN 0-8050-5805-2 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 2-4
A score of Halloweeny poems come a-trick-or-treating in this collection, provid-
ing youngsters with glimpses of phenomena ranging from "The Ghost and Goblin
Ball" to "Aggie Witch's Ads." The verse doesn't have the sparkle of Prelutsky or
Florian, and the Halloween hijinks are pretty predictable; the book does engage in
some entertaining conceits ("The Scaredy-Cat Ghost" has been a nervous wreck
ever since somebody "crept up behind me and shouted out BOO!"), however, and
the poems are serviceably spooky. The spattery art relies on the traditional orange
and green contrast, topping the colors up further with loud purples, greens, and
blues; the intensity enhances the MTVesque edge of the figures but sometimes
leaves the compositions cluttered or unfocused. Still, this is a sassy and chantable
offering for the 31st (make sure you point kids to the tombstone couplets on the
endpapers); it's also eminently suitable for reading aloud to younger monsters. DS
IBBOTSON, EVA 
Which Witch?; illus. by Annabel Large. 
Dutton, 1999 
231p
ISBN 0-525-46164-7 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The dashingly handsome Arriman the Awful, Wizard of the North, guardian of all
that is unpleasant and evil, is in a slump. He has given up waiting for his foretold
replacement wizard and decided to seek a wife, hoping that their union will pro-
duce the wizardling of prophecy. Not being what you'd call a wizard about town,
he holds a contest, vowing to marry the witch who performs the darkest magic.
Unfortunately, the witches who turn up for the contest are a motley bunch, from
old Mother Bloodwort (who has a disconcerting habit of turning into a coffee
table) to Mabel Wrack (who specializes in fish magic) to the seriously evil Madame
Olympia, sorceress par excellence, whose ambitions include power but not love.
Belladonna, the youngest of the contenders, hasn't got a chance, because all she's
got on her side is white magic and the fact that she fell for Arriman at first sight.
Enter Terence the orphan and his pet worm Rover. Belladonna takes Rover as her
familiar and Terence as her friend, and suddenly her magic is blacker than a dark
night and her chances improve considerably. There is an Addams Family feel to
Ibbotson's wizards and witches as these gruesome but gleeful malefactors engage in
matchmaking and magic. The descriptions of each witch and her attempted dark
magic is tongue-in-cheek funny, and the settling of the wizard's romantic dilemma,
while foreshadowed and forewarned, is eminently satisfying. JMD
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 19
JARZYNA, DAVE 
Slump. 
Delacorte, 1999 
[176p]
ISBN 0-385-32618-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Mitch is having problems with everybody-his coach, his best friend, his brother
and sister, his parents-and he is convinced that a) nothing is his fault and b)
nothing he can do will change things. An encounter with old friend Annie (who
used to be a pal but isn't anymore since girls and boys can't be pals) in which she
explains that Mitch is just going through a slump energizes Mitch, and he begins
to actively seek to make amends to all. This is a purposeful depiction of one
individual's taking responsibility for his actions and making his life better; unfor-
tunately, the shallow characterizations reflect shallow motivations, and Mitch's
impetus for all this troublemaking is barely indicated. His problems communicat-
ing-his anger, his frustration-are vaguely chalked up to his age and/or stage of
development and are never adequately explained. His miraculous turnaround due
to the kind words of the long-ignored Annie is not credible, and the relative ease
with which he returns to the fold is also a bit rosy. Jarzyna has a good handle on
adolescent dialogue, however, the scenes between the siblings have an irritated
ring of truth to them, and the occasional humorous aside leavens the pace some-
what. Readers in emotional conundrums of their own making may take some
comfort from Mitch's efforts to regain control over his life. JMD
JONES, CHARLOTTE FOLTZ 
Eat Your Words: A Fascinating Look at the Language of
Food; illus. by John O'Brien. 
Delacorte, 1999 
87p
ISBN 0-385-32575-4 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
The "language of food" examined here is both language about food (edible ep-
onyms such as Reubens, graham crackers, and sandwiches, meals named for places,
such as baked Alaska and turkey) and food-influenced language (phrases and words
such as "bring home the bacon," "salary," and "carnival"), and it's enhanced by a
seasoning of other tasty tidbits such as food folklore, food-related laws, food festi-
vals, etc. While there's plenty of fun here, Jones often doesn't distinguish clearly
between etymological myths and truths and usually gives more space to the former,
and her reliance on secondary sources means that some questionable material makes
it in here as facts (the food-related laws section is particularly lore-ish). This isn't
as mouthwatering as James Solheim's It's Disgusting-and We Ate It! (BCCB 4/
98), but as a quick crunchy snack, it may nonetheless tempt reluctant readers and
trivia nibblers. O'Brien's live-wire line drawings lend some visual absurdity to the
proceedings. A bibliography and index are included. DS
KEEHN, SALLY M. 
The First Horse I See. Philomel, 1999 
[224p]
ISBN 0-399-23351-2 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-7
Willojean knows that when you're horse-shopping you shouldn't fall for the first
horse you see, but when she sees the skinny and mistreated Thoroughbred mare
Tess, she's head over heels in love. Unfortunately, all Willojean's distant father
sees in the mare is trouble, and he gives his daughter a deadline by which time she
either has to succeed with Tess or get rid of her. That's a sturdy old nag of a plot,
here fetchingly if unbelievably romanticized, but Keehn burdens it with a pack of
heavy-handed subplots-Willojean's adjustment to her mother's death, her father's
alcoholism, her budding romance with her trainer's son, her trainer's husband's
20 
* THE BULLETIN
villainy-and there's little characterization to give heart to the melodramatics.
Though the present-tense narrative flows along easily, lines such as "By God,
Willojean, that mare's got spirit" are more clich6 than classic. While fervent horse
lovers might find the pony passion here enough to carry them through, they'll be
better off with Jessie Haas' A Horse Like Barney. DS
LEVINE, GAIL CARSON 
Dave at Night. 
HarperCollins, 1999 
[272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028154-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028153-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Papa is barely cold in his grave when stepmother Ida announces her refusal to care
for his two sons on her own; an uncle from Chicago willingly takes in his quiet,
studious nephew Gideon, but no one will take on eleven-year-old Dave, who's
always been a handful, to say the least. Off he goes to the Hebrew Home for Boys
(dubbed "Hell Hole for Brats" by its inmates), but its locked gates and brick fence
cannot keep the rebellious little soul inside. Despite well-founded threats of brutal
punishment by the orphanage director, Dave's up and over the wall at lights out
whenever he can manage. His guide and guardian through the nighttime world is
gonif Sol Gruber, a compassionate con man who introduces Dave to jazz-infused
rent parties and upscale salons of 1926 Harlem. Dave makes friends with Irma
Lee, the lonely, overprotected child of a black society hostess and philanthropist,
and plots an imaginative runaway scheme, which is finally abandoned not only
because of its impossibility, but also because conditions at HHB improve as Dave
elicits the help of friends within the Home and without. Dave's two-page wrap-up
of events brings his lengthy adventures to an over-abrupt close, leaving readers
thirsty for more detail about the childhood years stretching out ahead, not only for
him but for pampered Irma Lee. Still, Dave's tales of life on the "inside"-dodg-
ing sadistic masters, outwitting bullies, sharing midnight food revels with loyal
buddies-will engross orphan-story devotees. A closing note on the setting de-
scribes New York's Hebrew Orphan Asylum, in which the author's father spent
much of his childhood, and comments on the Harlem Renaissance. EB
LITTE, KIMBERLEY GRIFFITHS 
Enchanted Runner. Avon Camelot, 1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-380-97623-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Kendall is half Anglo and half Acoma Indian. His mother is recently dead, his
father and older brother are on a summer-long truck haul, and Kendall is staying
the summer with his maternal great-grandfather, Armando, at the Acoma pueblo.
Kendall is uncertain of his welcome, and his great-grandfather does little to reas-
sure him, indulging instead in long silences interspersed with cultural stories and
lore. Armando finally reaches out to the boy when he realizes that Kendall knows
the Acoma stories from his mother, that he truly wishes to belong to the pueblo,
and that he has in him the ability to become a ritual runner of the Snake Clan.
When Armando is injured on a pilgrimage to a desert shrine, Kendall finds him
and brings help, but the old man dies. The book ends with the understanding that
Kendall will come back to the pueblo: "The horses were gone. Any spirits of past
Snake runners were also gone-forever. But part of Kendall ran with them, would
always run with them. He was an Acoma runner of the Snake Clan. And he would
be back." The writing is choppy and, except for Kendall, the characterizations are
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 
21
flatly functional. The climax, in which Kendall experiences the spirits of his great-
grandfather and his mother, strains credulity, and Kendall's stoic great-grandfa-
ther imparts some heavy-handed cultural messages. These are lightened, however,
by the occasional lyrical descriptions of Kendall running through the desert, and
Kendall himself, searching for both a place to belong and relief from his grief, is a
sympathetic portrayal. JMD
LOWRY, Lois 
Zooman Sam; illus. by Diane de Groat. 
Houghton, 1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-395-97393-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-5
Sam decides to dress up as a zookeeper for "Future Job Day" at nursery school.
With the help of his mother and sister, he contrives a costume that's just right, and
he is unique among the many firemen in his class. Sam's search for the perfect
costume parallels his search for meaning in those collections of letters called words.
By the end of this book, Zooman Sam has turned into Bookman Sam, and he feels
that "Chief ofWonderfulness" feeling because he has become a proud reader. Lowry
has the dynamics of nursery-school participants down pat, and listeners are bound
to recognize themselves and their friends in Sam's classmates as they interact, in-
terrupt and interfere in daily lessons. (Sam's nursery school teacher, Mrs. Bennett,
is a saint.) Sam's internal thought processes are winningly depicted, and his anxi-
eties and accomplishments are both realistic and funny. Subplots involving train-
ing the family dog, Sleuth, and Anastasia's romantic interest in friend Steve are
duly commented on by the point-blank-frank Sam, whose reflections provide a
close-up view of the congenial Krupnik family. There is an ease to Lowry's prose
that makes this a surefire readaloud, and older readers-alone may enjoy looking
back (with an independent reader's sense of indulgence) and remembering when
they were little. Black-and-white line drawings head each chapter, with full-page
illustrations making an amiable addition to an amiable text. JMD
MAYHEW, JAMES 
Katie and the Mona Lisa; written and illus. by James
Mayhew. 
Orchard, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-531-30177-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
While Grandma dozes on a bench in the art museum, Katie strikes up a conversa-
tion with Mona Lisa and learns that the enigmatic smile barely conceals the lone-
liness of a solitary life within a picture frame; Katie entices her to step out of her
picture and meet some folk who can restore her happiness. Raphael's Saint George
is so smitten with Mona Lisa that he abandons his princess-in-distress to kiss her
hand, leaving the dragon to pursue his prey; Mona Lisa tries to dance with the cast
of Botticelli's Primavera, while Katie has a mishap picking oranges in the enchanted
grove. Before returning to Grandma, Katie and her companion unleash Carpaccio's
Lion ofSt. Mark, and it takes An Angel with a Lute to restore harmony within the
gallery and restore the errant images to their proper settings. Although concluding
notes offer a few lines about each masterpiece (Mayhew remarks that "the winged
lion .. , is the symbolic protector of Venice" but never connects the image to St.
Mark) and where it is currently displayed, Mayhew leaves viewers with a the sense
that all these works can be found in a single museum. Other works by the featured
masters peek coyly off the gallery walls (e.g., Leonardo's The Virgin of the Rocks
and Botticelli's The Birth ofVenus), but no identification or reference is offered. A
small but adequately reproduced photo of each work is incorporated into Mayhew's
22 
* 
THE BULLETIN
slightly cartoonish watercolor fantasies, effectively emblazoning this handful of
famous figures onto young memories and scoring a few points for cultural literacy.
EB
MCCAUGHREAN, GERALDINE, ad. 
The Crystal Pool: Myths andLegends ofthe World-
illus. by Bee Willey. 
McElderry, 1999 
138p
ISBN 0-689-82266-9 
$20.00 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
The power of lively language ("Spiny with hail and sleet, rattling and bristling
with icicles, the North Wind heard, and came howling down from the Arctic")
enriches this collection of twenty-eight legends, myths, and stories from a variety
of cultures including Inuit, Maori, Sumerian, Egyptian, Hindu, and Bantu.
McCaughrean brings together familiar tales ("The Pied Piper," "The Flying Dutch-
man") with a wide array of the unfamiliar: "Mommy's Baby" relates the adventure
of an Inuit mother who digs for a baby and ends up in the land of giant infants; "A
Prickly Situation" tells of the war between porcupines and beavers; and "Lamia"
reveals the fate of the unfortunate prince who marries an enchanted snake. Ge-
neric notes make it difficult to know how the stories were adapted from their
sources, and only a familiarity with the tales gives some indication of McCaughrean's
shaping. The writing is uneven, occasionally suffering from choppy sentence struc-
ture that interferes with the flow of the stories, and some of the tales lack the
cultural context necessary to make them meaningful. Still, the collection will be
enjoyed by those seeking unusual and accessible materials for reading aloud or
storytelling. Willey's luminant, stylized, mixed-media vignettes and full page spreads,
although not culturally specific, add visual interest. JNH
MCDONNELL, 
FLORA 
Splash!; 
written 
and 
illus. 
by 
Flora
McDonnell. 
Candlewick, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-0481-X 
$16.99 
R 
1-3 yrs
It's "Hot, hot, hot!" and all the animals are drooping, but baby elephant knows
just where to find relief-at the water hole: "Lovely water. Water to drink. Water
to ... squirt, squirt, squirt!" In no time mother elephant and rhino and hippo and
tiger are splashing and sploshing and whooshing and splooshing ("What a happy,
cool, clever little baby elephant"). Big, big, big! creates the charm here: oversized
format befitting the massive animals; thickly brushed, substantial images to point
at and pat; tall, bold type inviting emergent readers to follow along; uncluttered
backdrops that keep the focus simple and immediate. The searing golds of the
savanna scene in the front endpapers transform to the cool, earthy shadows of the
back endpapers-a promise of refreshment for children dragging their way toward
steamy summer's close. EB
MCELFRESH, LYNN E. 
Can You Feel the Thunder? Atheneum, 1999 
138p
ISBN 0-689-82324-X 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-7
Mic Parsons just wants to be a normal seventh-grader, attending junior high and
hanging out with his buddies Freemont and Stolks, but it's hard when you live on
Bixby Court (known for its weird inhabitants) and you have an older sister like
Stephanie (she is deaf-blind) with a household centered on her needs. Things get
worse with the arrival in Bixby Court of Vern Chortle, complete with his nerd
glasses, electric socks (one of three hundred and eighty-two pairs), and plastic-
coated map of the school sporting lift-off stickers declaring "YOU ARE HERE!" De-
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 
23
spite Mic's attempts to avoid Vern, he has somehow attached himself to Mic,
joining him for lunch, inviting him to practice baseball, and dubbing him "Four-
Twelve" (Mic lives at 412 Bixby Court). Mic's biggest problem, however, is his
failing math grade, which will keep him from playing the baseball season. Vern
and Mic are endearing characters: kids will marvel at Vern's spunkiness in the face
of being the new kid in school, and they'll be able to relate to Mic's desire to be
normal or even cool like his longtime buds. They'll also realize long before Mic
that his old pals aren't such great pals ("I looked around Freemont's room. It
looked even more different in the bright sunlight. Who was this guy? When had
he changed? Had I changed?"), that "Nerd Boy" Chortle is his true friend, and
that Stephanie, whose embarrassing behaviors the novel capably balances with her
admirable qualities (it's she who finally steps in to teach Mic fractions) is a friend
for life. McElfresh's adult characters are less developed, tending instead towards
the stereotypical (caring but overprotective mother, distant, rational engineering
father), and Vern's family is too good to be true. Sports fans will nonetheless
appreciate Mic's devotion to baseball, special-education kids will relish their col-
league Vern's quirky worthiness (Mic initially thinks Vern's "special classes" are
for the gifted, which evokes helpless merriment from an unembarrassed Vern),
and everybody will enjoy watching Mic grow into himself. EAB
MICHELSON, RICHARD 
A Book of Flies Real or Otherwise; illus. by Leonard
Baskin. 
Cavendish, 1999 
56p
ISBN 0-7614-5050-5 $18.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
"A 'cowpie' was my birthing place,/ that's why I have a dirty face./ My classmates
call me 'stinkerbell,'/ but I love all of nature's smells," chants the Latrine Fly in
this poetic collection of buggy verse. Each fly (or putative fly-Michelson makes
it clear that we toss that word around without regard to entomological accuracy)
receives a pithy poem opposite a whimsical watercolor portrait, then a second spread
offers a slightly more technical black-and-white sketch and a brief prose descrip-
tion of the fly's habits. The obvious comparison is to Florian's Insectlopedia (BCCB
7/98), which similarly offered a gallery of poetry and portraiture of the buzzing
brethren (and, like this volume, floated words and pictures in a glossy sea of white
space); Florian's verse is a bit snappier, and Michelson's prose explanations are a
strange blend of fact and fancy, but this volume too treats an intriguing allotment
of insects. Baskin's rough-textured insect figures often have a hint of ferocity in
their huge eyes and bristling legs; that approach contrasts with the delicate, some-
times lacy precision of the line drawings that offer a more straightforward depic-
tion. Between this, Insectlopedia, and Paul Fleischman's Joyful Noise (BCCB 2/88)
you could have a terrific collection of insect poetry-now all we need is the book
of roadapple verse. DS
MILLS, CLAUDIA 
You're a Brave Man, Julius Zimmerman. Farrar, 1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-374-38708-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Julius, introduced as Ethan's best friend in Losers, Inc. (BCCB 4/97), is not look-
ing forward to his summer: his mother, determined to make him an achiever,
signs him up for Intensive Language Study in French and insists he get a job,
which means babysitting for energetic and not-yet-toilet-trained toddler Edison
Blue. A French whiz Julius isn't, requiring special assistance from the teacher
24 
* THE BULLETIN
("Lower than a private lesson in le Hokey Pokey you could not sink") and ending
up as a rat in the class production of Cinderella in French; babysitting Edison
brings its own share of daunting challenges, though it also brings a friendship with
the spirited Octavia, who lives next door to Edison. Mills creates a humorous but
touching portrait of a good kid whose abilities don't necessarily lie in the best-
rewarded areas and who feels, accurately, as if he's disappointing people as a result
(about his mother, Julius "just wished that he could be the son she had always
wanted, or else that she could learn to want the son she already had"). The sad-
sack touches, such as Julius' discovery that he's taken a week to try to obtain A Tale
of Two Cities from the library when his family owned a copy all along, are ruefully
funny as well as telling. The book also believably crafts Julius' modest heroics as
he offers succor to a stricken Octavia at the cost of teacherly disapproval and assists
Edison in first potty success in the middle of the Cinderella performance. Even in
literature nice guys often finish behind the more flashily accomplished-kids will
appreciate seeing one finally get his due. DS
MULLER, ERIC 
While You're Waiting for the Food to Come: A Tabletop Science
Activity Book: Experiments and Tricks that Can Be Done at a Restaurant or Wherever
Food Is Served; illus. by Eldon Doty. 
Orchard, 1999 
84 p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30199-0 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-531-07144-8 
$8.95 
R Gr. 3-6
It's difficult to predict how far Miss Manners might bend the rules of etiquette in
the cause of science; certainly this title will undermine decorum in even the most
casual of eateries. Organized by courses ("appetizer" introductory activities, "main
course" experiments) and rated according to the attention one might attract among
fellow diners, these table top demonstrations elucidate scientific method and prin-
ciples relating to sensory perception, matter, electricity, and air pressure. Not all
experiments described here are equally engaging or even successful-the tic-tac-
toe game (demonstrating the need to follow rules) is a fizzle, the solar-system model
cannot be accomplished at the table, and the condiment-packet-diver "main course"
is a repeat of an "appetizer." It's also questionable whether a waiter will comply
with a child's request for a pair of martini glasses or a bill-footing parent will
appreciate the experiment that requires pieces of steak to be immersed in a water
glass. But then there's the "lava lamp" demo on density that's really fun to watch,
and the elegantly simple and dazzlingly effective "atomizer" (air-pressure demo)
that's bound to be such a school cafeteria hit, it's almost sure to be banned. In-
structions, explanations and cartoony illustrations are generally clear and direct,
and few experiments require adult supervision. Kids who devour Vicki Cobb's
quickie experiments will probably want to sample some of these. EB
MURPHY, CHUCK 
Bow Wow: A Pop-up Book ofShapes; written and illus. by Chuck
Murphy. 
Little Simon, 1999 
12p
ISBN 0-689-82265-0 
$12.95 
R 2-6yrs
The opening spread offers a black "circle" on white background; open it and up
pops a bicyclist with a dog springing at his side. Who could miss the big circles
that form the wheels? A closer look, though, reveals lots of identical shapes, from
the tiny circles on the dog's neck tags to the hubs and gears of the bike itself.
"Square" on the facing page lifts into a cozy bed on which a dog snoozes at his
young master's feet, and there are plenty of squares to be found among the head-
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 25
and footboard panels, the quilt pieces, and even the picture of boy and dog that
hangs at the head of the bed. Triangle, oval, rectangle, arrow, star, crescent, and
heart get equally clever treatment, with special kudos to the wild dog whose head
can be moved as he howls at the crescent moon and to the alerting retrievers who
demonstrate "arrow" with their entire bodies. The big finish recaps the lesson
with a simple panel of nine white-on-black shapes that open to an intricate scene
of two children making construction paper cutouts, and an endearingly chunky
Dalmatian from whose jaws dangles a mobile of all the shapes. The soft colors of
the pop-up scenes offer a startling contrast to the stark black and white of their
covers, making the surprise all that more, well, surprising. Reasonably sturdy con-
struction and smooth "action" of the figures should assure that children will sit up
and beg for many readings. EB
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
The Journal of Scott Pendleton Collins: A World War II
Soldier. Scholastic, 1999 
14 4p 
(My Name Is America) 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-439-05013-8 
$10.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Scott Pendleton Collins is a wet-behind-the-ears, green-as-grass soldier right out
of boot camp when he lands on the coast of Normandy in 1944. His journal
entries indicate he grows up fast-they change from disingenuous naivete to shell-
shocked horror as he survives battle after battle in the fight to take France back
from the Nazis. The opening entries are clumsily written and shallow as Collins
writes about what a creep Hitler is and "English girls all hot to trot for American
guys"; his tone becomes grimmer as more and more of his fellows die around him
and he is promoted to sergeant by virtue of still being alive. Myers captures the
mind-numbing fatigue and sheer randomness of wartime. Intense fear is ever
present, and it can be dealt with only through humor: "I'm so scared that if I ran
right into myself I'd shoot me three or four times before I even said hello. Only
thing that keeps me from running is I don't know which way to run and I'm too
tired to get up and look around." The entries evidence a growing maturity in
Collins as he grimly determines to fight, to survive, to live. Myers hints at things
not always emphasized in history textbooks: the fate of German prisoners wounded
too badly to travel, the contribution of African-American troops to the war effort,
the lack of information that often left troops without a clear picture of the progress
of the war. Those readers old enough to see Saving Private Ryan will appreciate
this close-up look at one individual's military experience. A historical note, black-
and-white photographs, and a foldout map of the Battle of Normandy are in-
cluded. JMD
NAPOLI, DONNAJO 
Spinners; by Donna Jo Napoli and Richard Tchen. 
Dutton,
1999 
[224 p]
ISBN 0-525-46065-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr.9-12
An intricate retelling of "Rumpelstiltskin" provides a provocative look at the na-
ture of love, lust, and familial affection. In a desperate effort to win his beloved by
producing a golden wedding gown, a tailor steals the enchanted wheel of an elderly
spinster. Tailor-turned-spinner spins straw into gold, but at a terrible price-the
spinning takes his good looks and leaves him with a cramped, twisted leg. The
tailor/spinner's love, pregnant with his child, cannot bear the sight of him and
26 
* THE BULLETIN
marries an older but wealthy miller; when she dies in childbirth, the spinner takes
to the road, returning years later to discover that his daughter, Saskia, has grown
into an expert spinner. When the miller swears to the king that Saskia can spin
straw into gold, the girl is doomed. The spinner comes to her aid three nights
running, bargaining on the third night for her firstborn, his grandchild, to satisfy
his need for family. From the opening scene of the aftermath of lovemaking be-
tween the spinner and his beloved ("The waning sunlight gilds the downy hair on
her arms and calves"), the language is shot through with gold- and weaving-related
images (golden hair, golden light, golden straw; the sound of the wheel spinning,
styles of weaving, the texture of yarn). The novel's emotional content is a stirring
mixture of unwise entanglements, foolish father figures, and broken promises; the
plot is built firmly upon the events of the traditional tale, but with an embroidery
of rich detail through which passionate motives glitter like gold threads woven
into a dark tapestry. After the finely tuned nuances of the story's beginnings, the
violent conclusion is surprisingly abrupt and even somewhat ambivalent, but that
is small criticism for such a thoughtfully designed and well-woven interpretation
of an ancient and disturbing tale. JMD
PATSCHKE, STEVE 
The Spooky Book; illus. by Matthew McElligott. 
Walker,
1999 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8693-6 $16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8692-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 6-9 yrs
In a dark, candlelit room in a big old house, a lone boy, Andrew, begins to read a
spooky book. The book tells of a girl, a redhead named Zo Zo, who also is reading
a spooky book, a book in which a lone boy is alarmed by goblins in his old house.
When the spookiness gets too much for Zo Zo, she flees her house and runs to
another house-and as Andrew reads this, a knock comes at his door, revealing the
redheaded Zo Zo waiting outside with a book under her arm. The twist is an
engaging one, the spooky-reading atmosphere and theme, which make this book a
likely Halloween candidate, are appealing, and the verse refrain has a pleasingly
haunting flavor. There are some glitches in the concept, however-if Zo Zo has
"the very same book," that oddly puts her in the position of reading a book about
herself rather than reading the more interesting counterpart to Andrew's story-
and some of the text is blandly written. While the illustrations proffer some pi-
quant perspectives and obligingly unsettling interiors, the human figures are
somewhat stolid and cartoonish, and the text sometimes gets lost amid the water-
color hatching that comprises the grassy background. The idea is creative, how-
ever, and youngsters who get a kick out of the convergence of fiction and reality
may enjoy the self-fulfilling narrative-especially if there's a well-timed knock at
their door. DS
PAULSEN,GARY Alida's Song. Delacorte, 1999 
88p
ISBN 0-385-32586-X 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-10
Working on a dairy farm during his fourteenth summer, a young man discovers
his own sense of purpose and self-worth under the loving eye of his Norwegian
grandmother. Paulsen's short autobiographical novel follows his hero from a life
of parental neglect in near-squalor to the healthy outdoor life of a farm where he is
well fed, well loved, and well looked after. It is a simple story of a few months of
wholesome living that transforms the way the hero looks at the world. Gunnar
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 
27
and Olaf, the farmers who employ Alida as cook and who take the boy on as
summer help, are men who appreciate beauty, make music, and love the earth;
Alida, the grandmother, is a wise woman with her grandson's best interests at
heart. The pace here is measured but not slow, and the language concentrates on
concrete images that provide a backdrop for the boy's spiritual and physical rejuve-
nation. The unnamed boy possesses both Everyboy anonymity and an able vul-
nerability that allows him to respond to the positive opportunities around him.
While the action is less than gripping, this is an affectionate character study that
will appeal to readers moved by The Cookcamp (BCCB 3/91), wherein they first
met Alida. JMD
PRIEST, ROBERT 
The Old Pirate of Central Park; written and illus. by Robert
Priest. 
Houghton, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-395-90505-2 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
When a retrospective Old Pirate, now retired to an apartment in New York City,
longs for the piratical days gone by, he creates a model boat ("a perfect replica of
his old ship, The Laughing Dog") and launches it on the pond in Central Park.
Unfortunately, a retired Queen sets her own model ship to ruling the seas-er,
pond-and her Uppity Duchess provokes a gun battle with The Laughing Dog; the
warfare startles and disrupts the park until the Queen, late for her afternoon nap,
sues for peace and amicable sharing of the pond. This eccentric book nearly sails
too close to the winds of whimsy, but its pokerfaced approach to its offbeat story
keeps cuteness from spoiling the matter-of-factly odd charm. Priest's illustrations
assist the effect: airbrushed enamel on clayboard, they offer planes of slightly
muted color demarcated and shaped with white line rather than black; their crisp
lines simultaneously suggest the Decoesque illustration of the thirties and contem-
porary computer graphics, while giving the Old Pirate and the Queen an other-
worldly and marionettish appearance that suits the story perfectly. Want to make
youngsters reconsider a day in the park? Take this one for a sail. DS
RAY, MARY LYN 
Basket Moon; illus. by Barbara Cooney. 
Little, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-316-73521-3 
$15.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Our young narrator lives in the Catskills, where his family weaves baskets for a
living. He desperately wants to join his father on the trip into town to sell, and
finally Dad invites him along; the boy is thrilled with his view of the bustling river
port but crushed when he and his father are taunted by a townie with "A tisket, a
tasket, hillbilly basket! That's all a bushwhacker knows." Eventually, however,
with the help of a neighbor, the boy rediscovers the quiet beauty of his home and
his family craft, following in his father's basket-making footsteps. The text's length
and serenity will restrict its audience, and it tends to lean a bit too heavily on
poetic statements; its understated thoughtfulness and detailed account of an un-
usual existence, however, makes this an atmospheric slice of history. Though
Cooney's human figures are occasionally a bit on the elfin side, her forest land-
scapes are simply stunning: feathery trees congregate around meandering paths,
and the weathered boards of the basket-maker's cabin shine like gold under a warm
spring sun. This might make an interesting pairing with other picture books of
rural lifestyles now disappearing, such as Kirkpatrick's Plowie (BCCB 10/94) or
Ray's Shaker Boy(BCCB 11/94). An author's note gives background information
on the basketmaking community of Columbia County. DS
28 
* THE BULLETIN
RIDDLE, TOHBY 
The Great Escape from City Zoo; written and illus. by Tohby
Riddle. 
Farrar, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-374-32776-9 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
In this picture-book parody of jailbreak stories, it's Elephant, Anteater, Flamingo,
and Turtle who are over the wall and on the lam. Donning a variety of street and
professional attire that could have been lifted from the Village People's costume
closet, they blend in with the big city. With Zookeepers dogging their steps, three
of them hop the first freight train out of town, leaving anteater to try his luck solo
("He actually ended up living on the outside quite successfully-renting a tidy
flat, and holding down a regular job .. . until the day he fainted outside a
taxidermist's. The incident came to the attention of the Zookeepers, and within
hours he was recaptured"). Elephant and Turtle eventually blow their cover as
well and only Flamingo's fate remains unknown ("there were reports of uncon-
firmed sightings .. ."). Gray-toned illustrations create a slightly spoofed film noir
mood, and the narration is unrelentingly deadpan. A plethora of visual references,
from King Kong to Hopper's Nighthawks to the Okies' migration, will undoubt-
edly fly past the intended audience and roost with the adult reader. But then
again, the Rocky and Bullwinkle effect may come into play, happily and cleverly
supplying children with images into which they can grow. EB
ROWLING, J. K. 
Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets; illus. by Mary
Grandpre. 
Levine/Scholastic, 1999 
34 1p
ISBN 0-439-06486-4 
$17.95 
R Gr. 4-6
To paraphrase an old movie trailer, Harry's back and Scholastic's got him. The
comparison is fairly apt, as the Harry Potter series is somewhat reminiscent of old
movie serials, full of secrets, revelations, death-defying deeds, and hair-raising es-
capes. In this, the second of Harry's continuing saga, he returns to the Hogwarts
School for Witchcraft and Wizardry after a dreadful summer with the Dursleys,
from which he is daringly rescued by his good friend Ron and Ron's always-ready-
for-mischief older brothers. All is not well at Hogwarts, thank goodness-Harry
is being harassed by a bizarre little house-elf, something truly creepy is turning
students to stone, and a diary belonging to a long-ago student is revealing things to
Harry that he doesn't really want to know. There are some minor inconsistencies
in the plot and Hermione's role in this sequel is disappointingly small, but Rowling
has a flair for the dramatic, and her suspenseful pace is such that the pages just
keep turning. Plot twists and pithy characterizations (the self-absorbed new pro-
fessor, Gilderoy Lockheart, is screamingly funny) make this magical boarding school
story roll to its breath-stealing climax. With only his true friends to stand by him,
Harry the underdog comes from behind to overcome self-doubt and false accusa-
tions in order to win the day. Stay tuned for the next one. JMD
Russo, MARISABINA 
Mama Talks Too Much; written and illus. by Marisabina
Russo. 
Greenwillow, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-688-16411-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Celeste is in a hurry to get to the store with her mother, but "then we see Mrs.
Green and I say, 'Oh no!' 
Mama stops. Mrs. Green stops. Now I have to
stop ... They talk and talk and talk." Celeste waits impatiently ("I watch the cars
go by. I count the red ones. I count the white ones") and finally manages to move
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 
29
her mother along, only to run into Mrs. Walker, resulting in more socialization
instead of forward progress, and then Mr. Chan, with similar results. Russo effec-
tively captures the fidgety, foot-shifting frustration of a kid beset by grownup di-
gression; the repeated text pattern matches the repeated stops, and the enumeration
ofCeleste's time-killing methods is authentic as well as humorous. The final twist-
Celeste looks at stopping in a different light when they run into Mrs. Castro, who
has an adorable new puppy with her-doesn't bury the book's realism under its
subtle message that one doesn't travel merely to arrive at one's destination. Russo's
gouache illustrations have the pigmented intensity of acrylic; the solidity of the
planes of color gives the city landscape a liveliness that is sufficiently organized to
avoid overcluttering. Just about every young listener will have been there and
done that; they'll appreciate a book that recognizes their silent suffering and per-
haps take a new look at the upside of the process. DS
SAN Souci, ROBERT, ad. 
Tarzan; illus. by Michael McCurdy. 
Hyperion,
1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2334-8 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0384-3 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 3-6
A simple retelling of Edgar Rice Burroughs' Tarzan of the Apes, this picture-book
rendition is sure to find a ready and willing audience among reluctant and other
readers. San Souci distills the story to its most basic elements, opening with the
rescue of the orphaned Greystoke baby by compassionate she-ape Kala. Tarzan
grows into a clever and strong young man. He investigates the abandoned hut of
his parents, securing a hunting knife for protection and later discovering books,
which he uses to teach himself to read. Action is paramount-Tarzan battles
Bolgani, the gorilla, defeats Sabor, the lioness, and vanquishes Kerchak, the ape
king, before deciding to leave the apes and seek his "true tribe," human beings.
Scratchboard and colored pencil captures the energy of the story in full-page illus-
trations framed in white. The occasional awkward drafting of the human figure is
offset by the larger than life perspectives and massive figures of the apes, which
impart a primitive power to the images. The layout and design encourages read-
ing alone or aloud, the clear, oversized font and wide leading making what could
be daunting text blocks simple and easy to access. An author's note provides back-
ground on Burroughs' Tarzan, likening him to other literary and mythical heroes.
JMD
SANDBURG, CARL 
The Huckabuck Family: and How They Raised Popcorn In Ne-
braska and Quit and Came Back; illus. by David Small. 
Farrar, 1999 
34p
ISBN 0-374-33511-7 
$16.00 
R 5-8yrs
It's hard to think of a better pairing than Sandburg and Small. Small's watercolors
have a translucent, airy quality that suits the fantastical elements of Sandburg's
story, and his drafting is solid enough to ground the illustrations in the rich earth
where Sandburg set his uniquely American tales. In this picture-book version of
one of Sandburg's most well-known Rootabaga tales, Small takes full advantage of
his form, using double-page spreads for cornfield, farmyard, and urban vistas. A
wide variety of perspectives and points of view add sweep and drama to the com-
positions, from Pony Pony Huckabuck holding out a glowing silver slipper buckle
to her mother in the dim light of the barn loft, to a farmyard full of inadvertently
popped popcorn, to the interior of a watch factory, where Jonas Jonas Huckabuck
30 
* 
THE BULLETIN
watches watches. Sandburg's language is as bracing as a tonic, and the inherent
humor and rhythms of his tale are as invigorating today as when it was first writ-
ten. Use this freshly joyous little picture book to point your listeners toward
Sandburg's collection of Rootabaga Tales, and bring these stories to a waiting gen-
eration of readers and listeners. JMD
SELGIN, PETER 
"S.S. " Gigantic Across the Atlantic: The Story ofthe World's Biggest
Ocean Liner Ever!; written and illus. by Peter Selgin. 
Simon, 1999 
40p
ISBN 0-689-82467-X 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 2-5
From the moment Pip-Squeak caught sight of the S. S. Gigantic looming above
the coastal town of Hyperbole, Ireland and heard Captain Bragg sing her praises to
sailors gathered at the Blohard Inn, "I knew I'd do anything to sail on her." With
nothing to offer but hyperacute eyesight (he reads the fine print on Capt. Bragg's
buttons), Pip-Squeak gains a berth on a ship "so gigantic, it can travel around the
world without moving!" and "so gigantic, you need a rocket ship to get from the
bottom to the top." Its maiden voyage, booked with passengers "so rich, giant
cranes were needed to load their diamonds and gold," is doomed, though; imper-
vious to myriad icebergs that turn the North Atlantic into a graveyard of sinking
liners, S. S. Gigantic's "waterproof, rubber, quadruple hull" ultimately succumbs
to the deadliest scourge of the deep-"the dreaded sea thumbtack." This briny
lunacy will appeal to any reader with a taste for tall tales, but enjoyment of its
references, broad and sly, to the Gigantic's more famous sister ship will rise in
direct proportion to the audience's Titanic obsession. Frenetic, retro-styled car-
toon images are packed tighter than hammocks in a forecastle and decked out in
pride-of-the-fleet red, white, and blue with a liberal gilding of gold; Pip-Squeak is
a goggle-eyed innocent, and Capt. Bragg a bewhiskered, medal-laden nutcracker.
If this can't make the Titanic set pop their rivets laughing, what will? EB
SEVERANCE, JOHN B. 
Einstein: Visionary Scientist. Clarion, 1999 
[14 4p] 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-395-93100-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
This is a serviceable biography that gives an overview of Einstein's personal life and
professional commitment to physics research. 
Severance opens with a chapter
designed to establish Einstein's place in and contribution to history in which he
outlines how Einstein's theories sparked advances in many scientific fields. The
succeeding chapters deal with Einstein's life chronologically, from his childhood,
when he was thought to be learning disabled, to his later years, when his genius
became apparent. Severance is careful to place Einstein in the context of his world,
making links between Einstein's research genius and contemporary events, espe-
cially the rise of Hitler in Nazi Germany and the impact this had on Einstein's
long-held belief in pacifism. While the tremendous changes in science and politics
are evident in this biography, those characteristics of Einstein, the personal details
that readers find engaging, unfortunately are not. Severance makes several refer-
ences to Einstein's eccentric and quirky personality but gives readers disappoint-
ingly lackluster examples to support them, and his attempt to make Einstein's
theories understandable to young readers is cursory at best. The writing is dry, and
it is only the occasional quotes from friends, relatives, and Einstein himself that
give some insight into the man David Ben Gurion called "the most illustrious Jew
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 31
in the world, and possibly the greatest man alive." Illustrated with black and white
photographs, this volume includes a chronology of events, bibliography, and in-
dex. JMD
SHUSTERMAN, NEAL 
Downsiders. Simon, 1999 
24 6p
ISBN 0-689-80375-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Under the streets of New York City is a community built among the forgotten
ruins of a subway constructed in 1867. The Downsiders, as they call themselves,
live underground, raiding the Topside for goods and medicine, taking in stray
Topsiders who need a new start, and maintaining a strict code of secrecy regarding
their existence. When Downsider Talon risks exposure to seek medicine for his
sick sister, he meets Lindsay, a lonely girl recently come to live with her emotion-
ally distant father and obnoxious stepbrother. The two become fast friends, and
Talon risks all by taking Lindsay to the Downside. The collision of their two
worlds is inevitable: Lindsay seeks the truth about the origin of the Downside,
Topside engineers excavate for an aqueduct, and Talon is convicted as a traitor
and sentenced to death for revealing the secret community to an outsider.
Shusterman creates a believable underground culture, including humorous refer-
ences to wild alligators and even a herd of cows that live in the city's sewers and
forgotten tunnels. The pace is quick and suspenseful, punctuated by Talon's and
Lindsay's chases and escapes through underground passages and the near-discov-
ery of the Downside. At the climax Talon seizes the moment and becomes leader
of his people, protecting their secret by an explosion that effectively closes them off
from the Topside. The conclusion, in which the Downsiders expand to live se-
cretly in the water towers atop city buildings, lacks the realistic intensity and sup-
portive logic of the Downsiders' underground culture, but readers will still be
fascinated by these full-size Borrowers and their secret lives. A map of the Down-
side is included. JMD
SILVERSTEIN, ALVIN 
A Pet or Not?; by Alvin Silverstein, Virginia Silverstein, and
Laura Silverstein Nunn. 
Twenty-First Century, 1999 
48p 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-7613-3230-8 
$21.40 
R Gr. 3-7
Got youngsters coaxing for a coatimundi, ferreting around for a ferret, or rooting
for a potbellied pig? Here's a book that'll give them the skinny (with the pig's
pardon) on those and seven other unusual pets, from armadillos to sugar gliders.
Each animal receives a collection of fast facts (scientific name, cost, required food
and housing, notes on legality, etc.) and then a few pages of narrative treatment
(one color photo per section) that includes anecdotes about pets, tips on special
problems, and sidebars on more familiar relatives, zoological tidbits, and other
miscellanea; a list of website resources is appended to each section. Though the
writing is choppy and the treatments are often cursory, this makes for a tasty smor-
gasbord of rare companion animals; it's particularly wise of the book to send read-
ers straight to the World Wide Web, where such recent and specialized knowledge
is more accessible than in print, for more information. There are also some fair
warnings about the unsuitability of many of these animals as pets (though the
encomiums may overpower the warnings) and the short lifespan some of these
critters have in domestic circumstances. A breeze to read and a treat to browse,
this will add some spice to your pet collection. DS
32 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SNICKET, LEMONY 
The Bad Beginning; illus. by Brett Helquist. HarperCollins,
1999 
[19 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028312-2 
$14.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-440766-7 
$8.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
The Reptile Room; illus. by Brett Helquist. HarperCollins, 1999 
[19 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028313-0 
$14.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-440767-5 
$8.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
These Aikenish takeoffs on unfortunate orphan novels promise a fast and funny
series, and they very nearly deliver. In The Bad Beginning, the three Baudelaire
children, Violet (age fourteen), Klaus (age twelve), and Sunny (a baby), are or-
phaned when the family manse burns down. They are given over to the care of
Count Olaf, their wicked cousin. The count is a no-account villain, who proceeds
to make their life a misery, conspiring to marry Violet in order to gain control of
the family fortune. Violet foils the plot, the evil Olaf escapes, and the three chil-
dren are taken in by the somewhat dense Mr. Poe, executor of their parents' estate.
The Reptile Room continues the saga of the siblings, opening with their being trans-
ported to the home of yet another distant cousin, herpetologist Dr. Montgomery,
aka Uncle Monty. Uncle Monty is a jolly fellow, but unfortunately not for long-
the evil Count Olaf shows up and makes short work of the orphans' guardian.
Olaf plans to kidnap them (and gain control of their fortune), and he nearly suc-
ceeds but is foiled (and escapes) once again. Snicket has a way of speaking directly
to the reader ("I wish I could tell you that the Baudelaires' first impressions of
Count Olaf and his house were incorrect, as first impressions so often are. But
these impressions-that Count Olafwas a horrible person and his house a depress-
ing pigsty-were absolutely correct") and of defining words in the context of dia-
logue that is, taken in large doses, irritatingly precious. The author does have the
traditions of the genre down, however, and the lively misfortunes of the Baudelaires
have a careening momentum that is well-served by the humorous if occasionally
self-conscious text. The Baudelaire children have personality and tenacity, and
their devotion to one another will hold readers when the mannered text does not.
JMD
STEWART, JENNIFER J. 
If That Breathes Fire, We're Toast! Holiday House,
1999 
118p
ISBN 0-8234-1430-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Rick is eleven years old and not happy. He and his mother have just moved to
Tucson, where his mother hopes Rick will be safe from the urban dangers of Los
Angeles, and he is not accepting the change gracefully. The first chapters play out
like a typical moving and adjustment story, at least until the new furnace comes
from Dragonwerks, Ltd. Rick and newfound friend Natalie unpack the box and
discover not a replacement furnace but a dragon named Madam Yang. Madam
Yang is not your typical dragon, however-she's a time-traveling dragon, and she's
there to help Rick adjust to the additional changes soon to come from the roman-
tic relationship between his mother and a local veterinarian. The justification for
Madam Yang's fantastical presence is a bit lame since Rick appears pretty well-
adjusted already, but a fire-breathing, flying dragon with attitude is a handy char-
acter: when the plot lags Madame Yang threatens to eat a nasty beauty-contestant
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 33
princess or turn a mongrel (competition in the ugliest pet contest) to toast. Rick is
sensitive and Natalie is feisty, but not in overly stereotypical ways, and mothers,
kid brothers, vets, and especially Madame Yang are an agreeable bunch of second-
ary characters. The time-travel jumps are sidetrips with little impact on the present,
and the plot doesn't bear much examination in terms of logical continuity; still,
this is an undemanding romp well-suited for summer pleasure reading. JMD
STOCK, CATHERINE 
Island Summer; written and illus. by Catherine
Stock. 
Lothrop, 1999 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12781-9 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12780-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Some places seem to come alive in summer with the influx of vacationers, and
Stock depicts such an island awakening after winter and preparing for the on-
slaught. Soon the holidaymakers arrive in bulk and kids are playing in the for-
merly quiet streets, napping in the warm afternoons, and sneaking down to the
beach at night for a quick skinnydip. While the focus on the summer visitors is a
bit disproportionate (the book implies that no one actually lives on the island year
round), the text is jolly in its evocation of authentic summer details ("By late after-
noon even the losing soccer team is okay, once they've thrown the winning team
into the water and rubbed sand in their hair"), creating a picture of a welcomed
summer routine and refreshment that's a tradition from year to year. The art,
watercolor textured with a few colored-pencil highlights, effectively captures the
striated hills of the Greek island and the pristine blue-white of the village build-
ings, using the clean idyllic landscape as a backdrop to the bustling multitudes of
vacationers. While this is a quick literary vacation rather than a story, youngsters
encountering the chill of fall and resumed school will appreciate the retained bit of
summer here, and they may then want to share their own vacation stories. DS
TEAGUE, MARK 
One Halloween Night; written and illus. by Mark
Teague. 
Scholastic, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-84625-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
"Anything can happen on Halloween," declares Wendell to friends Floyd and Mona
as a black cat crosses their path on the way home from school. And a lot of things
do happen, initially mostly bad: Wendell's mad scientist costume turns pink in
the wash, Floyd has to take his baby sister trick-or-treating ("Pirates don't have
little sisters" he objects), and Mona's mother makes her dress up like a fairy prin-
cess ("I look ridiculous"). When trick-or-treating lands them more tricks than
treats, and bully Leona Fleebish and her cackling friends (all dressed as witches)
corner the quartet in an alley ("Yo Ho Ho!/ I see something funny./ It's Pirate
Floyd/ And his baby bunny!"), it begins to look like the black cat really was bad
luck. They're goners, until Floyd draws his saber and takes on the powers of a real
pirate: "He kept the witches at bay so his friends could carry little Alice to safety.
Then, growling like a movie pirate, he swung out of reach on an overhanging tree
limb, turned a quick flip, and somersaulted backward over the fence." Later,
Wendell (brewing an invisibility potion from his mad scientist supplies) and Mona
(summoning the powers of her magic wand) execute similar miracles to bring the
passel back home to safety complete with hot chocolate, a fire, and good candy.
34 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Teague's acrylic paintings balance stylized characters with dynamic expressions
and body language to create a rollicking tale. The palette of muted yet strong
colors, with plenty of pumpkin oranges and dusky blues, summons the reader,
while Teague's use of perspective creates tension and suspense. While the transi-
tion from mangled costumes and baby bunny sisters into movie pirates, capable
scientists, and powerful fairy princesses requires a leap of faith, kids will jump right
in for a ride to where the underdog triumphs for the evening, the black cat is a
companion instead of a curse, and the world is a place where anything can happen.
EAB
THESMAN, JEAN 
The Other Ones. 
Viking, 1999 
181p
ISBN 0-670-88594-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Thesman weaves a contemporary coming-of-age tale laced with fantastical witches,
threshold guardians, and shape-shifters who force sophomore Bridget Raynes to
confront her own witch-ness. The narrative initially focuses on the protagonist's
school life and intimate relationships: with school bully Woody, with her clueless
parents, and with her neighbor and classmate Jordan, with whom she feeds quail
every day and in whom she's developing a romantic interest. With the arrival of
new classmate Althea Peale (who attracts attention immediately from class bully
Woody for her odd appearance and behavior), Bridget is warned by her Aunt Cait
and her threshold guardian xiii (pronounced "shhh") to acknowledge and harness
her powers to prevent disaster in her Pacific Northwest coastal community
("Trouble!... Trouble is coming and you must be prepared!"), but Bridget is torn
between the reality of her daily life and the reality of her dreams. Thesman draws
the reader through this fantastical story with xiii's eerie predictions, but she locates
the denouement later than some readers will want to read. Adult characters remain
static, which reinforces the intensity of Bridget's problems but flattens the dynam-
ics. Young adults will nonetheless be drawn to Bridget's struggle to fit in, and
they'll cheer her on as she chooses to control her powers. EAB
THOMAS, FRANCES 
What If; illus. by Ross Collins. 
Hyperion, 1999 
24p
ISBN 0-7868-0482-3 
$15.99 
R* 3-6 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 3, for review.
TRAYLOR, BETTY 
Buckaroo. Delacorte, 1999 
[208p]
ISBN 0-385-32637-8 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Preston Davis hasn't adjusted well to his dad's remarriage, and after a confronta-
tion with his new stepsister, he's packed off to stay indefinitely with Aunt Eugenia
Goodwin, not the least of whose eccentricities is her openly pro-integration stance
in her late 1950s Arkansas community. Eugenia takes every opportunity to pro-
mote companionship between Preston and Ivy Johnson, a black neighbor close to
Preston's age. Preston is having none of it, though; not only does interracial friend-
ship defy attitudes he's learned from his father at home, it also threatens a more
promising friendship with a boy across the street. Traylor's message is earnest but
bland, packed with folksy dialogue ("Someday-I don't know exactly when-
there'll come a time in this old South when the coloreds and the whites can offer a
hidy to each other without worrying if it's the proper thing to do") and peppered
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 35
with a distracting number of subplots ranging from Preston's obsession with Roy
Rogers and his yen to ride in a fire truck to an unconvincing encounter with an
escaped convict (a jail buddy of Ivy's father, no less). Though well-meaning and
serviceable, this is ultimately outclassed by Mildred Taylor's writing on the same
subject. EB
TSENG, GRACE, ad. 
White Tiger, Blue Serpent; illus. by Jean and Mou-sien
Tseng. 
Lothrop, 1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12516-6 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12515-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A loving mother weaves an elaborate brocade for her dutiful son, Kai, only to have
it snatched up by a thieving breeze sent by greedy goddess Qin. Kai is no ordinary
son, however; his strength and speed enable him to defeat the divinity's champi-
ons, the white tiger and blue serpent of the title, only to find himself faced with a
vengeful goddess determined to keep what she has stolen. The whirlwind she
conjures to blow Kai away blows the creatures stitched into the brocade into the
air: "Birds took flight, deer leaped forth, bears lumbered, peacocks screamed.
Trees and flowers flew through the air. And beneath them all, a shining rainbow
stretched itself out and formed a path for Kai and the rest.... All that remained in
the goddess's lap was a faded cloth full of holes." The natural bounty of the cloth's
design is transferred to the barren countryside, "and Kai and his mother lived
peacefully and happily in the beauty of the magnificent brocade." The text effec-
tively depicts Kai's loving relationship with his mother, and the action scenes have
dashes of derring-do; the story itself, however, is wordy, and the lengthy text is
hampered by a self-consciously literary opening and conclusion. The illustrations
(full and double-page spreads and panels) are rendered in a rich gold-toned palette
enlivened with sparks of red and blue. Architectural, natural, and textile details are
delivered with a panache that offsets the sometimes inarticulate facial expressions
of the human characters. A cultural note identifies this tale as based on a story
from the Drung tribe of the Yunnan Province in southwest China; the watercolor
and pigment illustrations are inspired by masterworks of the Ming dynasty. JMD
TUNNELL, MICHAEL O. Halloween Pie; illus. by Kevin O'Malley. 
Lothrop,
1999 
[24p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16805-1 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16804-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A spooky recipe for readaloud fun, this picture book is both trick and treat. "On
Halloween, Old Witch baked a pie. A pumpkin pie. A scrumptious pie. A big-
and-wide-as-a-full-moon pie," and put it on the windowsill to cool. Before she
"flies into the dark night to make some mischief," however, she puts a spell on the
pie to "protect this treat .. for me alone to eat." Good thing, too, because the
aroma of that fresh-baked pie attracts a vampire, a ghoul, a ghost, a banshee, a
zombie and a skeleton, and it draws them from the graveyard to the witch's win-
dow, where they proceed to devour the pie. The witch returns and discovers her
confection gone-but it doesn't matter, because the diners have all been turned
into the ingredients for another pumpkin pie. When the witch sets the new pie on
the windowsill, "the spell was broken. Riding on sweet-smelling steam, the grave-
yard creatures rose into the air, floated home, and settled sleepily into their beds,
36 
* 
THE BULLETIN
their tummies still full of Halloween Pie." O'Malley, who has proven that he is
the man for gleefully illustrating spookiness (Velcome, BCCB 11/97), has a fine
old time depicting ghouls, skeletons, and vampires in oil wash and ink, endowing
them with a domestic solidity that makes them downright neighborly. The tomb-
stones are adorned with old groaners like "Here lies Anna./ Choked on a banana"
and "Who'd a thunk/ I'm buried in a trunk" that will have readers chuckling and
looking to make a groaner-graveyard of their own. The ending is a tiny bit anticli-
mactic, but the final page has a recipe for pumpkin pie that may motivate listeners
to bake one, put it on a windowsill, and see what happens. JMD
WHYBROW, IAN 
Sammy and the Dinosaurs; illus. by Adrian Reynolds. 
Orchard,
1999 
26p
ISBN 0-531-30207-5 
$15.95 
R* 3-6 yrs
Sammy and his grandmother are cleaning the attic: "Sammy found an old box all
covered with dust. He lifted the lid ... 
DINOSAURS!" Sammy adopts the
prehistoric foundlings, unbending them, mending them, washing them, and find-
ing them a new home in a bright blue bucket. Despite the opinion of his older
sister Meg ("She said it was stupid, fussing over so much junk"), Sammy takes his
dinosaurs everywhere. On an outing with his gran he becomes so excited that he
leaves his bucket on the train, and he is inconsolable. Gran takes him to the Lost
and Found, where Sammy calls his dinosaurs by name: Scelidosaurus, Stegosau-
rus, Triceratops, Brontosaurus. "'All correct!' said the man. 'These are definitely
your dinosaurs!'" And Sammy and his friends go home. The gently effective
whimsy of this book is that the listener (or reader) sees through Sammy's eyes: his
colorful plastic dinosaurs are alive. They peer over Sammy's shoulder when he's
reading, try to sneak candy from Meg's candy box, and sleep cuddled around Sammy
like a pile of puppies, and the impact of their loss will be instantly understandable
to the young listener (Sammy's sister Meg is not as fortunate-she winds up with
a bowl of cereal on her head when she calls the missing dinosaurs "Dusty old
junk!"). Reynolds' watercolors are the perfect accompaniment to Whybrow's
dinotale. Single and double-page spreads feature the thoroughly lovable dinosaurs
peeping out of the thoroughly lovable Sammy's pockets, swimming in his bath,
and clambering over the edge of the bucket. Big oversized shapes, simple but
expressive features (on humans and dinosaurs), and unusual perspectives combine
in compositions easily large enough for group viewing; with a coziness that never
falls into the saccharine, text and art bring the story home. JMD
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 37
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Sullivan, Edward T. The Holocaust in Literature for Youth: A Guide and Resource
Book. Scarecrow, 1999. ISBN 0-8108-3607-6; $29.50. 259p.
There's now quite a body of literature on the Holocaust, which makes it increas-
ingly more challenging to sort through it for titles that will best serve a particular
collection or curricular use. In this resource, Sullivan offers considerable assis-
tance. Roughly half the book is annotated bibliography, which includes every-
thing from picture books to plays to adult memoirs to reference sources, with
various other genres in between. The rest of the book consists of appendices list-
ing professional resources, electronic resources (including CD-ROMs, listservs,
and websites), relevant organizations and museums, suggestions for booktalks and
classroom activities, and guidelines for building a "core Holocaust collection."
While the book has some proofreading glitches (one significant book is listed twice
with the author's name misspelled both times), it's also packed full of useful sources.
Sullivan takes a broad approach to the subject, openly encouraging connections
with other human-rights disasters of this and previous centuries and including
titles and resources suitable to a variety of different approaches. His annotations
often include evaluation as well, and though his responses are generally positive,
he doesn't shirk from the occasional flat condemnation (Wild's Let the Celebra-
tions Begin, unsurprisingly, gets a stern assessment). Those looking to consolidate
their library's approach to this part of history will find this an immensely useful
text. Five indices (author, geographic, grade, subject, and title) are included. DS
MacDonald, Margaret Read. The Round Book: Rounds Kids Love to Sing; by Mar-
garet Read MacDonald and Winifred Jaeger; illus. by Yvonne Le Brun Davis.
Linnet Books, 1999. Trade ed. ISBN 0-208-02441-7; $22.50; Paper ed. ISBN 0-
208-02472-7 $16.50. 124p.
Eighty rounds for choral singing from the sixteenth to twentieth centuries are
presented in this easy-to-follow resource book. According to the introduction, the
rounds are playable on many recorders, too, making this a boon for the beginning
musician as well as more experienced programmers. The eighty rounds are di-
vided into eleven themes and include such familiar ditties as "Day Is Done," "Are
You Sleeping?" (Frere Jacques), "Make New Friends," "Kookaburra," "Christmas
is Coming," etc., along with more unusual tunes. If you can already read music
this is a handy source, and even novice sight readers will have little difficulty with
these selections. The musical notation is beginner-basic, with the times clearly
marked; additional verses, sources, and instructions for singing are included with
many of the rounds. Addenda include a brief history of the round, suggestions for
leading rounds (beginning, ending, pitch, etc.), a list of additional titles contain-
ing rounds, and a title and first line index. Black and white line drawings open
each section, and spot art is scattered throughout. Use this for a melodic supple-
ment to story and other literature-based programming. JMD
38 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: San
Souci; Shusterman
African Americans-fiction: Grove;
Hewett; Levine; Traylor
Alcoholism-fiction: Keehn
Aliens-stories: Camp
ALPHABET BOOKS: Heller
American Indians-fiction: Little
Animals: Silverstein
Animals-fiction: Cutler
Animals-stories: Hobbie;
McDonnell; Riddle
Art and artists-fiction: Henkes
Art and artists-stories: Mayhew
Aunts-fiction: Thesman
Babies-stories: Bond
Babysitting-fiction: Mills
Ballet-fiction: Hewett
BEDTIME STORIES: Bond;
Thomas
BIOGRAPHIES: Severance
Birthdays-stories: Griffith
Books and reading-fiction: Heide;
Lowry
Books and reading-stories:
Patschke
Brazil-fiction: Holtwijk
Brother and sisters-fiction: Holm;
McElfresh; Snicket
Brothers-fiction: Cutler
Bullies-fiction: Anderson
Cats-stories: Griffith
Censorship: Blume
China-folklore: Tseng
CONCEPT BOOKS: Adler;
Heller; Murphy
Contests-fiction: Ibbotson
Courage-fiction: Gantos
Cousins-fiction: Bunting
Crafts-stories: Ray
Crime and criminals-stories:
Riddle
Dancers and dancing-fiction:
Hewett
Death and dying-fiction:
Calhoun; Little
Dinosaurs-stories: Whybrow
Disabilities-fiction: McElfresh
Disasters-fiction: Selgin
Dogs-stories: Griffith
Dragons-fiction: Stewart
Ethics and values: Blume;
Bunting; Garden; Hewett
Families-fiction: Cleary; Cutler;
Henkes
Families-stories: Bond; Sandburg
FANTASY: Calhoun; Ibbotson;
Napoli; Rowling; Stewart;
Thesman
Farms-fiction: Paulsen
Farms-stories: Sandburg
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Keehn; Napoli
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Camp
Fathers and sons-fiction:
Calhoun; Gantos; Little
Fathers and sons-stories: Ray
Fear-stories: Thomas
Films and film-making-fiction:
Block
Finnish Americans-fiction: Holm
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: McCaughrean;
Napoli; Sandburg; Tseng
Food and eating: Fleming; Jones
SEPTEMBER 1999 
* 
39
Food and eating-fiction: Anderson
Food and eating-stories: Heller;
Tunnell
Friendship-fiction: Block;
Garden; Gorman; Grove;
Jarzyna; McElfresh; Mills;
Stewart
Friendship-stories: Hobbie
FUNNY STORIES: Gantos;
Selgin
Grandfathers-fiction: Little
Grandmothers-fiction: Paulsen
Halloween: Horton; Teague;
Tunnell
Health: Daldry
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Bradley; Hertenstein; Holm;
Hoobler; Levine; Myers;
Paulsen; Ray; Snicket; Traylor
History, U.S.: Finkelstein;
Fleming; Gourley; Hertenstein;
Ray
History, world: Heide
Homelessness-fiction: Holtwijk
Homosexuality-fiction: Garden
Horses-fiction: Keehn
Human sexuality: Daldry
Insects-poetry: Michelson
Islands-stories: Stock
Japan-fiction: Hoobler
Jews-fiction: Levine
Jobs-fiction: Anderson
Journalism-fiction: Cutler;
Garden
Jungles-fiction: San Souci
Language arts: Carlson; Jones
Libraries-fiction: Heide
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Ibbotson; Rowling
Mathematics: Adler
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Russo
Mothers and sons-fiction:
Calhoun; Henkes; Mills;
Stewart
Mothers and sons-stories: Tho-
mas; Tseng
Moving-fiction: Gantos
Museums-stories: Mayhew
MYSTERIES: Hoobler
Orphans-fiction: Holtwijk; Ibbotson;
Levine; Rowling; Snicket
Pets: Silverstein
Pirates-stories: Priest
Plays: Carlson
POETRY: Horton; Michelson
POP-UP BOOKS: Murphy
Queens-stories: Priest
Racism-fiction: Grove; Hewett;
Traylor
Reading aloud: Cleary; Cutler;
Fleming; Horton; Michelson
Reading, easy: Silverstein
Reading, reluctant: Daldry; Gourley;
Muller
Responsibility-fiction: Jarzyna
SCARY STORIES: Patschke
School-fiction: Gantos; Gorman;
Lowry; McElfresh; Rowling;
Thesman
Science and scientists: Severance
Science experiments: Muller
SCIENCE FICTION: Shusterman
Science-fiction: Gorman
Secrets-fiction: Bunting
Segregation-fiction: Traylor
SHORT STORIES: Blume
Sisters-fiction: Bradley; Cleary
Social studies: Finkelstein
South, the-fiction: Traylor
Storytelling: McCaughrean
Storytime: Camp; McDonnell;
Whybrow; Tunnell
Summer-stories: Stock
Theater: Carlson
Time travel-fiction: Stewart
Toys-stories: Whybrow
Twins-fiction: Bradley
Uncles-fiction: Henkes
Vacations-stories: Stock
Voyages and travel-fiction: Selgin
Voyages and travel-stories: Priest;
Russo
War-fiction: Myers
Witches-fiction: Ibbotson; Thesman
Witches-stories: Tunnell
Wizards-fiction: Rowling
World War II-fiction: Hertenstein;
Myers
(JUciIJE~~tttt~~~
L. CE
"A fast-paced read in which fantasy and reality are
compellingly intertwined." -School 
Library Journal
"A youngster gets help coping with a bully-from a
ghost horse....In this rich, offbeat fantasy." -ALA 
Booklist
Ages 8 up * 112 pp. * RTE $15.00 / 0-688-16337-8
N 
Greenwillow Books A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019* www.williammorrow.com
* "A super storytime selection"'
-
School Library Journal (starred review)*
"Billy is the birthday boy, but like many a human child,
he has a hard time sharing his special day....Hutchins
combines a warm, knowledgeable sense of children with
lots of funny touches.... A good choice for new readers"
-ALA 
Booklist
Ages 3 up. 32 pp. 
TR 0-688-09663-8/$15.00 
LE 0-668-09664-6/$14.93
Other Billy Monster books by Pat Hutchins:
Three-Star Billy * Silly Billy * Where's the Be
The Very Worst Monster
W Greenwillow Books A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, NewYork, NY 10019 * www.williammorrow.com
-ýW The Horn Book and School Library Journal star
William Shakespeare
& the Globe
WRITTEN & ILLUSTRATED IN FULL COLOR BY
A T 
T T7T
"One of the most appealing and responsible biographies of
Shakespeare for this audience,... [this] is also a history of the Globe
of the 17th century and of the recently completed facsimile of
the theater built through the efforts of Sam Wanamaker. With deft
economy of words, Aliki [also] covers a broad range of Elizabethan
theater history. Her lively cartoon illustrations blend with more
finished portraits, maps, playhouse designs, and scenes from London
life. A thoroughly enjoyable and reliable introduction to the Bard."
-Starred review / School Library Journal
"As with Shakespeare, there's something here for every mood:
history, biography, theater, and architecture commingle, with
comedy, tragedy, romance and poetry playing bit parts."
A 
-Starred 
review 
/ 
The 
Horn 
Book
All ages. $15.95TR (0-06-027820-X); $15.89LB (0-06-027821-8)
9" HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 E. 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
www.harperchildrens.com
*"Original and entertaining."*
by Polly Horvath
"An unconventional aunt blows in from Vancouver to pinch-hit
as a babysitter, and offers two sisters and their brother an entrancing
view of family history... Most sections are... hilarious, as is the snappy
and perfectly timed dialogue... After the last laugh, Aunt Sally's
hard-won understanding of human nature will leave readers with
plenty to ponder." -Kirkus 
Reviews
*"tA] witty, clever, and involving book." -*Starred, 
Booklist
*"Offers memorable characters, fizzy narrative, and scenes
worthy of a roll on the floor, but also an underlying emotional
trajectory that makes the strongest comedy part of a larger and more
complex picture." -Starred, 
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
$16.00 / 0-374-37787-1 / Ages 8-12 FARRAR * STRAUS * GIROUX
Other books in the series:
In the Woods: Who's Been Here? TR $16.00/0-688-12318-X; LE $15.93/0-688-12319-8
In the Snow: Who's Been Here? TR $17.00/0-688-12320-1; LE $16.93/0-688-12321-X
Around the Pond: Who's Been Here? TR $16.00/0-688-14376-8; LE $15.93/0-688-14377-6
M 
Greenwillow Books A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.williammorrow.com
=(~111~~
l'lIlr
SOMEONE'S COME TO OUR HOUSE
WRITTEN BY KathiAppelt
ILLUSTRATED BY Nancy Carpenter
"An unseen narrator practically
sings the verses of this celebra-
tory book.... Bustling with
energy.... A book that captures
the jubilation and awe sur-
rounding a family birth."
-Publishers Weekly
* Ages 2 to 8
* Picture book
* 74" x 9"
* 24 pages
* Full-color illustration,
* Hardcover
* ISBN 0-8028-5144-4
* $16.00
To order, call 800-253-7521
Fax: 616-459-6540
E-mail: sales@eerdmans.com
An imprint (
I.- · ·
"Crisp, funny, dramatic."
-ALA 
Booklist
A "bold collection that observes different cats
in tones both affectionate and sardonic."
-School Library journal
"Witty poems and pictures full of visual puns."
-Kirkus Reviews
"Alternating narrative poems with haiku...
[this book] distills the essence of cat with
humor and, occasionally, wry elegance."
-Publishers Weekly
Ages 6 up * 40 pp. * TR $16.00/0-688-13153-0 * LE $15.93/0-688-13154-9
Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Books A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.williammorrow.com
'A garden fantasia"'
MY DAY IN
THE GARDEN
by
MIELA FORD
pictures by
ANITA LOBEL
"Its simplicity is engaging....
The joyful exuberance of the
colors will cheer up any rainy day."
-Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books*
"Lobel's idyllic illustrations are
as lovely as a sunny summer
afternoon, while the lyrical
text demonstrates inventive
simplicity. Charming."
-Kirkus Reviews
'"A stimulating visual experience."
-Publishers Weekly
Ages 4 up. 24 pp.
TR 0-688-15541-3/$16.00
LE 0-668-15542-1/$15.93 
r
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(199909)53:1 ;1-M
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
is online!
It is our great pleasure to announce that, beginning with the
1999-2000 volume year, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books will be available to our print subscribers as a searchable
online database. Print subscribers will be able to browse the
latest issue online, look through issues from the 1998-99 volume
year, and search for reviews by title, author, and reading level.
The staff of The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
cordially invites you to browse through the September 1998
sample issue at:
http://www.prairienet.org/cgi-bin/ccb/bulletin.cgi
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
The Best of Tradition and Technology
i 
I· 
Jh"
pi;: 
i·Z~_-· 
'' 
-,- n 
cc
.. 
~w~ r~: 
~··i-:- 
1:,
·e 
:1· 
·-·
·Ir q 
:·;~6":: s
:i:i:.-:.i 
~-·5~"
:,~···: iS·'
