I LLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Univers~tB ~ Il!i~oi~
GT~uate 
Sch~l 
ofllbrary 
~d 
In~rmatisn 
S~ence
Uni~sig 
Of Illinoik Press
SThe 
Horn Book stars
W1INT91ER
~~-~F-" 
An I 
Can Read Book' 
C
~r a;· 
by Jean Little 
(·
full-color pictures by Jennifer Plecas
"Emma is too shy to speak above a whisper whenever it's he~r
turn to read aloud before her class; too shy to make friends
easily. But when a new girl her age moves in next door,
Emma finds a way to connect.. .and 
g
[together they discover] the
true magic of friendship.
This is Jean Little's first 
.~
book for beginning readers,
and she's a natural. With
Jennifer Plecas's warm 
II
illustrations, [here] is a 
"
book newly independent
readers won't be at all
shy about reading."
--The Horn Book
Ages 4 8. $14.95TR 
0-06-025389-4
$14.89LB 
0-06-025390 8
Other HarperCollins books by Jean Little
HEY WORLD, HERE I AM! 
FROM ANNA
Pictures by Sue Truesdell 
Pictures by Joan Sandin
Ages 9 up. $4.5OPB 0-06-440384-X 
Ages 9 11. $4.95PB 
0 06 440044-1
~t Hlarp erCollins Children 'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022 * http://www.harperchildrens.com
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
November 1998
Vol. 52 No. 3
A LOOK INSIDE
85 
THE BIG PICTURE
The Other Shepards by Adele Griffin
86 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
94 
* Jazper written and illus. by Richard Egielski
94 
* Bandit's Moon by Sid Fleischman; illus. by Jos. A. Smith
95 
* Joey Pigza Swallowed the Key by Jack Gantos
99 
* Circle Dogs by Kevin Henkes; illus. by Dan Yaccarino
109 * War and the Pity of War comp. by Neil Philip; illus. by Michael
McCurdy
116 * My Name Is Georgia: A Portrait written and illus. by Jeanette Winter
117 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
118 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1998 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Jim Carroll from The Other Shepards ©1998. Used by permission of Hyperion
Books for Children.
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 85
THE BIG PICTURE
The Other Shepards
by Adele Griffin
Geneva and Holland Shepard are sisters living under the shadow of a tragedy that
happened before they were born: eighteen years ago their three older siblings, two
brothers and a sister, were killed in a car accident in the tropical island paradise
that used to be the family's beloved refuge. Teenager Holland is an acute observer,
and she tells the story of herself, her younger sister, Geneva, their parents, and
their dead siblings with the unerring eye and passionate angst of an adolescent
longing to break free of a smothering, inescapable past. In the character of Hol-
land Shepard, Griffin offers readers a young narrator whose voice encompasses
intense, poignant longing, employing language that touches the heart with its lyri-
cal simplicity.
"The parents," as the girls refer to them, are emotionally and physically
remote, isolated by and yet enamored of their inconsolable grief. Their mother
"prefers air kisses and thank you notes: a look-but-don't-touch kind of polite-
ness;" their father uses his gift for scientific objectivity to keep his daughters at a
safe but observable distance. Sixth-grader Geneva dislikes being touched, and she
has innumerable neuroses and compulsions that she uses to control her environ-
ment; Holland's quirks are less obvious, but no less compulsive-she makes deals
with God and counts constantly in order to affect situational outcomes.
Griffin carefully constructs the barren spiritual landscape of the Shepard
house, a house presided over by the portraits of two dead brothers and a sister, a
household of inhabitants defined, imprisoned, and stunted by tragedy. Starving
for the affection she believes her parents reserved for her dead siblings, Holland
reacts with stomach-sinking horror when Geneva grimly says, after viewing slides
from happier days, "I knew it. The parents used up all their love on them." The
two sisters find solace only in each other. Holland explains it to her new boy-
friend, Louis: "I'm a ghost story, too.... Whatever else Geneva and I are ... has
been swallowed up by our haunting. And you know the worst part? We never
even knew them. We never shared their history. We live inside our very own
haunted house, and we have no idea who the ghosts are."
When "Annie the painter" enters their lives to paint a mural on the Shepard
kitchen wall, she brings a sense of creative chaos, an emotional broom, so to speak,
to sweep away the cobwebs of tragedy and to free the two sisters from the tear-
sodden bonds of the past. Annie denies the eternity of grief, declares "the parents"
lucky to get a second chance at family with their youngest children, and says "it's
better to concentrate on the living" instead of the dead. Annie energetically pushes
the two sisters outside the emotional and physical boundaries set by their cautious
parents; she shows the past to Holland and Geneva from a completely different
86 
* 
THE BULLETIN
perspective, charming and cajoling and exasperatedly shoving them along the healing
road to redefinition of themselves, their dead siblings, and their parents.
Griffin's skill at revealing the depth of her characters through their ac-
tions shines here, and her ability to hold back just enough information without
being coy will keep readers enthralled. The revelation that Annie is the redemp-
tive spirit of the girls' dead older sister is so subtly and lovingly unfurled that it is
totally believable within the context of the Shepards' claustrophobic world.
Holland's narration is claustrophobic as well, concentrating from the outset on the
circumscribed dynamics between herself and Geneva and between both girls and
their parents. As Holland and Geneva begin to open both literal and figurative
windows, Holland's narration expands to include other people and places-and
feelings uncolored by her parents' unending grief.
There are moments of remarkable emotional clarity in Griffin's story.
The relief when the girls finally embrace one another and their future is like the
relief of being released from a locked room; the key is Holland's revelation that
while her parents may be caught in the past, she and her sister are not: "I know the
parents will not take down the portraits of the other Shepards any more than they
will roll up the bottoms of their pants and grill hot dogs on our roof. They will
continue to meet in the twilight kingdom of their dining room, and their grief is a
feast of pain I cannot touch. But now I know I will not always sit at their table."
The other Shepards' sensational death is the tragic incident that will draw
readers into a world subdued by unremitting sadness; just when the shadow of
grief seems too dark to penetrate, Griffin's characters act to let in all the light the
reader needs to see the clear, bright path of the sisters' deliverance. (Imprint infor-
mation appears on p. 97.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ARNOLD, MARSHA DIANE 
The Pumpkin Runner; illus. by Brad Sneed. 
Dial,
1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2125-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-2124-2 
$15.99 
R Gr. 2-4
Fueled by the energy of his favorite snack, sun-filled pumpkins ("'Must be the way
the sun shines through the eucalyptus trees that gives the pumpkins that extra
spark,' Aunt Millie had said as she watched Joshua's dust trail"), Joshua has en-
joyed running ever since he was a boy. When the now-sixty-year old sheep farmer
hears about the 900 kilometer Koala-K race from Melbourne to Sydney, he de-
cides that he and Yellow Dog will enter, because "we could see two cities and get in
a little run as well." The old man in his overalls and orange gumboots causes quite
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 
87
a few snickers among race spectators and other runners, but the snickers fade to
cheers when it becomes clear that old Joshua and Yellow Dog, fortified by Aunt
Millie's pumpkin confections, are going to win the race "two days and two hours
off the record!" Arnold's lengthy but involving text will make a successful readal-
oud for younger children while serving as a non-babyish tale of winning the good
fight (running the good run?) for beginning and even middle readers-alone. Sneed's
oil paintings combine expert drafting and compelling compositions. His elon-
gated, flexible figures are loaded with motion, running across single and double-
page spreads of sun-filled vistas of Australian sky and plain, bridge and city. This
is a cheerful tale of persistence, good sportsmanship, and winning against the odds.
A concluding note states that the author was inspired by the true story of Cliff
Young, an Australian sheep farmer who, at age 61, won an 875-kilometer race
against much younger opponents. JMD
Avi 
Perloo the Bold. Scholastic, 1998 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-590-11002-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
This political fantasy pits the Montmers ("a mix of jackrabbits, prairie dogs, and
humans") against the Felbarts ("an alarming mix of human and coyote") in a battle
for domination of snowy Rocky Mountain terrain. On her deathbed, Granter
Jolaine chooses Perloo (the Unwilling) over her vile son Berwig to be the next
granter, the new leader of the Montmers. Berwig furiously attempts to cover up
Jolaine's choice by accusing Perloo and Lucabara, Jolaine's first assistant, of mur-
dering Jolaine. Perloo and Lucabara escape, Perloo finding unexpected assistance
among their Felbart enemies and Lucabara leading the rebel resistance against
Berwig. In a confrontation between the Montmers and the Felbarts, Perloo de-
feats Berwig's slimy challenger with the help of some well-aimed snowballs. The
fantasy environment here is tightly controlled if relatively slight, featuring the in-
sides of warrens and burrows, with the occasional venture onto snowy slopes. There
is little characterization outside of that which is necessary to the plot, but the
physical descriptions of the villains double easily as character development. The
scattering throughout of the sayings of the philosopher Mogwat the Magpie acts as
a unifying element and leads readers painlessly to conclusions about power cor-
rupting individuals, fascism being bad, and democracy being good. Perloo's deci-
sion to abdicate his role as granter in favor of Montmer self-rule is seen as an
indication of his modesty and wisdom, but as all he's done throughout is regret
Jolaine's choice of him as granter, it seems more self-serving than anything else.
Still, the action is quick, and those pre-Redwall readers who have a yen for animal
fantasy will be happy to come along. JMD
BACON, KATHARINE JAY Finn. McElderry, 1998 
[176p]
ISBN 0-689-82216-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The sole survivor of the plane crash that claimed the lives of his family, fifteen-
year-old Finn has come to live with his grandmother on her Vermont farm. The
trauma of the crash and its aftermath have left him an elective mute, and his grand-
mother and his friend Julia try everything they can think of to draw him out, but
his only voice is the soundless interior monologue that Bacon presents in italicized
88 
* 
THE BULLETIN
passages. Neighborhood events involving a cocaine ring and the appearance of a
feral wolf-dog that is suspected of savaging the local livestock eventually back Finn
into a corner, forcing him to communicate openly to save Julia from the drug
dealers upon whom she has accidentally stumbled. Finn's gradual recall of the
terrifying events surrounding the crash creates considerable tension, and the ma-
turing relationship between Finn and Julia is tenderly presented. However, Finn's
unrelenting soul-searching ("There is a voice here with me at the heart of my heart-
it is my voice") tends to stall the action. A melodramatic finish replete with wounded
hero, damsel in distress, noble wolf-dog, incinerated villain, and trusty mare breath-
ing her last on her mate's grave is simply too much to be believed. Readers who
gravitate to tales of brokenness and healing may bite, but survival-story fans had
better look to Gary Paulsen and Will Hobbs. EB
BEELER, SELBY B. 
Throw Your Tooth on the Roof: Tooth Traditions from Around
the World; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Houghton, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-89108-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A book filled with gap-toothed smiles explains what different traditions there are
for disposing of the former residents of those gaps. Each oversized spread focuses
on a continent or region and offers half a dozen or so engaging first-person reports
of tooth-disposal practices. As the title suggests, throwing the tooth-sometimes
explicitly the upper or the lower one-on or over the roof is a widespread practice,
represented here by reports from Cameroon, Benin, Greece, Moldova, Cambodia,
and other countries. The participation of dentally inclined animals is another
strong trend: Mexico, Guatemala, Uganda, France, and Kazakhstan all involve
mice or rats in the ritual; El Salvador deviates with a rabbit, and Georgia and Haiti
outshine the competition by employing both the rodent and the roof. There are
plenty more beyond that, and there is an undeniable charm and fascination in the
variety and the matter-of-fact phraseology (the German contribution says flatly, "I
don't do anything special with my tooth," and the Ugandan one, discussing the
money the rats leave, observes, "Some rats are poorer than others"). Karas' effer-
vescently inventive spot art sometimes features the dentally impaired individual,
sometimes the house waiting to be overthrown by the lost incisor, and sometimes
the relevant helper on its own (a couple of resourceful rodents have sensibly brought
lights to guide them on their mission). Whether for entertaining cultural compari-
son or a source for Tooth Fairy alternatives, this is a toothsome entry that kids will
want a bite of-clever TFs might consider varying the ritual and tucking this under
the pillow. A friendly and useful map opens the proceedings; a few final pages on
factual dental information will give parents some toothy tidbits; a note explains
Beeler's collection of toothlore. DS
BIBLE 
To Every Thing There Is a Season: Verses from Ecclesiastes; illus. by Leo and
Diane Dillon. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1998 
40p
ISBN 0-590-47887-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The well-known verse from Ecclesiastes ("To every thing there is a season, and a
time to every purpose under heaven") is given royal treatment in a visual extrava-
ganza by husband-and-wife artistic team Leo and Diane Dillon. This handsome
volume features a brief line of verse on each double-page spread, the accompanying
art reflecting religious and other iconographic symbols. The Dillons have taken
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 89
their inspiration from a wide variety of cultures, patterning their stylistic interpre-
tations after traditional or historical art forms ranging from the illuminated manu-
scripts of Ireland to the floating wood blocks of Japan to the Anasazi murals of
ceremonial kivas. (An extensive note about the illustrations gives the artistic sources
for each double-page spread as well as the medium used.) The Dillons are accom-
plished artists, and the drafting and design of this volume, with its elaborate com-
positions and heavy paper, is remarkable; both the introduction and the notes
indicate that this is a well-intentioned labor of love. That being said, the book
itself is overproduced, the ornate and complex art overwhelming the verses it is
supposed to complement. The double-page spreads lack cohesion, the images
existing in stylistic isolation rather than being logically connected by some com-
mon thematic thread. There is also a disquieting and discordant note struck by
the coupling of the Judeo-Christian verses with iconography from cultures that
embrace other, non-Judeo-Christian spiritual paths. The art does not inform or
clearly contextualize the verses, which contributes to a distancing effect. (Oddly
enough, the cover illustration does not have that same distance-done in the Dillons'
signature style, it represents nature and peoples in a unity not accomplished by the
book's apparent artistic vision.) The majesty of the verses and the technical ac-
complishment of the Dillons cannot be denied, however, and this volume has
strong curriculum possibilities for both religious and art instruction. JMD
BODNAR, JUDIT Z. 
Tale ofa Tail; illus. by John Sandford. 
Lothrop, 1998 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12175-6 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12174-8 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
A greedy fox refuses to share his catch of fish with Bear, assuring his ursine friend
that "there never was anything better for a fishing pole than a bear's tail" and
guaranteeing Bear a fine catch if he will just attempt this mode of angling. Bear
goes off to dangle his tail in the lake and sit and shiver all night long. When
daybreak comes and he tries to pull his tail out of the lake, the frozen lake comes
with it; as the now-angry bear heads for the fox's den, lake in tow, the frozen lake
melts into a shallow stream full of "lovely, shimmering fish," which the happy
bear eats till his belly drags on the ground. BodnAr's boisterous retelling is based
on the Hungarian tales she heard from her parents when she was a child, and it has
the ring of a story made to be read aloud or told. Sandford's lovingly detailed oil
paintings depict a bucolic winter landscape somewhat reminiscent of Jan Brett,
wherein well-dressed animals exchange ideas over books while standing in snowy
lanes, Fox snuggles into his slippers by a warm fire, and Bear sleeps in flowered
pajamas. Textured surfaces (stone, fur, trees), expressive faces, and sweeping line
add nuance to double-page spread compositions that can easily be used with groups.
This has some dandy creative-dramatics possibilities, so get your group together
and go fishing. JMD
BOUDALIKA, LITSA, ed. 
If You Could Be My Friend: Letters of Mervet Akram
Sha'ban and Galit Fink; tr. by Ariane Elbaz and Beatrice Khadige. 
Orchard,
1998 
118p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33113-X 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30113-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
At the height of the intifada, the Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation, a
Jewish girl (Galit) and a Palestinian girl (Mervet) begin an open-minded corre-
90 
* THE BULLETIN
spondence in which they discuss everything from the most mundane details of
family life to their reactions to the armed struggle between their nations. As the
girls mature into their teens, their letters demonstrate their growing political aware-
ness. Galit suspends the correspondence during the Gulf War, and her next letter
evinces a militancy that young readers accustomed to tales of invincible friendship
may find startling: "Since this horrible war I have changed my mind about the
Arab-Israeli conflict. When I was little, I was more open to ideas because I did not
understand the true significance of things. . .. [Now] I tell myself that it is your
people who are responsible." Although there is considerable power in the letters
between the girls, Boudalika's editorial role is unclear, and the historical notes that
proceed each letter are positively abstruse for most young readers. Coverage of the
girls' relationship ends abruptly with their meeting in 1991 (apparently arranged
by Boudalika), and this American edition's lack of notes on current Arab-Israeli
affairs renders the title sorely out of date. A historical overview and a comprehen-
sive glossary are included. EB
BROOKS, BRUCE 
Each a Piece; illus. by Elena Pavlov. 
Geringer/HarperCollins,
1998 
[2 8p]
ISBN 0-06-023594-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
6-9 yrs
In a stylistic change of pace, Bruce Brooks turns his attention to the genre of the
picture book, offering an enumerative poem ("A piece of the moon// a part of the
sky/ two words from a tune// a dog passing by .. . ") that alludes to aspects of the
illustrations; the verse finishes with the teasing statement that "each piece is a part/
of more left to find." The illustrations, collages of images from Victorian prints
and cards, contain a multitude of patterns and included objets that would seem a
further enticement to search, but there is, as the immortal Tallulah Bankhead once
said, less in this than meets the eye. The spreads depict a cherubic little girl and
boy playing with a dollhouse in the nursery; pages also show cutaways of the
dollhouse scenes (containing their own little boy and girl) that contain objects
found in the previous spreads, so that the blocks the real little boy tumbles eventu-
ally turn up in the dollhouse nursery. In an age of ISpy, Optical Tricks, Zoom, and
The Stinky Cheese Man, however, this is pretty unsurprising stuff; it's hardly a
conceptual stretch to grasp that a scene you view on one page is part of a larger
whole and that the sunflower by the dollhouse in one spread is the same one that
onlookers saw in a previous wider view of the whole room. The art's fidelity to its
Victorian popular tradition makes it sentimental and overcrowded by modern con-
ventions (flowers, frills, and chirping birds abound, and the palette runs strongly
to pink), which is unlikely to endear the book any further to readers drawn in by
the promise of puzzling. Since the text depends on the visuals and the visuals
don't deliver much but the prettiness of a long-gone era, there's unfortunately not
a whole lot to redeem this; dollhouse mavens and Victoriana fans might find it
inspires them to their own collages, but that's about it. DS
BUFFIE, MARGARET 
Angels Turn Their Backs. 
Kids Can, 1998 
239p
ISBN 1-55074-415-1 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Addy is furious that her mother has uprooted her to drag her halfway across Canada
and away from her father, and she's also deeply troubled by panic attacks so great
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 
91
that she refuses to leave her apartment house and enrolls herself in distance learn-
ing instead. This gives her plenty of opportunity to get to know her fellow apart-
ment-house residents, including a nice landlord, a cool college student, and a voluble
African Grey parrot, whose words sometimes seem to go well beyond mimicry to
conversation but also to echo the troubles of the house's previous owner, Lotta
Engel. Addy discovers more about Lotta, who was herself deeply troubled by guilt
and anxieties and who left behind shimmering needlepoint tapestries of museum
quality, and she finds herself becoming more and more interested in finishing
Lotta's project as well as in understanding Lotta herself. Buffie effectively com-
bines various plot components-Addy's anxiety disorder, her parents' acrimoni-
ous separation, the college student's abuse at the hands of her domineering
boyfriend, and the story of Lotta's artistic legacy-into a gratifyingly febrile and
compelling whole. Victor the parrot and his domain of the shuttered room are
particularly winning atmospheric strokes, and the book makes Lotta's elaborate
needlepoint creations worthy ofAddy's fascination. The revelations of the past are
a bit muted and obscured by the attention on the present (it looks like Lotta's guilt
came from her failure to prevent the death of her family and that she herself died
when Victor accidentally knocked her out the window), but the present is interest-
ing enough that readers probably won't mind. Fans of Buffie's earlier books (The
Warnings, BCCB 3/91, etc.) and those who like their ghost stories on the psycho-
logical side will appreciate Addy's overwrought and interesting world. DS
BUSBY, CYLIN 
Tales Too Gross to Be True: The Chicken-FriedRat; illus. by Phoebe
Gloeckner and Ravenblond Studios. 
HarperTrophy, 1998 
94p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-440701-2 
$4.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
DALY-WEIR, CATHERINE 
Tales Too Funny to Be True: The Exploding Toilet; illus.
by Phoebe Gloeckner and Ravenblond Studios. 
HarperTrophy, 1998 
85p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-440702-0 
$4.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
GILSON, KRISTIN 
Tales Too Scary to Be True: The Baby-Sitters'Nightmare; illus.
by Phoebe Gloeckner and Ravenblond Studios. 
HarperTrophy, 1998 
102p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-440700-4 
$4.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Kids are, of course, the classic purveyors and audience of urban legends, but these
collections go a bit farther than the oral tradition in acknowledging the UL as a
genre and their factuality as virtually nil. Jan Harold Brunvand, urban legend
maven, has provided introductions for the books; they address the definition of
urban legends, his history in studying them, and some classic examples. Each
book then embarks on a slight narrative, wherein kids doing regular schoolkid (or
vacation-kid) things end up telling stories back and forth all day. The framing
device offers an opportunity for the characters to demonstrate some appropriately
skeptical responses to these fictional tales told as true, but the writing is pretty limp
and the arrangement is ultimately more distracting than useful. Though the tales
themselves aren't brilliantly told, they retain their old compelling charm, and young
readers not up to Brunvand's own books may welcome the source concentration,
since each book has over a dozen stories. Though these lack the edge of Paul
Jennings' legendesque short stories or even Judith Gorog's retellings, there's a
poolside swappability to these titles that makes them amiable choices for the reluc-
tant or coasting reader. Black-and-white line drawings in comic-book style catch
the campy mood of the stories. DS
92 
* 
THE BULLETIN
CADNUM, MICHAEL 
Heat. Viking, 1998 
[19 6 p]
ISBN 0-670-87886-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Sixteen-year-old Bonnie is a serious competitive diver, getting ready for a major
state invitational and maybe, beyond that, national and international competi-
tion, when a collision with the edge of the platform during practice sends her off to
the hospital and into recuperation from a head injury. While physical recovery
seems assured, Bonnie's confident mastery of her sport has ebbed away; at the
same time, Bonnie's certainty about her confident and masterful father, a lawyer
divorced from her mother, begins to crumble in the face of his arrest and trial for
grand theft and fraud. While Cadnum's connections between the plot threads are
sometimes subtle to the point of obscurity, his portrait of Bonnie is strong and
effective: she's her father's daughter, even to the extent of keeping his views about
cross-examination in mind as she's answering the neurologist's diagnostic ques-
tions, and despite her frustration with some of his fatherly failings her devotion
makes her blind to the signs of his guilt-and even of her mother's possible culpa-
bility. The book's dip into the watery world of the competitive diver is also well-
executed, with just enough details of diving methodology and pool milieu ("Even
when the pool water appears unruffled and without current, it isn't") for specific-
ity without over-focus. There's been a small spate of recent novels about fathers
whose white-collar crime catches up with them; with its steely thoughtfulness and
consistent voice, this is the best. DS
COLEMAN, MICHAEL 
Weirdo's War. 
Orchard, 1998 
184p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33103-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30103-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Daniel Edwards, known-not fondly-to his classmates as "Weirdo," is living his
worst nightmare: five days sharing a cabin with his worst enemies on a manly
orienteering/Outward Bound-type trip in the British countryside. Now he's trapped
in a cave with one of his tormentors and the bullying gym teacher in charge of the
expedition, the latter unconscious from a fall, and they need to find a way out
before flood waters rushing into the cave engulf them all. While the elements here
are, to say the least, familiar, Coleman capably constructs the emotional dynamics
of the situation; the core of truth-Daniel is a weirdo, with his precious talisman
notebook and obsession with figures-lifts this book above the perfunctory. The
interrelationships are effectively spelled out: there's the P.E. sadist that readers
will love to hate, the cocky class ringleaders he likes, their toady Tozer, who's the
butt of the gym teacher's jokes and who knows he narrowly escapes being a victim
in general, and Daniel, disdained and taunted by all of them. The plot structure,
which starts with Daniel and Tozer in the cave and alternates between explanatory
flashbacks and contemporary progression, is clear and generally unconfusing (though
there's some inconsistency in the verb tenses), and the ending stays away from
unrealistic sunniness. The teacher comeuppance will be enough to gratify many
youngsters, but the combination of physical and psychological drama will sustain
them while they yearn for it. DS
CuuEN, LYNN, ad. 
The Mightiest Heart; illus. by Laurel Long. 
Dial, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2293-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-2292-3 
$16.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Dog is not only man's best friend but man's only friend in this story of a Welsh
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 
93
prince whose faithful hound remains loyal even though his master forsakes him,
past boyhood, for the arts of war, a cold-hearted wife, and the mistaken belief (if
only for a moment) that the dog has harmed his baby son in the cradle. Of course,
it is a wolf that attacked the baby, it is the dog that saved the baby, and it is the
dog-long run away and grown old-who saves the prince years later as he rides
through the woods and is attacked by wolves once again. This is a heart-wringer,
since the dog disappears never to be seen again, but its pup finds the son of the
prince, and the prince watches boy and pup bound away together. An author's
note outlines the basis for this thirteenth-century legend, presented here with smooth
grace and illustrated with skillfully modeled, deep-hued paintings resembling scenes
from medieval tapestry. The young listener's identification with a powerless, mis-
understood but desperate-to-please satellite of the grownup world will sweep this
picture book into first place with children, an honor supported by the art and
storytelling. BH
DALY-WEIR, CATHERINE 
Tales Too Funny to Be True: The Exploding Toilet.
See review under Busby, p. 91.
DENENBERG, BARRY 
The Journal of William Thomas Emerson: A Revolutionary
War Patriot. Scholastic, 1998 
156p 
illus. with photographs 
(My Name Is
America)
ISBN 0-590-31350-9 
$9.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
MURPHY, JIM 
The Journal of James Edmond Pease: A Civil War Union
Soldier. Scholastic, 1998 
illus. with photographs 
(My Name Is America)
ISBN 0-590-43814-X 
$9.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Scholastic has retained the diary/journal format but shed the fancy titles and rib-
bon page markers to woo boys to this popular series, and for the intrepid middle-
school male who dares to be seen carting around a variant of the Dear America
imprint, the rewards are commensurate with the bravery. Denenberg's offering is
a trifle disjointed at the offset but quickly and cleverly knits together into a tale of
a young boardinghouse employee who helps unmask a traitor among members of
the Patriot "Committee" who meet at the downstairs tavern. Assignations in dark
alleys, encrypted messages, and the death of a friend at the hands of King George's
"lobsterbacks" keep the action rolling. Murphy's entry is even stronger-finely
crafted and frequently humorous observations of a seventeen-year-old private en-
trusted to keep the G Company record for the 122nd Regiment, New York Vol-
unteers. The company is in the bad graces of the commanding officers after mowing
down fellow Union soldiers with friendly fire at Gettysburg. They are eventually
called to action at the Wilderness, where Pease becomes separated from his com-
pany and must cross enemy lines to rejoin his troops at Spotsylvania. As in other
series titles, each volume concludes with historical notes and period illustrations
that genuinely illuminate the stories. EB
DEWEY, JENNIFER OWINGS 
Navajo Summer; written and illus. by Jennifer Owings
Dewey. 
Boyds Mills, 1998 
143p
ISBN 1-56397-248-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Jamie is twelve when she flees her divorcing parents and seeks refuge with the
Wilsons, a Navajo family she knows from horse-trading trips with her father. Over
the course of the summer Jamie babysits four-year-old Rita Wilson, takes part in a
94 
* THE BULLETIN
blessingway ceremony for an elderly medicine woman, and confronts the reality of
an abusive, bullying father and passive, conventional mother. In this autobio-
graphical novel, Jamie's internal life is well-developed as she struggles to make
sense of her old life and to have some control over her new one; her emotional
responses to her personal circumstances, to the natural environment, and to her
Navajo friends ring with honest resonance. The plot, however, meanders from
event to event, the individual incidents fairly involving but only rudimentarily
connected. The Wilson family is sketchily characterized, and there is the occa-
sional lapse into socio-speak as narrator Jamie presents information about tribal
custom. Readers may still find satisfaction here, though, as Jamie, finally retrieved
and sent off to boarding school, hangs on to a tenuous but growing sense of self.
Pencil illustrations by the author decorate each chapter heading. JMD
EGIELSKI, RICHARD Jazper; written and illus. by Richard Egielski. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027999-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027817-X 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
After his father's accident, little green bug Jazper takes a housekeeping job for five
weird moths in order to support the family while Dad's laid up. He comes away
not just with a paycheck but also with the ability (learned from the moths' "books
of tricks and magic") to perform "feats of magic transformation"; when the moths
discover that Jazper is making his fame and fortune from their secrets, they come
after him, and thus ensues a showdown of transmogrifications. The plot is just
plain bizarre, since the events lack both internal and progressive logic (we never
know, for instance, why the moths go away for five weeks and why they transform
themselves anyway), and the tone haphazardly veers from humorous to sentimen-
tal. There's nonetheless distinct charm in Jazper's loopy transformations (he con-
verts into a cheese doodle, a sour pickle, a blue crayon) and in the dramatic battle
that resembles a game of rocks-paper-scissors writ large and personified (Jazper
finally triumphs by turning himself into a rain cloud that douses the moths, who
have turned into flames). Nattily clothed Jazper, with his mosquitoesque probos-
cis and extra set of legs, is a loving insect son in a teeming world of bug-eyed (well,
they are) bugs going about their colorful business; his sturdy homeliness and the
other insects' rich diversity contrast with the gilt-edged similarity of the palely
sinister moths. Kids appreciative of the special effects and the sheer bugginess here
will get a buzz from this. DS
FLEISCHMAN, SID 
Bandit's Moon; illus. by Jos. A. Smith. 
Greenwillow,
1998 
136p
ISBN 0-688-15830-7 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Annyrose escapes from the clutches of ne'er-do-well horse thief
0. O. Mary and falls into the clutches of notorious bandit Joaquin Murieta, "the
Robin Hood of the California Gold Rush." (Since Annyrose was wearing jeans
and short hair when they found her, the bandits think she's a boy, and Joaquin
enlists her to teach him to read English so he can read the fliers offering a reward
for his head). Joaqufn's band of outlaws is comprised of Mexicans dispossessed of
their lands, families, and property by "Yankee" gold rush laws based on bigotry
and greed, and Annyrose becomes an unwillingly sympathetic witness to their
raids on the gold miners. The adversarial yet affectionate relationship between
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 
95
Joaquin and Annyrose is the medium on which Fleischman hangs his plot, and,
while it's possibly a bit shallow in spots, the sheer chase and escape excitement of
the action is enough to carry readers over the rocky bits. Fleischman states in an
author's note that Joaquin Murieta was a real outlaw, but a closer look indicates
that there were several Joaquins, that one of them might have been a Murieta, and
that he might have been a legend perpetuated by the same source used by Fleischman
as the basis for this historical fiction. Whether the outlaw was entirely real or not
is moot-Fleischman has crafted an adventure story as fast paced as the outlaws'
ponies, and in the creation of Joaquin Murieta, the dashing outlaw seeking ven-
geance on the men who robbed him of his house and home, he has created a lively,
irresistible anti-hero. Pair this with Andrew Glass' Bad Guys (BCCB 9/98) in a
booktalk, and watch both titles gallop off the shelves. As Joaquin would say, "Es
destino." Occasional line drawings add to the book's accessibility. JMD
FRIESEN, GAYLE 
Janey's Girl. Kids Can, 1998 
222p
ISBN 1-55074-461-5 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Fourteen-year-old Claire is on vacation with her mother, Jane, to visit the grand-
mother she has never met. Inflamed with curiosity about her mother's past, Claire
is frustrated by Jane's refusal to discuss the details Claire so wants to know, espe-
cially the identity of the illegitimate Claire's father. Jane withholds information
and denies permission, but Claire (with a tenacity probably inherited from her
willful mother) refuses to be distracted from her quest, embarking on a voyage of
discovery that her mother cannot scuttle. She meets her father, Mac, and her half-
brother, Jamie; she finds a first love in hired boy Jack; and she claims her heritage
by dragging out into the open all the pent-up emotions and secrets Jane has been
suppressing for nearly fifteen years. In the midst of all this emotional upheaval
Jamie's leukemia reasserts itself, and Claire is the only match for a bone marrow
transplant. It seems as if this should degenerate into soap opera and bad soap
opera at that, but Friesen spends the better part of the book setting up her charac-
ters to confront this issue: Jane refuses Mac's first tentative request, but she never
tells Claire; when Claire discovers her mother's continued secrecy, she is furious,
and for the first time in her life rebels against her controlling if loving mother's
rules. Friesen's light touch with dialogue adds humor and the emotional nuances
of her characters ring true, and that lifts this title above the usual fatal-illness al-
most-death-bed melodrama. JMD
GANTOS, JACK Joey Pigza Swallowed the Key. 
Farrar, 1998 
[160p]
ISBN 0-374-33664-4 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Joey knows that he's "wired" and that his medication only intermittently enables
him to calm down and focus on school tasks and reasonable behavior. More often
he's swallowing his house key on a bet, sharpening everything he can find (includ-
ing his finger) in the pencil sharpener, and sneaking the special scissors out of the
teacher's desk-which results in another student's trip to the emergency room.
This drastic event results in Joey's being moved from the special education class in
his own school to "intensive counseling at the special-ed center downtown," but it
also results in a more comprehensive and ultimately more helpful approach to his
problems. The plot has some similarities to familiar learning-disability problem
novels, but the treatment is quite different indeed. For one thing this starts after
96 
* THE BULLETIN
most of them leave off-the problem isn't that Joey's undiagnosed, and mere rec-
ognition of the problem isn't enough to solve it. Gantos has a heartbreaking hon-
esty about the lot of a kid treated poorly by fate that makes you realize how much
other children's authors tend to pull their punches. Joey's mother really does love
him; she also left him for years with his creepy grandmother while she threw her lot
in with his alcoholic father (whereabouts of Grandma and her son both currently
uncertain), and she has missed several opportunities to improve Joey's situation for
reasons we never quite know. Joey's narration is a particular achievement: it offers
a vivid insight into his world, making his insistent internal pressure to bounce and
fiddle tangible and contagious while also making it completely understandable
that adults who deal with him don't really know what to do and are often at their
wits' end. Jane Cutler's Spaceman (BCCB 5/97) decorously broke some new ground
on this topic; Gantos roars past genre boundaries and takes readers to a place they've
probably never been before. DS
GARNER, ALAN 
The Well of the Wind; illus. by Herv6 Blondon. 
DK Ink,
1998 
4 5p
ISBN 0-7894-2519-X 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Garner has braided well-known motifs into a spare, original tale of two royal sib-
lings marked with stars on their foreheads, found floating in a box at sea, reared by
a fisherman, and imperiled by a witch who three times knocks on their door and
lures them into danger. As in many a folktale, it is the patient, determined sister
who walks from one impossible task to the next ("I got from that. Perhaps I shall
get from this"); a knowing helper bestows advice and magical objects in the woods
to assist her in freeing her brother from transformation into stone and in finding
the siblings' parents. Deliberate in pace and ritualistic in tone, this benefits from
sharply honed phrasing. Mythical symbols abound, and there may be just a touch
too many marvels here, including rainbows, a square castle spinning in the wind,
and a bird that turns into a diamond after the girl shoots it with an arrow-as with
some of Garner's other fiction, the reader or listener must bend with mystical
twists of plot and character. However, there's no question but that the book will
cast a spell when read aloud to, or alone by, fairy-tale fans. Blondon's bronzed
figures seem poised in a wind-blown world devoid of detail, which is appropriate
to contextualizing the selectively intense narrative. Except for a box that clearly
appears cardboard rather than the stated crystal, the compositions suggest more
than they specify-always fitting for stories of surrealistic dimension. BH
GELSANLITER, WENDY 
Dancin' in the Kitchen; by Wendy Gelsanliter and Frank
Christian; illus. by Marjorie Priceman. 
Putnam, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-23035-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 4-6 yrs
In this rhyming text, an extended family dances around the kitchen to the tunes on
the radio as everyone helps get dinner cooked and on the table until "Everybody's
hungry/ But dinner's got to wait/ 'Cause all the legs are moving/ 'Cept the chicken's
on the plate." The rhyme and rhythm push the scansion envelope here and there,
but Priceman's goofily impressionistic take on the kitchen shenanigans nearly car-
ries the day. Although the palette tips into the muddy, her energetic, flowingly
curved figures dance airily through the hot pink and orange kitchen. Even the
furniture wants to get in on the dance action, the wavy table legs, dashing curlicues
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 97
on chair backs, and skewed lines of kitchen cabinetry all competing to be the most
active inanimate object. Splashy full and double-page spreads makes this an easy
addition to storytimes and readaloud programs, although you'll have to practice
reading it aloud once or twice to get the rhythm of the awkward verse just right.
JMD
GILSON, KRISTIN 
Tales Too Scary to Be True: The Baby-Sitters'Nightmare.
See review under Busby, p. 91.
GRIFFIN, ADELE 
The Other Shepards. Hyperion, 1998 
218p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2370-4 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0423-8 
$14.95 
R* 
Gr. 6-9
See this month's Big Picture, p. 85, for review.
GUTHRIE, WOODY 
This Land Is Your Land; illus. by Kathy Jakobsen. 
Little,
1998 
32p
ISBN 0-316-39215-4 
$14.95 
R 
4-8 yrs
The words to Woody Guthrie's most famous folksong are set among folk-art paint-
ings in which viewers can follow the small figure of a guitar-carrying Guthrie through
double-page vistas of wintry plains, golden valleys, and urban landscapes blighted
by poverty; through framed single-page spreads of cities like San Francisco and
New York; through smaller framed details of places and sites important to Guthrie
during his life. The painted borders on the alternating spreads are based on tradi-
tional "tramp art" (boxes, picture frames, and mirror frames crafted by hobos,
miners, and lumberjacks in the early to mid-1900s), and they feature corner text
boxes containing selected verses from some of Guthrie's other folksongs. The
overall impression is of a classy folk-art calendar with focus, as readers and viewers
follow Guthrie and his lyrics through the USA. Jakobsen's mastery of her medium
is clear in both her drafting and composition, as meticulous detail supports con-
tent with disarming grace. The faces consist of dot eyes and grins and suffer a bit
from repetitive inarticulation; the landscapes, cityscapes, and monuments, how-
ever, are bound to intrigue up-close viewers. Musical notation and lyrics are in-
cluded, as is a two-page biography, with photographs, of Guthrie's life. JMD
HAMILTON, VIRGINIA 
Second Cousins. Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1998 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-590-47368-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
After the tragedy of their cousin Patty Ann's drowning (Cousins, BCCB 11/90),
Elodie and Cammy have become as close as sisters. It is they who realize that Aunt
Effie, Patty Ann's mother, is still grief-mad over her daughter's death and still
blaming Cammy and Elodie. The upcoming family reunion is a distraction for
everyone, however, and with the arrival of "The Girls from New York," two
streetwise, urban cousins, Cammy is about to learn more about family ties than
she anticipated. Cammy is shocked to find out she has a half-sister (the result of an
affair her father had while still married to her mother), and her shock is only
slightly mitigated by her beginning relationship with her newly discovered sibling
Jahnina, aka Fractal. A trip to the river (the site of Patty Ann's drowning) and "a
telling," a remembering of family history by Gram Tut, are the beginning of true
98 
* THE BULLETIN
healing for both Aunt Effie and Cammy. The opening scene sets the tone for this
absorbing if disjointed sequel, with Cammy's and Elodie's closeness emphasized
by their shared activities and affection. While Hamilton has a sure touch with the
dynamics of intense interpersonal and family relationships, there is a lack of cohe-
sion in both the plot and the narrative that undercuts the emotional impact. Gram's
conversations with her dead husband drop in and out without context or explana-
tion, Fractal's obsession with the Internet is trendy but peripheral, and the instant
healing of Aunt Effie is without resonance. Still, Hamilton's masterful handling
of the physical settings and her ability to create empathetic characters will carry
readers through until the neatly wrapped up, if somewhat anticlimactic, conclu-
sion. JMD
HARPER, DAN 
Telling Time with Big Mama Cat; illus. by Barry and Cara
Moser. 
Harcourt, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201738-0 
$15.00 
R 4-8 yrs
The format in this how-to-tell-time book is so simple it's a wonder it hasn't been
done to death: a heavy board cover has a round cutout that reveals the eminently
readable clock face and its movable plastic hands; open the cover and fold out the
clock. Now you can read the book and change the clock face as narrator Big
Mama Cat naps, purrs, and nibbles her way through the day, from 6 A.M. to mid-
night. Each activity (stretching, breakfasting, going out, coming in, etc.) has a
specific time; each time is reinforced by a picture of a clock in the accompanying
illustration, as well as by reader and viewer's moving the hands and changing the
time on the fold-out clock. Harper's temporal text is simple and direct, with
touches of feline humor in the pictures (the titles in the bookcase include The
Milkman Cometh and To Catch a Mockingbird) and in BMC's asides ("At 2:15
Isabelle gets off the school bus. I wonder if she saved some lunch for me"). The
illustrative collaboration between Barry Moser and daughter Cara results in water-
colors that capture the fat-cat self-satisfaction of the time-telling kitty, whether
she's yawning after her late afternoon nap or gazing at the viewer with half-closed
eyes while being scratched under the chin. Uncrowded but interesting composi-
tions in full, double, and three-quarter page panels are accompanied by a bold and
easily readable typeface; the inclusion of a different type of clock in each picture (a
wall clock with a pendulum, a clock in a church steeple in an outside tableau, a
Felix-the-Cat clock with movable eyes and ticking tail) adds a seek-and-find aspect
to a timely title. JMD
HASSETT, JOHN 
Cat Up a Tree; written and illus. by John and Ann
Hassett. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-395-88415-2 
$15.00 
R* 4-7 yrs
Nana Quimby, concerned about the cat stuck up a tree outside her window, at-
tempts to telephone the traditional community source of help, but the firehouse
says they're out of that business ("Call back if that cat starts playing with matches").
When there are five cats she tries the police station ("Call back if the cats rob a
bank"), when there are ten she calls the pet store ("Call back if the cats wish to buy
a dog"), and so on through unhelpful responses from the zoo, the post office, the
library, and city hall as the cats' numbers increase. The cats are saved when Nana,
in a fit of citizenly pique, throws her phone out the window and into the tree,
providing the now-forty cats with a line of escape; metropolitan officialdom re-
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 99
grets its former attitude in light of a new mouse infestation. The patterned narra-
tive has a lilting charm in the balance between Nana's repeated cry of "Help! Cat
[or however many cats] up a tree!" and the civic agencies' drolly bureaucratic re-
sponses. The illustrations have a sedate precision that emphasizes the humor:
delicate lavender, rose, and ochre shades contrast with the sturdy green of the cat-
supporting tree, and tidy rows of quaint tourist-magnet village shops hint at the
disaster to befall the soon catless town, since they all seem to sell cheese. Most
important here are the cats, whose elongated swirly-tailed exaggeration is vaguely
reminiscent of the Pink Panther but whose wonderful variety will make them end-
lessly desirable to young viewers. Don't confuse this with Anne Isaacs' book of the
same title, reviewed below: this is a pettable and furry little adventure that should
make lapsitters as happy as kittens with a ball of yarn. DS
HAUTMAN, PETE 
Stone Cold. Simon, 1998 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-689-81759-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Denn Doyle has discovered he possesses a talent of such lucrative potential that he
pitches his modest but thriving lawn care business and devotes himself seriously to
a new avocation, poker. Not only does Denn have a knack for calculating odds
and an uncanny control of his emotions at the table, he also has the ability to read
his opponents' "tells," a player's tics and mannerisms that give away the contents
of a hand. As Denn emotionally drifts away from his chums, his girlfriend, and his
parents, he analyzes his changed life in terms of power gain rather than social loss.
His visit to a Gamblers Anonymous meeting leaves him only cockier, convinced
that the participants are losers not because they're addicts, but because they're
inept players. Hautman's anatomy of a teen addict is chillingly intensified by
Denn's narration, which manifests both pride of accomplishment and nagging
unhappiness. The end of the novel finds a wealthy sixteen-year-old Denn at the
top of his game, buying and selling the adults who lured him deep into their mi-
lieu, but it's clear that lonely isolation is a stake too high for the return. Booktalk
this in junior high, and watch even reluctant readers ante up. EB
HEARNE, BETSY 
Listening for Leroy. 
McElderry, 1998 
[224p]
ISBN 0-689-82218-9 
$16.00 
Gr. 5-9
[Note: Books by Bulletin staff are given a descriptive annotation rather than a
review and code rating.]
A young girl's coming of age unfolds in this autobiographical novel of growing up
in the mid-twentieth century American South. Nurtured by stories heard, read,
and written, Alice struggles to find her way in a family and society poised on the
brink of momentous change. JMD
HENKES, KEVIN 
Circle Dogs; illus. by Dan Yaccarino. 
Greenwillow, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15447-6 $14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15446-8 
$15.00 
R 
2-4 yrs
Henkes takes a picture book U-turn from the rodents (Lilly's Purple Plastic Purse,
BCCB 10/96) to the dogs with this look at the antics of a pair of extra-stretchy
dachshunds. Uncurling after a good night's slumber, "the circle dogs wake up.
Clink-clank, clink-clank, clink-clank, clink. Hear their tags? Mrooon, mro-o-o-
100 
* THE BULLETIN
o-on. They stretch and stretch and moan and yawn." Thus begins a full day of
doggy doings-lapping up table scraps, barking at the doorbell, digging in the
yard ("Mama and Papa yell, 'No, no, no!'"), licking faces, and dreaming of cats.
These homey adventures are stylishly realized by Yaccarino's retro-looking graph-
ics. Simple shapes dominate the circle dogs' theater of operations-the big square
yard, the round heads of their loving family, the oval holes in the ground, the
square toast that drops into a dog's waiting jaws. The restrained palette of black
and white and a handful of slightly muted colors will carry the images to the far
reaches of the preschoolers' story-area rug. The closing line suggests bedtime use:
"Shhh. They're sleeping now. And you should be too. Good night." Forget it-
this is too much fun for sleep. EB
HERMAN, JOHN 
Deep Waters. 
Philomel, 1998 
[208p]
ISBN 0-399-23235-4 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Andrew is all set to follow in the family footsteps and have a terrific time at camp,
and indeed some aspects go well-he gets a girlfriend, excels in swimming and
running, and manages to make some friends. Things aren't that simple, though,
because there are undercurrents of human dynamics of which he's only vaguely
aware. These include the rivalry of two male counselors, Johnny and Tony, over
Marsha, who had previously been Johnny's girlfriend and is now engaged to Tony,
and the effective manipulations ofAndrew's jaded and rule-breaking friend, Julian,
who goads Johnny into trying to regain Marsha's favors-which may be a factor in
Tony's mysterious drowning. Herman's tone wavers a bit between the inarticulate
intensity of adolescence and the wise erudition of adulthood, and readers will be
frustrated that the circumstances around Tony's death are never actually spelled
out. The book is excellent, however, at depicting the quiet but crucial power
relationships in the camp social structure and balancing it against the apparently
lighthearted sports and activities. Andrew is a credible character, not quite the
innocent dupe of the wiser boys but more the guilty dupe, who knows better but
isn't sure that doing better outranks going along for the ride ("I don't think it ever
occurred to my parents that one could perceive Right and Wrong and still choose
the Wrong"). Nancy Werlin's The Killer's Cousin (BCCB 9/98) is a better analysis
of the moral dilemma of the bystander, but this testosterone-charged yet intellec-
tual chronicle will appeal to many would-be-campers. DS
HICKMAN, JANET 
Susannah. Greenwillow, 1998 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-688-14854-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Shortly after her mother's death, fourteen-year-old Susannah finds herself in an
Ohio Shaker community that her father has determined they will join. Parted
from her father by the Shaker policy of separation of genders and by her father's
single-minded enthusiasm for a faith she does not share, Susannah finds some
comfort in tending the littler girls, particularly six-year-old Mary, who has also
been brought to the community by a Believer father. Susannah becomes increas-
ingly more determined to leave the Shakers, until threats against the Believers by
their neighbors, a stray remark concerning a distant relative who wishes to provide
her a home, and attempts by Mary's mother to remove her own daughter from the
community finally impel the teenager to lay a definite plan for escape. Although
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 
101
readers will not find an overly sympathetic portrayal of the Shaker ways of faith in
this fictional account, Hickman seems less interested in indicting the Shakers than
in exploring the absolute legal power which a father held over his children in the
early nineteenth century. Susannah's situation is happily resolved by her father's
change of heart, but it is clear that most children were subject to a father's author-
ity, even when it was legally challenged by a most determined mother. Susannah's
restrained narration lends credibility to her tale, and her patient plotting to build a
life of her own choice will touch a chord with adolescents similarly struggling on
their own homefronts. EB
ISAACS, ANNE 
Cat Up a Tree: A Story in Poems; illus. by Stephen Mackey. 
4 8p
ISBN 0-525-45994-4 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Yes, we've got two books with the same title this month, and they are both about
cats in arboreal situations. This one, however, is a story written in a series of
fifteen poems telling of the effect of the cat's climb on firefighters, a cat-catcher,
nearby birds, the tree, some passing citizens, and the cat itself. The poems are
lyrical, sometimes intensely so, with an emphasis on imagery ("Is spring the trick-
ster who conspires/ To summon life from earth to branches?") that makes the
verses atmospheric as well as often philosophical. The phraseology's elegance isn't
always matched by its smoothness or accessibility, but it's generally a lush evoca-
tion of catness and the multitudinous components of this particular event, exam-
ining the wonder of a moment in a way that kids will appreciate. The luminous
oversized oil paintings might initially suggest a younger audience than the poetry
requires, but they make the most of the text: the verdant setting of the park in
spring bloom is redolent with sunshine and new growth; people are string-bean
caricatures while the cat is an economy-size tiger with glowing green eyes, enjoying
his chance to peer through the shell-pink blossoms and contemplate his magical
feline existence. Use this to work your way through a unit on animal poems (it
would rub happily up against Old Possum's Book ofPractical Cats); the richly real-
ized visual world will engross some younger kids (especially fans of Nancy Willard)
who might also enjoy this as a feline readaloud. DS
JAFFE, NINA, ad. 
The Way Meat Loves Salt: A Cinderella Tale from the Jewish
Tradition; illus. by Louise August. 
Holt, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-4384-5 
$15.95 
R 6-9 yrs
A tale that may ring familiar with children lucky enough to have heard "Like Meat
Loves Salt," a favorite storytellers' selection from Richard Chase's Appalachian
Grandfather Tales, this is an East European Jewish variant featuring a rabbi who
asks his three daughters how much they love him (yes, it's King Lear's folkloric
premise as well). One says as much as diamonds, one says like silver and gold, and
the youngest says the way meat loves salt, which so enrages the rabbi that he throws
her out of the house. Elijah the prophet appears, comforting her and providing a
magic stick that fulfills enough wishes to procure-after the traditional slipper-
fitting scenario-a prime husband. At their wedding she bids no salt be put in the
food and thus forces her father, attending as a guest, to recognize his mistake. Jaffe
is a gifted storyteller, witness her collection While Standing on One Foot (BCCB
12/93); though the text here is long, an older picture-book audience will find that
it makes smooth listening. Autumnal hues thickly applied with broad brush strokes
and overlaid for a highly textured effect give the oil paintings depth without over-
102 
* THE BULLETIN
defining-and thus confining-the characters. For a primary-grades comparison
of folktale variants, try using this with William Hooks' Moss Gown (BCCB 3/87),
set on a South Carolina plantation with an African-American swamp witch who
magics the heroine. BH
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
Gone from Home: Short Takes. 
Jackson/DK Ink,
1998 
[112p]
ISBN 0-7894-2499-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In these dozen stories, readers will catch glimpses of a dozen lives as they pass by: a
girl masquerading as a boy finds her vagabond mother; a boy finally passes on his
brother's legacy of safekeeping; a girl remembers the babysitter who came in and
out of her life too quickly; a boy watches his brother and sister sadden their mother
by inheriting her love of the road. Slow-developing mood, Johnson's strong point,
doesn't really have time to work its magic in these shorter pieces, so the forced bits
of plot and humor intrude on the world of the stories. Her casually lyrical style
and tender treatment of all manner of human relationships still shine through,
however, making stories such as "A Summer's Tale" rich and individual slices of
life. Readers not quite ready for Martha Brooks' Traveling on into the Light (BCCB
12/94) or Johnson's longer fiction may find this collection a useful entree. DS
JONES, DIANA WYNNE 
Dark Lord ofDerkholm. Greenwillow, 1998 
[352p]
ISBN 0-688-16004-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
How's this for a travel plan? Step through a portal to the world next door and take
part in some real fantasy role-playing; go on a pilgrimage to the realm of the Dark
Lord, join the forces of Good against Evil, spar with Dwarves and Dark Elves, and
finally do battle with and defeat the Dark Lord himself, before stepping through
the portal to go home. Sound like fun? Well, it is if you're a tourist, but not if
you're a native of the magical world that hosts the pilgrimages. That world is
being devastated by constant battles, wizards are exhausted trying to cope with the
damage, and the populace is crying out for release. The problem is that the man
running the tours is powered by a demon in his pocket, and he is happy to exploit
the host world's magical resources to his own ends. Enter the wizard Derk and his
son Blade, chosen by the Oracles to rid the world of the pilgrimages, the only
difficulty being that they don't want the job. This is a fine-tuned, intelligently
funny fantasy that works not only because Jones is good at evoking fully realized
parallel worlds but because her worlds are inhabited by wonderfully rounded,
emotionally believable characters. The juxtaposition of politics, family squab-
bling, deep magic, and old dragons has a heady allure that will draw in your Jones-
and-fantasy fans. Need a vacation? Here's one trip you won't forget. JMD
KNOWLTON, LAURIE 
The Nativity: Mary Remembers; illus. by Kasi Kubiak. 
Boyds
Mills, 1998 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-714-1 
$14.95 
M 4-8 yrs
Among this season's glossier Christmas offerings is this retelling of the Nativity
story in the fictionalized voice of Mary: "When Joseph and I found no room, we
took shelter in a stable. Dear Joseph, I saw the dismay written on his face. But
there was a fresh bed of hay. And we were alone." The text is sometimes warm but
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 
103
more often precious and sentimental, and purists may balk as Mary jumps the
theological gun, whispering to her new baby, "You are the Messiah." More objec-
tionable, however, is Kubiak's shallow glamorization of the principals here. Fig-
ures awash in incandescent light emanating from the Christ Child are awkwardly
drafted. Mary's robin's-egg-blue eyes gleam under perfectly arched brows and
brown hair with salon-frosted highlights; Joseph is a cuddly boy-next-door with a
scruff of postpubescent beard; two of the Three Kings certainly do not hearken
from anywhere east of the Red Sea. With so many worthy renditions of the Nativ-
ity story from which to choose (perhaps Julie Vivas' The Nativity, BCCB 9/88, or
Nonny Hogrogian's The First Christmas, 11/95), this title drops far down on the
Christmas list. EB
KORMAN, GORDON 
The 6th Grade Nickname Game. Hyperion, 1998 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2382-8 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0432-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Jeff Greenbaum and Wiley Adamson were born six hours apart, and those six
hours are apparently the only time (except for sleeping) in their young lives that
they haven't spent together. The two eleven-year-olds are best friends, reading
each others thoughts and finishing each other's sentences. Their favorite sport is
making up nicknames for classmates, teachers, teams, nicknames that have re-
markable staying-as well as transformative-power. The boys never have any
problem coming up with appropriate nicknames until the new girl joins their class.
Cassandra has flaming red hair, wears long skirts and combat boots, and the boys
(both of them) fall head over heels for her. For the first time in their lives they are
in competition, and the result? Well, let's just say it isn't pretty. Korman is at his
amusing best here, with a tight focus on the relationship between the two boys,
their relationship with the genuinely nice Cassandra, and the whole grade-school
milieu. The plot revolves around the boys' friendship, their bewilderment at the
changes in their relationship wrought by Cassandra, and their consternation when
they find that, through the grace of their nicknaming hobby, they have trans-
formed a nondescript classmate into the love of Cassandra's life. This is a funny,
fast-paced grade-school romp that is going to cross gender lines with ease. JMD
KUKLIN, SUSAN 
Iqbal Masih and the Crusaders against Child Slavery. Holt,
1998 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-5459-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In an account that attempts to examine opposing sides of a thorny issue, Kuklin
reviews world efforts to combat the worst excesses of child labor exploitation, par-
ticularly in South Asian countries where the bonded labor market has long been
entrenched. The focus is on Iqbal Masih, the Pakistani carpet-knotter who, at the
age often, became an activist for the child labor cause, and whose murder remains
unsolved. Iqbal's life could readily serve as both object lesson and call-to-arms for
any reader interested in the child labor problem, but Kuklin diffuses the power of
his story with a poorly organized text that interrupts the biography with explana-
tions on the bonded labor industry and efforts by non-government organizations
to disband it. Although this information is valuable, it is bone dry in comparison
with Iqbal's personal history, and readers unfamiliar with the larger social problem
104 
* 
THE BULLETIN
will chomp at the bit for Kuklin to get back on course. Extensively annotated
notes are appended, as well as addresses for further information on efforts to regu-
late or eradicate child labor. For a better-organized and touchingly photo illus-
trated look at this subject, consider David Parker's Stolen Dreams (BCCB 2/98).
EB
LEWIS, H. B. 
Winnie Mae; written and illus. by H. B. Lewis. 
Creative Edi-
tions/Harcourt, 1998 
40p
ISBN 0-15-201954-5 
$18.00 
M 
6-9 yrs
A boy with a keen interest in model airplanes saves his money to buy a kit of the
WinnieMae, a replica of the aircraft Wiley Post first flew around the globe. Printed
instructions don't, however, resemble those the boy is accustomed to; directions
for rudder assembly read, "Direction is determined by grace and will working
together." The boy rightly suspects there is a message in this-and as the plot
unfolds, the reader all too quickly concurs. By believing in his dreams of flight,
the boy discovers he can soar with his model plane high above his community.
Soon bullies crush all his hard work into pieces, old fishermen patronize him for
his beliefs, his parents seem oblivious to the breadth of his personal catastrophe,
and it seems unlikely the boy will ever fly again. When he begins to revive his
belief in the goodness of his family and neighbors, though, he finds he can take off
even without his plane. While Van Allsburg's Polar Express (BCCB 10/85), with
its air of mystery and similar believe-in-your-dreams message, chugs along at a kid-
pleasing clip, Winnie Mae is grounded by her ponderous symbolism, snail pacing,
and tiny print. A single double spread catches the Winnie Mae gloriously in flight;
however, most of Lewis' moody paintings focus on the boy, pensive or pouting or
shrouded in shadow. If the flight plan calls for parable, this might just take off, but
for young airplane enthusiasts it'll never get off the ground. EB
LEWIS, KIM Just Like Floss; written and illus. by Kim Lewis. 
Candlewick,
1998 
[26p]
ISBN 0-7636-0684-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
A cozy story, with just enough puppy drama to engage young children discovering
their own capabilities, this begins with the border collie of Lewis' previous book
Floss nursing her litter in a snow-surrounded barn. When the farmer's children
beg to keep a puppy, he agrees to select one that will work the sheep "just like
Floss." Young listeners will know immediately that it's not Bess and Nell, who
perpetually play tug of war; or Cap and Jack, who constantly play hide-and-seek;
but the littlest, Sam, who follows Floss everywhere, even into the field, even in the
face of "big woolly shapes with their hard black heads and horns. One ewe put
her head down to sniff at Sam. She was big and Sam was little. Sam wanted to
run, but he stayed very still. He looked in the old ewe's eyes. Slowly the ewe began
to back away. Sam crouched low and started to run." It's a thrilling moment,
though realistic in scope, for Sam is soon reduced to a ball of fur rolling over in the
snow. Still, he's the one, and fans captured by Lewis' sweeping, meticulously
textured colored-pencil drawings, which play black-and-white fur against back-
grounds of tawny-lined snow and sheep, can look forward to Sam's next adven-
tures. Although this more than fills its picture-book entertainment quota, you can
also try it as a bit of bibliotherapy for that spindly nursery-schooler who's already
having to face down bullies. BH
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 
105
LINDQUIST, SUSAN HART 
Wander. 
Delacorte, 1998 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-385-32563-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
James and his younger sister, Sary, are still grieving over the loss of their mother a
year ago; their father's refusal to talk about her and his tendency to disappear for
long stretches of time (they're living at the home of their aunt) has made the wound
fester rather than heal. When the kids spot and then secretly befriend a stray dog,
whom they name Wander, it emphasizes the unsettledness and isolation of their
own lives; a neighbor's intention to shoot the stray, which he suspects of worrying
his sheep, threatens to bring the kids another unbearable loss. Though occasion-
ally stilted, James' narration is generally easy and confiding, and his worry about
his family's frozen emotional situation is believable. The climax piles too many
events on one another, however, some of which push the tone into the sentimen-
tality the book otherwise generally manages to avoid. The gentle winning of
Wander's confidence and healing of the family will still engage readers who can't
get enough of Shiloh country. DS
LORBIECcI, MARYBETH 
Sister Anne's Hands; illus. by K. Wendy Popp. 
Dial,
1998 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2039-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-2038-6 
$15.99 
R 
6-9 yrs
Before Anna Zabrocky ever sets eyes on her new teacher, Sister Anne, she hears her
parents privately comment, "I don't know how a woman of her color is going to
survive." Sister Anne, a young black woman whose beauty shines past veil, wimple,
and floor-length habit, moves confidently and cheerfully into the classroom and
seems to have the students eating out of her hand, until a paper airplane sails past
her head bearing the nasty missive, "Roses are red,/ Violets are blue./ Don't let
Sister Anne/ get any black on you"; stung and stunned by the childish barb, Sister
Anne quietly replies, "I'll need some time to think about this, if you know what I
mean." By morning Sister has clearly rallied, and she serves up a lesson to her class
on discrimination, tosses in a dash of homespun humor, and firmly concludes
with "I was sent here to teach, and that's what I'm going to do." Popp's gauzy,
atmospheric paintings in dominant shades of chalkboard gray and mauve evoke a
strong nostalgia for parochial schools in the days "when flowers had power, and
peace signs were in, and we watched The Ed Sullivan Show every Sunday night."
But the romanticized scenes serve as a veneer covering the prejudice deeply rooted
in the most innocent and genteel of settings-an irony that younger listeners may,
perhaps, miss. Still, Sister Anne's grace and dignity carry the day, and they deliver
to listeners her message to the class: "I'd rather open my door enough to let every-
one in than risk slamming it shut on God's big toe." EB
LOVE, ANN 
The Kids Guide to the Millennium; by Ann Love and Jane Drake;
illus. by Bill Slavin. 
Kids Can, 1998 
64p
ISBN 1-55074-556-5 
$12.95 
M Gr. 2-5
After some de rigueur discussion on whether January 1, 2000 is the correct date for
the hoopla to commence, Love and Drake offer more than two dozen crafts and
activities for counting down to and celebrating the millennium, along with sidebar
information on historic events and a running timeline of world trivia. Unfortu-
nately, cluttered presentation and pedestrian cartoon illustrations lend little to the
106 
* THE BULLETIN
overworked activity ideas, most of which have made an appearance in non-millennial
settings. (Keeping a diary, making a papier-mache globe with balloon and news-
paper, stitching a family quilt, or collecting 2000 of anything will not win awards
for novelty.) The timeline is a more powerful draw, with such enticing tidbits as
the invention of the wheelbarrow (A.D. 5), introduction of linen underwear (1340),
installation of the first flush toilet (1596), and the first human heart transplant
(1967). Still, these chips off the monolith of the Christian era aren't enough to
generate much excitement, and readers who wonder what all the fuss is about
probably won't find out here. EB
MCKEE, TIM, ed. 
No More Strangers Now: Young Voices from a New South Af-
rica; illus. with photographs by Anne Blackshaw. 
Kroupa/DK Ink, 1998 
[107p]
ISBN 0-7894-2524-6 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
In a dozen interviews, young people tell of their differing experiences of life in
South Africa, and the diversity here will be eye-opening for many young U.S.
readers. Interviewees are blacks, whites, Coloured (mixed-race), and those of In-
dian background, rural and urban, well-off and struggling; some have suffered a
great deal in the country's upheaval and some have been largely spared. Particu-
larly intriguing voices include that of a village chieftain's younger brother, essen-
tially unaffected by apartheid and seeking strength in community traditions rather
than in the new political opportunities; a girl who spent most of her childhood in
privileged Tanzanian exile and whose longed-for return home brought some shocks;
and a white farmer's daughter just beginning, largely as a result of her Christian
faith, to question the rightness of apartheid. The near-constant hopefulness of the
book's outlook is inspiriting, but it does make one wonder a bit if optimism was a
criterion for inclusion and if more cynical viewpoints have all brightened or merely
clammed up. That's just one of many useful discussions this book might provoke,
however, and the look at life in a country that's been somewhat eclipsed by more
recent events but is still laboring to redefine itself brings the situation into effec-
tive focus. Open format on glossy pages keeps things unintimidating; a generous
number of black-and-white photographs (unfortunately sometimes grayish and
dim), complete with captions that offer further information, add to the book's
accessibility. Use this with Hazel Rochman's Somehow Tenderness Survives for an
examination of two different stages in a nation undergoing great change. DS
MCVEITY, JEN 
On Different Shores. 
Orchard, 1998 
16 7p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33115-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30115-X 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Tess lives with her father, stepmother, and beloved younger half-sister, Laura; just
as a desire to please their competitive father led Tess to be a champion swimmer
(her father remains perplexed and frustrated by her dropping out of the sport),
Laura is a top trampoliner, increasingly anxious about the possibility of failure and
the substantial probability that her father will fail to turn up at meets as promised.
Tess' efforts now are focused on her environmental activists' group, which in addi-
tion to orthodox erosion-prevention activities engages in less decorous challenges
to the status quo, one of which (hanging a banner from a polluting factory smoke-
stack) lands her and her friends in the hands of the law. The distant workaholic
father, concerned with appearances rather than actualities, isn't an original charac-
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 
107
ter, and the feel-good ending, in which Tess' family put away their differences to
help save a beached whale, is both dramatically and emotionally contrived. McVeity
capably portrays the family's increasing desperation, however, as well as some in-
teresting human dynamics (there are complicated relationships between Tess and
her noncustodial mother and Tess' mother and stepmother, for instance) that give
the story some richness. Readers with an environmental bent or a taste for family
drama will appreciate this antipodean adventure. DS
MARTIN, PATRICIA 
Memory Jug. Hyperion, 1998 
236p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2368-2 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0357-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Mack lost her fireman father in her family's own house fire five years ago; at thir-
teen, Mack (who specializes in pushing outsiders away and remaining uninvolved)
is now thoroughly accustomed to living a gypsy life with her mother, Maggie, and
her silent younger sister, Amaryllis, for whom Mack has been the mouthpiece
since the family tragedy. Now their residence in the Adirondacks is taking on
some disturbing signs of permanence, and Mack is stung by her mother's growing
friendship with a nice man and by Amaryllis' new willingness to find friends other
than her sister. Martin's writing often attains a pleasingly understated inventive-
ness, imaginatively capturing the colorful small-town setting and its local charac-
ters, and her portrayal of Mack's determinedly isolationist policy has recognizable
authenticity. The book's pace bogs down in its atmosphere, however, so that the
where interferes with the what for; some of the thematic and decorative touches
have an air of contrivance to them (the town possesses a pair of Brioche sisters and
a Miss Marmelyde) that undercuts the effortlessness of the book's language. Read-
ers who appreciate the reflective atmospherics of Sharon Creech and Angela Johnson
and who are unfazed by a stately literary pace may nonetheless warm to Mack's
story. DS
MASUREL, CLAIRE 
Christmas Is Coming!; illus. by Marie H. Henry. 
Chronicle,
1998 
36p
ISBN 0-8118-2106-4 
$14.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
It's Christmas Eve, and bubbly moppet Juliette and her parents have lots to do
before the big day arrives-choose and trim the tree, decorate the house, bake
cookies, and hang stockings. Juliette's doll and stuffed animals take enthusiastic
part in the proceedings in their own bumbling fashion (dropping ornaments, nib-
bling on candles, begging for cookies) and only manage to settle down a bit for the
good-night storyJuliette reads to them. But while "Juliette soon falls asleep, dream-
ing about what Christmas will bring," her toys sneak downstairs and spy "the jolly
man all dressed in red." Juliette awakens to a gratifying heap of gifts, but the toys
are upset that there's nothing under wraps for them-until Juliette opens an enor-
mous package that turns out to be a sled big enough for all of them to share.
Juliette is a sprightly figure who romps through Henry's watercolor holiday scenes
with boundless energy that helps invigorate the occasionally too-cute and oversweet
images. A French import, this title pleasingly blends details of village shops and
downy duvets and candle emblazoned trees lifted right off an Old World Christ-
mas card with the innocent gluttony of a thoroughly modern child. A few judi-
cious touches of metallic gold set the holidays shimmering, from the opening peek
through a toy store window, to the final "Merry Christmas." EB
108 
* 
THE BULLETIN
MAZER, HARRY 
The Wild Kid. Simon, 1998 
[112p]
ISBN 0-689-80751-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
After being punished for smarting off to his mother's boyfriend, twelve-year-old
Sammy angrily takes off on his bicycle; when a thief rides away with it, he goes in
pursuit and winds up lost in the forest. There he encounters Kevin, a kid on the
run from serious problems at home, who is at first Sammy's captor and then,
grudgingly, Sammy's friend, helping him get back home after thirteen days away.
There's less danger here than adventure, as Sammy broadens his horizons through
acquaintance with Kevin but also never slackens in his resolve to return home.
Mazer's particularly good at the characterization of Sammy: his Down Syndrome
explains his limitations but by no means defines his character, and his determined
survival and bonding with Kevin are as realistic as his frustration at the everyday
restrictions of home (his family is loving and functional, but the adolescent's growing
desire for independence brings friction to the best of them). It's nice to see a
portrait of a Down syndrome kid that Sammies themselves might relate to; like
other readers, they'll understand that of the two kids here Sammy is the fortunate
one. DS
MIKLOWITZ, GLORIA D. 
Masada: The Last Fortress. Eerdmans, 1998 
188p
ISBN 0-8028-5165-7 
16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
How to fictionalize for kids a historic episode in which almost all the characters
commit suicide at the end? To her credit, Miklowitz does not take the easy way
out by contriving a main character to be one of the few surviving women or chil-
dren. Two first-person accounts alternate here, one by a Jewish fighter defending
the towering, fortified plateau called Masada and the other by the Roman com-
manding the long siege (A.D. 72-73) that ended when the Romans battered down
the walls to find that all the Jewish fighters had killed themselves and their families
rather than be captured as slaves. This narrative device seems unnecessary, given
the inherent drama of the situation, and it sometimes results in expositions that
seem artificial to the characters, such as Simon's explaining that the shofar is a
ram's horn, or a supposed entry in Flavius Silva's diary that begins thus: "'Make
camp,' I commanded when we were yet a half-day's march from the fortress. And
my words were echoed by each centurion in turn." Ultimately, however, the ac-
tion wins out here, and readers get deeply involved in the paradoxical suspense of
doomed characters who nourish their lives-including romance, marriage, friend-
ship, and ambition-in the face of death. Although much of the cast is simply
functional-which perhaps softens the blow for young readers-certainly the hero
and his immediate circle are clearly delineated. History is sometimes simply sad,
and Miklowitz has asserted that sadness without sensationalizing it or apologizing
for it. Maps are included but no notes. BH
MOLLL, TOLOLWA M., ad. 
Kitoto the Mighty; illus. by Kristi Frost. 
Stoddart,
1998 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-7737-3019-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Mollel retells the tale of the Savannah mouse Kitoto, who hopes to make friends
with the "most powerful being" in order to protect himself from the local hawk.
He confronts the river, whom he thinks must be the most powerful, who then
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 
109
insists the sun is really the more powerful ("He burns me to a trickle"). The sun
sends Kitoto to the wind, "who gathers the clouds and hides the Savannah from
my view." Only after a mountain sends Kitoto down to the creature "who chomps
away at my root" does Kitoto finally discover the most powerful being (another
mouse). Mollel's text is accompanied by Frost's thickly textured paintings in a
sometimes-garish palette of green, brown, blue, pink, and black. Though the
vivid colors and clearly rendered figures may draw the reader into the story, the
awkwardness of the characters' facial expressions and the periodic disjunction be-
tween art and illustration detract from the effect. An author's note at the end of
the book reveals the specific changes the author made to a traditional folktale
"found the world over." Though kids may be attracted to a story where the weak
prove the strongest, this unsynchronized offering may be more confusing than
empowering. EAB
MURPHY, JIM 
The Journal ofJames Edmond Pease: A Civil War Union Soldier.
See review under Denenberg, p. 93.
PAYE, WON-LDY, ad. 
Why Leopard Has Spots: Dan Stories from Liberia; ad. by
Won-Ldy Paye and Margaret H. Lippert; illus by Ashley Bryan. 
Fulcrum Kids,
1998 
50p
ISBN 1-55591-344-X 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-5
This is a successful collaboration between a Liberian from the Dan ethnic group,
who retells six stories he heard from his grandmother, and a U.S. teacher/story-
teller-with Ashley Bryan's rhythmically patterned black-and-white linoleum prints
decorating the text. Spider is the main character, and he assumes the varied roles
of a trickster, mostly the victim of his own failings and foil of his own jokes-
children will especially enjoy "Why Spider Has a Big Butt"! Other tales include
"Why Leopard Has Spots," "Mrs. Chicken and the Hungry Crocodile," "The
Talking Vegetables," "The Hunger Season," and "Spider Flies to the Feast," all
told with an artless simplicity of style that will make them prime-time readalouds,
readalones, or storytelling sources. This is an unusually good and accessible collec-
tion of tales for this age group-the storytelling voice is fresh and invigorating,
and the polished but unglamorized design of the book itself has an easy appeal. An
introduction gives cultural background, while several sections at the end of the
book provide notes on the stories, a glossary, a bibliography, and a profile of the
contributors. BH
PHILIP, NEIL, comp. 
War and the Pity of War; illus. by Michael
McCurdy. 
Clarion, 1998 
96p
ISBN 0-395-84982-9 
$20.00 
R Gr. 7-12
McCurdy's stark black-and-white woodcuts are the perfect complement to this
selection of poems about the tragedy and ultimate futility of war. Philip's selec-
tion of poems ranges from the ancient Greeks to the Vietnam experience, from
Kipling to Brecht, but each poem echoes the common theme. Selections from
European poets such as W. B. Yeats, Guillaume Apollinaire, and Anna Swirszczynska
are juxtaposed with Arab, Japanese, and Amerindian voices, providing an interna-
tional but stunningly similar point of view. The poems are set in thick black text
against white pages, with full page, half page, and spot illustrations breaking up
the bare but elegant design. The chilling austerity of the images and black-and-
110 
* THE BULLETIN
white simplicity of the book design impose visual control over the uncontrollable
elements evident in poetry that contemplates the terror and pathos of war. Dis-
creet footnotes provide glosses on unfamiliar terms or further explanation for some
poems; an index of poets and another of titles and first lines are included. JMD
ROTH, ROGER Fishing for Methuselah; written and illus. by Roger
Roth. 
HarperCollins, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-06-027592-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Ivan and Olaf's longstanding friendship is founded on bickering and competition;
each tries to outdo the other at fishing, ice sculpture, or whatever rivalry might
present itself "way up in the North Country." But despite their challenges and
boasting, neither has been able to land Methuselah, a mysterious fish of near-
mythological local renown. When the pair venture dangerously far out onto thin
ice, Methuselah, circling below, decides to teach them a lesson: minnows tie their
lines together, and as each man strains to land the big one, the ice cracks beneath
them, stranding them on a floe. Now's the time to abandon competition in favor
of cooperation, and the friends cobble bait buckets and a toboggan into a make-
shift raft that Methuselah speeds to the shore. With a new perspective on what
harmony can accomplish, Ivan and Olafdo manage to land first place in the Fabu-
lous Ice Sculpture Contest with a gargantuan statue of Methuselah, whose "mouth
was frozen in the slightest of smiles." Roth drives the moral home with a hefty
helping of humor, as the bearded buddies rant and quarrel while behemoth
Methuselah rolls his eyes in exasperation directly beneath their feet. Line-and-
watercolor pictures evoke a community of friendly eccentrics, who would seem
right at home in the cast of Northern Exposure. Try this in the winter doldrums,
when kids' tempers and friendships are wearing thin. EB
ROWLING, J. K. 
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone; illus. by Mary
Grandprd. 
Levine/Scholastic, 1998 
309p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-590-35340-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Harry Potter lives a Cinderella life (the pre-godmother phase) with his unpleasant
aunt, uncle, and cousin Dudley until one day he's summoned to attend Hogwarts
School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. This is the first Harry's heard of his illustri-
ous wizardly heritage (his aunt and uncle are Muggles, non-wizards, who loathe
and fear the wizard strain in the family), but at his new boarding school he soon
learns the ropes, finds friends, becomes a sports star, and-oh, yes-ends up in
combat with one of the greatest evil forces in the universe. In point of fact the last
element is the least significant in the story: this is largely an old-fashioned British
public-school saga with nasty boys from the competing house, idolized masters,
swots turning out to be decent sorts, weedy younger kids demonstrating their loy-
alty, and blow-by-blow descriptions of sports events. Rowling has carefully cre-
ated a magic-infused institution of higher learning, and readers will relish many of
the fantastical details, such as the portraits that ensure obedience to curfew and the
social status attached to different familiars ("If I'd brought a toad I'd lose it as
quick as I could"). Some aspects of the magical world, however, seem inserted
largely because the author laboriously created them (the sport of Quidditch) and
interfere with the plot rather than advancing it; the tone also relies on a studied
whimsicality that probably won't sit well with readers hoping for Golden Compass-
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 
111
type thrills. It's also not clear that the stakes are anything to get excited about-
Harry's victory over evil seems merely to mean his house's victory in intramural
competition, and his loss would seem merely to have caused a change in headmas-
ter and school policy. Still, the carefully imagined world of the wizardly school
and the triumph of the underappreciated young hero will suffice to keep many
wannabe wizardlings reading. DS
RUBINSTEIN, GILLIAN 
Under the Cat's Eye: A Tale ofMorph and Mystery. 
Simon,
1998 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-81900-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Jai doesn't want to go to boarding school at all, and his first days at Nexhoath do
little to reassure him. Kitty, the housekeeper, and Roughly, the handyman, are
disconcertingly attentive, and Seal and Hugo, two of his classmates, swear that
headmaster Drake is a drackle, sort of a spiritual vampire, who's stealing the souls
of both teachers and students. Little by little, Jai discovers that Kitty and Roughly
are shapeshifters from a parallel world seeking to find and return that world's lost
leader, that Drake is using technology from yet another parallel world to suck the
souls from individuals and extend his own life, and that Jai is to play a pivotal role
in the final confrontation. The climactic unveiling is slow in coming, and as a
result the final revelations are rather rushed. Still, Jai, Seal, Hugo, and the briefly
present but ultimately crucial Sunita are characters in the best student-rebel-against-
conformity mode, with Jai as the reluctant, longing-to-belong, hero. The parallel
worlds are handled with an offhand ease somewhat reminiscent of Diana Wynne
Jones, and there are enough hints about the planet-ruling Bureaucracy to give Jai's
world a certain depth and complexity. Creepy elements-portraits that change,
Jai's being "coached" by a talking cat, the legend of the Dead Baby-will keep
readers going, and the conclusion, though neat, is still satisfying. JMD
SAUL, CAROL P. 
Barn Cat: A Counting Book; illus. by Mary Azarian. 
Little,
1998 
32p
ISBN 0-316-76113-3 
$15.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
This visually engaging counting book features a fat barn cat on the prowl, but
what she's prowling for isn't any of her usual prey-she refuses to be distracted by
"one green grasshopper in the grass," "six darting, humming dragonflies," or even
"nine cheeping chicks." Instead, "she meets me at the kitchen door./ I tilt the
pitcher. Then I pour./ She winds around my legs and purrs/ And drinks the bowl
of milk that's hers." Saul's rhyming text is clear and concrete (if the scansion is
sometimes a bit forced) as the barn cat makes her way past butterflies, puppies, and
buzzing bees, but it is Azarian's hand-colored wood blocks-and the personality
of the barn cat-that makes this counting book stand out. Framed single and
double-page spreads feature handily detailed and cleverly composed illustrations
of barnyard life, with the appropriate accompanying numeral clearly set off in a
box in the upper right or left-hand corner of the frame. That big gorgeous tabby
cat with her winking eyes, big paws, and fluffy white chest is easy to spot, even
when she's only a reflection in a pond or seen from the point of view of "seven
songbirds in their nest." The art is somewhat reminiscent of Wormell's woodcuts
for A Number ofAnimals, but with a cozier environment and a feline protagonist
with personality to spare. JMD
112 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SCIESZKA, JON 
Squids Will Be Squids: Fresh Morals/Beastly Fables; written and
illus. by Lane Smith. 
Viking, 1998 
[50p]
ISBN 0-670-88135-X 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Scieszka and Smith turn their transformative approach to the fable, offering some
brief background on the genre ("Aesop is the guy most famous for telling fables")
and this particular collection ("These are beastly fables with fresh morals about all
kinds of bossy, sneaky, funny, annoying, dim-bulb people"). The eighteen fables
feature grasshoppers, frogs, cats, cabbages, bacteria, Froot Loops, slugs, tongues,
and assorted beings of animate and inanimate origin; they star in concise tales that
generally squeeze themselves into a double spread and still have room for a brack-
eted moral at the end. The Scieszka humor is apparent, but its effectiveness here is
mixed and the clever side less evident: the morals are sometimes comedic punchlines,
sometimes drolly incongruous, and sometimes just an extra, anticlimactic line.
The fables ramble a bit, sometimes squandering entertaining ideas in unfocused
execution and sounding more like unstructured preteens with the sillies than some-
thing to give them the sillies in the first place. There's still plenty of dopey kid-
appealing humor, however, and the art and design is topnotch: there's a savage
and neo-cartoonish edge to Smith's depictions that contrasts entertainingly with
the pages' tasteful textures and the font's elegant flourishes. Readers looking to
guffaw at some unsubtle satire won't love all the offerings here, but they will prob-
ably still appreciate the stories of Shark, Wasp, and Bacteria and their fabulous ilk.
DS
SHAKESPEARE, WILLIAM 
Talesfrom Shakespeare: Seven Plays; ad. and illus. by Marcia
Williams. 
Candlewick, 1998 
36p
ISBN 0-7636-0441-0 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Williams applies her familiar comic-strip format to the works of the Bard of Avon,
providing lively cartooned versions of Romeo and Juliet, Hamlet, A Midsummer
Night's Dream, Macbeth, The Winter's Tale, Julius Caesar, and The Tempest. She's
arranged things a little differently than in her other titles, however: here the speech
in the comic illustrations is verbatim Shakespeare, while the captioned text pro-
vides a description of the play's action; the wiseacre remarks that are Williams'
trademark appear in speech balloons from the Shakespearean audience, who range
from Queen Liz herself to rowdy groundlings and who cluster below and along the
sides of the strips depicting the play. The effect is somewhat distracting, since one
really has to go back and forth between the audience comments and the play itself,
but it's a spirited and unprissy (and probably authentically Elizabethan in its three-
ring circus flavor) approach to the works. Some plays work better than others in
this format: the identity problems presented by Midsummer Night's Dream are
accentuated by squeezing the play into three double spreads, but Macbeth and
Hamlet (aided by stormy gray palettes) are surprisingly effective. The book pays
close attention to detail, changing dominant design colors from play to play (in
the audience's garb as well as in the central drama) and including a wealth of
intriguing and relevant commentary from the attendees. While the obvious use
for this is as an introduction to the written or performed works of Shakespeare, it
would make a particularly interesting look at theatrical history when combined
with an examination of London's reconstructed Globe. DS
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 
113
SMITH, JANE DENITZ 
Charlie Is a Chicken. HarperCollins, 1998 
[176p]
ISBN 0-06-027594-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Maddie's feeling like she has arrived: Jessica McGuire, the social queen of the fifth
grade, has invited her to partner on a class project and even to be her second best
friend in the world-after her pudgy lackey Karen, that is. There's just one catch:
Maddie must agree to hate boys in general, and to torment in particular Charlie
Siegal, a close friend of Maddie's whom Jessica and Karen have designated as their
current victim. Maddie complies by sending Charlie a string of taunting verses,
but Charlie never suspects his good buddy is behind them. Jessica ups the ante,
and Maddie agrees to prey on Charlie's fear of heights by luring him onto the
school roof, where Jessica locks him out. Smith has a good handle on the fifth-
grade nasties, which so often feed on just such shifting loyalties. Jessica and com-
pany, though, are rank amateurs next to Cynthia Voigt's Bad Girls (BCCB 4/96),
and the feel-good ending, in which all is too easily forgiven by the put-upon Charlie,
is trite. Still, gals with a yen for some literary cattiness (and guys who wonder what
all the giggling is about) might want to watch the sparks fly on another school's
turf. EB
TAFURI, NANCY 
Counting to Christmas; written and illus. by Nancy
Tafuri. 
Scholastic, 1998 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-27143-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-4 yrs
Tafuri's spare text details a little girl's growing anticipation during the twenty-four
days before Christmas. The child narrator declares "I'm counting to Christmas"
and then participates in the rituals of the season, such as writing letters, baking
cookies, and stringing popcorn. The ascending days and coordinated activities are
a little catalogish but they're well-chosen, and the language makes effective use of
rhythm: "Days 1, 2, and 3 / I paint, cut, and paste.... Days 12 and 13 / I wrap
and tie." Festive if slightly bland watercolor-and-ink paintings infuse the two-
page spreads with decorous celebration as the girl wraps presents and sings carols.
Tafuri contrasts solid shapes with the finely patterned checkerboard endpapers
chock-full of thumbnail Christmas images, which will provide some hunt-and-
discuss fodder for lap readings. The text and illustrations work in tandem, slowing
the pace at day twenty-four to "share, and give, and wait" before the joyous sforzando
of day twenty-five's "Merry Christmas!" This title will easily be incorporated into
a holiday lapsit storytime, perhaps even culminating with projects from Tafuri's
included recipes for crafts and treats. EAB
THOMPSON, JULIAN F. 
Brothers. Knopf, 1998 
[216 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99082-8 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89082-3 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 8-12
Seventeen-year-old Chris Craven has always idolized his older brother, Cam, who
served as a caring and creditable role model after the death of their father. Now,
however, Chris learns that Cam is mentally unstable and that he has taken off from
the posh hospital where he was receiving treatment. With some clues as to his
possible whereabouts from old friends and roommates, Chris hits the road with
114 
* THE BULLETIN
Cam's hospital-mate Michelle and her sister Millie for a site in South Dakota that
Cam had sometimes mentioned. Finding Cam at the Sons of Liberty 2 com-
pound is not all that difficult, but Chris soon realizes that the "camp" at which
Cam intends to bond with nature is actually an anti-government militia, whose
members are bleeding Cam of his inheritance. Thompson gives the subject of
mental illness fair, unsensationalized treatment-Cam's intermittent spurts of ir-
rational behavior are nonthreatening and often as confusing to himself as to those
around him; Michelle's struggle to adjust her medication leaves her occasionally
erratic and sleepy, but generally sharp and amiable. Chris is a sensitive and coura-
geous narrator, who recounts his exploits with mildly self-deprecating good hu-
mor. As Chris and Millie unobtrusively assume guardianship of their older siblings,
their common responsibility becomes the foundation for romance; even readers
who have only come along for the road story or the militia showdown will be
delighted to wish them well. EB
TURNER, ANN 
Drummer Boy: Marching to the Civil War; illus. by Mark
Hess. 
HarperCollins, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027697-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027696-7 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 3-6
The story of a thirteen-year-old's coming of age in combat begins with a full-page
painting of an innocent farmboy and, on the opposite page, a text box that reads
"Who would've ever thought I'd go to war-a boy like me?" The boy hears Lin-
coln speak about the necessity of keeping the country together and of the evils of
slavery, so he runs off, lies about his age, and joins the Union Army as a drummer.
The boy witnesses carnage and death, and, in the conclusion, vows, "And when
the war's over and I go home, I'll stop and talk to Mr. Lincoln and tell him how it's
his fault, how his great, sad eyes made me go and see things no boy should ever
see." The language has a forced spareness that so simplifies the inhumanity of war
that the character's voice never achieves credibility, so the anti-war message never
achieves potency. Full and double-page paintings are over-romanticized, the fig-
ures are often poorly articulated and wooden, and the expressions on the photore-
alistic faces range from near-bovine tranquillity to stiff-upper lip caricatures. Still,
this may be useful in a curriculum unit on the Civil War, especially in a class that
needs hi-lo materials. A concluding historical note gives some background on the
role of the drummer boy in Civil War combat. JMD
VANDE VELDE, VIIAN 
Smart Dog. Harcourt, 1998 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-15-201847-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Fifth-grader Amy Prochenko is trying to avoid getting to school too early (she
doesn't want to encounter nasty classmate Kaitlyn Walker) when she runs into F-
32, a talking dog. Named Sherlock by the initially disbelieving but quick-to-
adjust Amy, F-32 is a science project of sorts that has escaped from a lab at a
nearby university. The intelligent canine is trying to get lost in order to avoid
having his brain dissected. Amy agrees to hide Sherlock, but this proves to be
easier said than done when he insists on following her to school. The ensuing
series of events lead to the exposure of nasty Kaitlyn's true nature, Sherlock's true
abilities, and the truly unlikely, even considering this premise, happily-ever-after
conclusion. Characterizations are unsubtle and shallow, with characteristics tak-
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 
115
ing the place of developed personalities and coincidence taking the place of plot
development. The narrative line of this tale doesn't hold together nearly as well as
Vande Velde's previous novels, but middle-grade readers looking for some unde-
manding fluff will appreciate this lightweight story of a girl and her (talking) dog.
JMD
WAITE, JUDY 
Mouse, Look Out!; illus. by Norma Burgin. 
Dutton, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-525-42031-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-6 yrs
The opening lines of this suspenseful hunter-and-prey story set the tone for what is
to follow: "The gate no one opened was rusted and old. When the wind blew
against it, the hinges creaked and moaned." Unbeknownst to our protagonist, the
little brown mouse, there is a sleek black cat stalking him, with the gleam of the
hunt in his yellow eyes: "Mouse, look out! There's a cat about!" the text warns.
The little mouse creeps through "the hallway no one stood in," to "the kitchen no
one cooks in," up "the staircase no one used," to curl up to sleep in an old straw
mattress. The cat is about to pounce . . . but wait! The mouse has followed its
nose, the cat has followed the mouse, and a dog has followed the cat ("Cat, look
out! There's a dog about!") and the cat bounds away, chased by the dog. Waite's
story has drama despite its awkward scansion, and, coupled with the narrative
quality of Burgin's paintings, it results in a satisfyingly exciting read. The illustra-
tions are precise, the details of the neglected garden and abandoned house lovingly
depicted, from the dry leaves that have blown in under the broken door to the
cobwebs draping from broom to wall to broken crockery. Shadows and reflections
hint at the presence of the canine that will thwart the cat's desire for mouse meat;
the glowing eyes that eventually prove to belong to an observant owl are more
perplexing. Kids may question an owl that flies around in daylight (and grownups
may question why the bird of prey doesn't eat the little rodent), but the suspense
of Waite's text and the haunting mood of the illustrations will be enough to carry
the day. JMD
WILLEY, MARGARET 
Thanksgiving with Me; illus. by Lloyd Bloom. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-06-027113-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
A little girl sits with her mother on Thanksgiving Day beside the window looking
out on the windswept autumn hills and demands to know when her uncles will
arrive: "Tell me again of your house by the sea, and brothers a hundred times
bigger than me!'" Mother regales her with thumbnail sketches of each of the six
brothers: "Davey, the smallest, was strong as an ox, and Joe stood ten feet tall in
his socks." Bloom supplies the pictures of the girl's imaginings-uncles in their
youth, uncles on the road to her house, uncles celebrating the holiday-until the
whole gangly lot is there in the flesh, greeting her and her mother by the side of the
house. Plot may be thin, but energy abounds both in Willey's rhymed text (with
a verse before Thanksgiving dinner that may find its way to some readers' repasts)
and in softly colored pictures rich in the changing seasonal palette of greens and
golds and cloudy grays. The uncles are a lively, individuated bunch, and even if
their particular style of feasting and fiddling isn't every listener's holiday ritual,
many children will be inspired to consider what makes their own clan unique. EB
116 
* 
THE BULLETIN
WINTER, JEANETTE 
My Name Is Georgia: A Portrait; written and illus. by Jeanette
Winter. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 1998 
48p
ISBN 0-15-201649-X 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Employing an approach similar to that she's used in other biographical picture
books of artists (Cowboy Charlie, Josefina, etc.), Winter turns to the inimitable
Georgia O'Keeffe. Simple yet sometimes lyrical sentences are interspersed with
O'Keeffe's own words in italics, describing in the first person the growth of her
artistry and her artistic vision, starting with her childhood in Wisconsin through
her work in Chicago and New York to her final painterly destiny in the New
Mexico desert. Winter's works are often difficult to classify, and this one is no
exception: this isn't a fact-filled biography but a faux-autobiography/effective fact-
based evocation of O'Keeffe's creativity and visual sensibility, which sounds like
an arcane project but is in fact surprisingly concrete and accessible: "I painted a
garden in the city. I wanted everyone to see flowers the way I saw them." Sedate
squares of artwork illustrate each page, but aspects of each image extend, fly, or
blossom past the edge of the square; Winter's colors run more to pinks and laven-
ders than her subject's did, but her Winterization of O'Keeffe's art echoes the
originals' strength and spare ebullience. This would pair well with more orthodox
biographies of O'Keeffe or even stories about the creative impulse-Cooney's Miss
Rumphius comes to mind. No specific source notes are provided, but a bibliogra-
phy and explanatory note are tucked away on the copyright page. DS
WOLF, BERNARD 
If I Forget Thee, 0 Jerusalem; written and illus. with photo-
graphs by Bernard Wolf. 
Dutton, 1998 
64p
ISBN 0-525-45738-0 
$17.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
This portrait of Jerusalem benefits from Wolf's magnificent color photographs,
which project an immediate sense of the place, its history, and its scenes of con-
temporary street life. Unfortunately, these pictures are not captioned, so that readers
will have no idea what the striking frieze of a battle involving a woman on horse-
back (an Amazon?) depicts, nor what the building is on the next page. Although
some images clearly reflect the text, others comprise a puzzling mismatch, as in a
description of "tough young Israeli soldiers" standing in a crowd, which is illus-
trated by a peaceful cafe scene opposite a couple passionately kissing (the soldiers
come fifteen pages later). The text does a good job of compressing centuries of
dramatic conflict and of explaining the intense religious fervor that has generated
from this city holy to Jews, Christians, and Muslims, but again there are organiza-
tional problems. We move, for instance, from a housewife shopping for gefilte
fish ingredients on one page to the partition of Palestine on the next. Although
several pages are devoted to Herod's ambitious building program, Jesus goes un-
mentioned there but suddenly appears immediately afterward as an unexpected
first reference at the beginning of the archeology section. The subject divisions are
subtly designed but not clearly delineated with headings, increasing the sense of
odd jumps and juxtapositions, and the tiny little print will daunt many young
readers. For browsing or reading selections aloud, this will prove satisfying for a
classroom or Sabbath-day visit, but the lack of an index or other access features
will limit its use for information gathering. BH
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 
117
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Marcus, Leonard S., ed. A Caldecott Celebration: Six Stars Share Their Paths to the
Caldecott Medal. Walker, 1998. 
49p. illus. with photographs. Trade ed. ISBN
0-8027-8656-1; $18.95; Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8658-8; $19.85.
In honor of the sixtieth anniversary of the Caldecott Medal, editor Leonard Marcus
has selected one medal winner from each of the six decades as representative of the
pantheon of award winners. Marcus begins with Robert McCloskey, who won the
illustration medal for Make Way for Ducklings in 1942, and concludes with David
Wiesner, who won for Tuesday in 1992; in between he discusses Cinderella, or, the
Little Glass Slipper (1955) by Marcia Brown; Where the Wild Things Are (1964) by
Maurice Sendak, Sylvester and the MagicPebble (1970) by William Steig, andJumanji
(1982) by Chris Van Allsburg. Each brief entry (six or seven pages long) is packed
with information about the conception, execution, and publishing of the Caldecott-
winning book, with some background on how the artists began illustrating books
for children and quotes from the artists themselves. (Marcus interviewed all six
artists, five for this book and Robert McCloskey for an article published in 1992.)
Each entry is illustrated with color and black and white photographs of the artist,
dummies from the books, etc. The layout is a tad on the busy side, with text boxes
and hot pink running headers and footers, but that's a minor quibble with what is
essentially an inside look at the artistic process. Marcus' chatty, conversational
style stays on topic (the books and their art), while his copious quotes allow the
artists to speak for themselves in a way that is eminently satisfying. Adults will
find this approach intriguing but the book can also double as a collective biogra-
phy for younger readers. The selected titles were ground-breaking when published
(all of the books cited were author-illustrated), and the books have thus far stood
the test of time. A list of Caldecott honors and winners by each artist is included
at the end of each entry; a glossary, an index of proper names, and a list of Caldecott
Medal winners from 1938-1998 are appended. JMD
118 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Coleman; Thompson
African Americans-fiction:
Hamilton; Johnson
African Americans-stories:
Lorbiecki
Airplanes-stories: Lewis, H.
American Indians-fiction: Dewey
ANIMAL STORIES: Paye
Animals-fiction: Avi; Rubinstein
Animals-stories: Bodnar; Mollel;
Waite
Art and artists: Winter
Aviation-stories: Lewis, H.
BEDTIME STORIES: Henkes
BIOGRAPHIES: Winter
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Garner
Brothers-fiction: Thompson
Bullies-fiction: Coleman; Smith
Camps and camping-fiction:
Herman
Cats-poetry: Isaacs
Cats-stories: Harper; Hassett; Saul
Child abuse: Kuklin
Child labor: Kuklin
Christmas: Knowlton; Masurel;
Tafuri
Civil War-fiction: Murphy;
Turner
CONCEPT BOOKS: Harper;
Love; Saul
COUNTING BOOKS: Saul;
Tafuri
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Bacon; Cadnum
CUMULATIVE STORIES:
Hassett
Dancing-stories: Gelsanliter
Death and dying-fiction: Bacon;
Friesen; Griffin; Hamilton;
Herman; Lindquist; Martin
Disabilities-fiction: Gantos; Mazer
Dogs-fiction: Lindquist; Vande
Velde
Dogs-stories: Cullen; Henkes;
Lewis, K.
Drama: Shakespeare
Ecology-fiction: McVeity
Economics: Kuklin
Ethics and values: Avi; Boudalika;
Hautman; Lorbiecki; McKee;
Miklowitz
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Busby; Cullen;
Garner; Jaffe; Mollel; Paye
FABLES: Scieszka
Families-fiction: Griffin;
Hamilton; Jones; Martin
Families-stories: Gelsanliter
FANTASY: Avi; Jones; Rowling;
Rubinstein; Vande Velde
Farm life: Saul
Farms-stories: Lewis, K.
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Cadnum; Hamilton; Hearne;
Hickman; McVeity
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Jaffe
Fathers and sons-fiction: Jones
Fathers and sons-stories: Egielski
Fathers-fiction: Lindquist
NOVEMBER 1998 
* 
119
Fear-fiction: Buffie
Fishing-stories: Bodnar; Roth
Food and eating-stories:
Gelsanliter
Friendship-fiction: Dewey;
Herman; Korman; Mazer;
Smith
Friendship-stories: Roth
Friendship: Boudalika
FUNNY STORIES: Korman;
Scieszka
Gambling-fiction: Hautman
Ghosts-fiction: Buffie; Griffin
Health: Beeler
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Denenberg; Fleischman;
Hearne; Hickman; Miklowitz;
Murphy; Turner
History, world: Love; Wolf
Holidays-stories: Masurel; Tafuri;
Willey
Imagination-stories: Lewis, H.
Insects-stories: Egielski
Jerusalem: Wolf
Jews-fiction: Miklowitz
Jews-folklore: Jaffe
Latinos-fiction: Fleischman
LETTERS: Boudalika
Liberia-folklore: Paye
Literature, English: Shakespeare
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Jones; Rowling
Mental illness-fiction: Thompson
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Friesen; Martin; Willey
Mothers and sons-fiction: Gantos
Music and musicians: Guthrie
MYSTERIES: Herman
POETRY: Isaacs; Philip
Politics-fiction: Avi
Puzzles: Brooks
Racism-stories: Lorbiecki
Racism: McKee
Reading aloud: Arnold; Isaacs;
Paye; Scieszka
Reading, reluctant: Busby;
Korman; Scieszka
Religion-fiction: Hickman
Religion: Knowlton
Religious education: Bible; Hickman;
Wolf
Revolutionary War-fiction: Denenberg
RHYMING STORIES: Gelsanliter
School-fiction: Gantos; Korman;
Rowling; Smith; Vande Velde
School-stories: Lorbiecki
Segregation-fiction: Hearne
SHORT STORIES: Johnson; Scieszka
Sisters-fiction: Griffin; Martin; McVeity;
Thompson
Slavery: Kuklin
Social studies: Boudalika; McKee; Wolf
South Africa: McKee
South, the-fiction: Hearne
Sports stories: Arnold; Cadnum
Storytelling: Bodnar; Busby; Cullen;
Garner; Jaffe; Mollel; Paye; Roth;
Scieszka
Storytime: Bodnar; Egielski; Gelsanliter;
Hassett; Henkes; Isaacs; Roth; Waite;
Willey
Suicide-fiction: Miklowitz
SURVIVAL STORIES: Bacon; Coleman;
Mazer
Swimming-fiction: Cadnum
TALL TALES: Roth
Teeth: Beeler
Thanksgiving-stories: Willey
Theater studies: Shakespeare
Time: Harper
Uncles-stories: Willey
URBAN LEGENDS: Busby
Wales-folklore: Cullen
War: Boudalika
War-poetry: Philip
Wizards-fiction: Rowling
Women's studies: Winter
World cultures: Beeler
ITeachg
Teaching &8
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
Every issue of Teaching K-8
----- 
provides informative articles on
TfPc in K 
the cutting edge of education.
(ou ll also find insightful
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
-rillc
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
r _ _ 
.
I. 
-_ 
.
-
-
1 
-
Don r miss out on tis vauuable
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
Teachtng4K8
)x 54808, Boulder, CO 80322-4808
8-8793 * www.TeachingK-8.com
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
11
"This attractive oversize book will...have plenty of appeal for youngsters."
-ALA 
Booklist
"The tight focus and helpful graphics...offer a more clear and in-depth look
at the early days of colonization than most textbooks."
-Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
"Gorgeous...Puts all cultures on an equal historical footing."-Kirkus Reviews
Ages 6 up. 48 pp. TR $16.00/0-688-13448-3 LE $15.93/0-688-13449-1
Other Books in The American Story Series:
The Discovery of the Americas * The Discovery of the Americas Activities Book
Exploration and Conquest: The Americas After Columbus: 1500-1620
A More Perfect Union: The Story of Our Constitution
Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Books * A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.williammorrow.com
from tERDMANS 
OOKS
for Young Readers
OR AMONG US
in Steenwyk
could easily become
this suspense story. ..
. is heart-pounding."
-
Publishers Weekly
World War II thriller."
-
Booklist
ction * Hardcover
0-9 * 143 pages * $15.00
FORGIVE THE RIX
FORGIVE THE SKI
Gloria Whelan "Michigan author
"Engaging short novel. ... 
L
irresistible as a force of natur
-
Kirki
Ages 9-14 * Fiction * Hardcover
ISBN 0-8028-5155-X * 116 pages *
Jk 
L8
)okstore, 
824 
J 
EERDMAN
.00-253-7521 
for Youn
459-6540 
255 Jefferson Ave S.E. Grand Rapids, M
At your bo
or call 1-8
FAX: 616-4
E-mail: sal
an imprint of WM. B. EERDMANS Pui
les@eerdmans.com
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(199811)52:3;1 -G
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1997
* the Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more ... updated monthly!
l I ifiI
IJI 
lo
