H
ILLINO 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
I"t
"·I_;:~
";
: 
':i 
I :
c 
.MpS:~:I:.
Books 
make 
great 
gifts, 
but
cip k-
ing the perfect books for your
favorite youngsters can be daunt-
ing. Let the expert staff of The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books help you navigate the book-
store wilderness full of shiny new children's
books.
Updated and expanded from last year's edi-
tion, the Guide Book to Gift Books contains
annotations of the best books for giving (and
receiving) and is available as a downloadable
PDF file that you can print out and use for
every holiday, birthday, or other gift-giving
occasion on your calendar this year.
Listed books have all been recommended in
full Bulletin reviews from the last three years
and are verified as currently in print. Entries
are divided into age groups and include
author, title, publisher, and the current list
price.
To purchase, go to:
www.lis.uiuc.edu/giftbooks/
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
January 2005
Vol. 58 No. 5
A LOOK INSIDE
195 
THE BIG PICTURE
IAm the Messenger by Markus Zusak
196 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
204 * I Fall Down by Vicki Cobb; illus. by Julia Gorton
212 * Baby Brains written and illus. by Simon James
219 * A Dream ofFreedom: The Civil Rights Movement from 1954 to 1968 by
Diane McWhorter
225 * L'Chaim!: To Jewish Life in America! Celebrating from 1654 until
Today by Susan Goldman Rubin
234 
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 2004
236 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Timnah Card, Reviewer (TC)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Krista Hutley
Maggie Hommel
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $75.00; multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each
additional; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $7.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box
1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2005 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Illustration ©2004 by David Goldin from the jacket of IAm the Messenger by Markus Zusak,
published by Alfred A. Knopf.
JANUARY 2005 
* 
195
THE BIG PICTURE
IAm the Messenger
by Markus Zusak
It's not unusual for literature to examine the issue of making one's life meaningful
or to explore the question of our impact on one another. It is, however, unusual
for such topics to be addressed directly rather than obliquely, and interestingly
rather than sententiously, and for this to happen in a book aimed at young readers.
Nonetheless, Australian writer Markus Zusak has managed it, and, if you'll par-
don what will soon become apparent is a pun, he does it in spades.
Ed Kennedy is living a largely purposeless life-at nineteen, he's an un-
derage cabdriver with no particular ambitions-with his largely purposeless cab-
driver friends when his life takes a strange and unexpected turn. For no reason
that he can figure, he's chosen as a messenger, receiving in the mail a playing
card-an ace from each suit in turn-and some cryptic information that he must
pursue and interpret in order to find his mission and intervene in the lives of the
selected individuals. Some of these missions are joyful-he brings an old woman
reassurance from her long-dead husband and encourages a shy teenaged girl to
believe in her own worth; some are simple-he buys an overwhelmed single mother
the ice-cream cone she's never able to indulge herself in; some are harsh-he must
stop a man's nightly assault on his wife and bring a young tough into the fold of
his hard-edged family. The stakes soon escalate, though, when he comes to the
most intimidating suit, hearts, and he's asked to undertake missions that involve
his friends and that shatter the complacently breezy exteriors that they've all shown
each other ("How well do we really let ourselves know each other?"), laying bare
the truth behind the "No worries, mate" facades. Finally, the hardest message of
all comes-the joker, which has as its subject Ed himself.
Zusak, author of Fighting Ruben Wolfe (BCCB 3/01), has always been
excellent at writing about young men who can't see the possibilities for the limita-
tions, and he outdoes himself here: Ed's aimless floating is completely under-
standable, in terms of his family and character ("'Who knows you real well, Ed?'
And that's just it. 'No one,' I say"), but it's also poignant for the same reasons.
His yearning for his colleague Audrey, the closest he comes to having an ambition,
seems as hopeless as the stalled lives of his friends, and there's rueful humor in the
fact that his closest confidante is an aging and repulsively smelly dog. The vi-
gnettes of Ed's visitations, on the other hand, are exquisitely wrought, whether
they're tender or brutal, and they're woven together into a human-scale demon-
stration of chaos theory, making a passionate case for the importance of even small
personal connections. Ed's voice is compelling, by turns exultant, as he feels he's
mastered his missions and expanded himself thereby, and fearful, as he's led fur-
196 
* THE BULLETIN
ther into taking the risks of personal exposure and commitment he and his friends
have self-protectively avoided, cheapening their lives as a consequence.
The revelation of the architect of Ed's mission isn't as compelling as the
mission itself, but that's almost inevitable with such an elaborately constructed
mystery. The book still succeeds in being a touching and intriguing exploration of
the need to live one's life significantly, to value the richness knowing one another
brings along with its terrible vulnerability. And in that respect, Ed Kennedy truly
is the messenger, conveying an important message that will speak volumes to many
young adult readers. (Imprint information appears on p. 233.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
iw
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALEXANDER, LLOYD 
The Xanadu Adventure. 
Dutton, 2005 
[160p]
ISBN 0-525-47371-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Vesper Holly (from The Illyrian Adventure, etc., BCCB 4/86) is back, and she's
still galloping through the nineteenth century; excited by her friend Toby's theory
that Troy, not Greece, was the cradle of civilization, she agrees to visit the newly
discovered site of the Trojan War. Along with Toby, she is accompanied by her
elderly guardians, Brinnie (Professor Brinton Garrett) and his wife, Mary, as well
as others from the household. After two dangerous boating trips, Vesper and crew
disembark-to find that they have been taken to the wrong dig site. Who else
could be behind the trouble but Vesper's archenemy Helvitius? Left for dead at
the end of the last adventure, he is now determined to acquire all the oil on the
Arabian peninsula, forcing the world's leaders to answer to him. (Just in case, he
has also developed an explosive so powerful that he's named it after himself.) Only
Vesper Holly can defeat him-as soon as she breaks out of his lair, Xanadu. Vesper's
top billing is deceptive, since she does not stand out as much as she has in the past;
though she has the unhesitating spirit and good head for danger that all action
stars have, her solo derring-do is undercut by Toby's heroism as well as Brinnie's
reserved first-person narration. Through Brinnie, Alexander also includes a great
deal of subtle scholarly humor that will likely miss the mark for young readers
(though adults, particularly professors, will be amused). However, Helvitius is a
perfect example of the old-fashioned villain who oozes cosmopolitan malevolence
(he is as likely to quote poetry to his captive dinner guests as to poison them with
the pistachio nuts). This is more of a clever parody than pulse-pounding adven-
ture, and readers who are looking for the latter may be disappointed; however,
those who enjoy a slower-paced, intelligent poke at classical adventure stories may
find this to their liking. KH
JANUARY 2005 
* 
197
ALLEN, M. E. 
Gotta Get Some Bish Bash Bosh. Tegen/HarperCollins,
2005 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-073201-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-073198-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Our nameless narrator is incensed when his girlfriend, Sandi, dumps him for a guy
with "a bit more bish-bash-bosh." Determined to rejig his image and make Sandi
regret her interest in older boys, our boy gets a trendy haircut (disastrous) and a
place on the rugby team (clavicle-shattering), then attends a hip Halloween party
(actually desperately unhip). He also fends off the advances ofSandi's ditzy friend
and contemplates the possibilities of a pretty girl two grades below, but what really
garners Sandi's attention is his videotaping of her embarrassing accidental plunge
into a duck pond. This British import has some of the lightheartedness about its
romantically hapless hero that Rennison's Angus, Thongs, andFull-FrontalSnogging
(BCCB 5/00) brought to the teen female point of view, and there's similar humor-
ous appeal in the protagonist's vexations, from parents who unreasonably refuse to
cater to his every whim to uncool friends who are either interfering with the
narrator's plans or, worse, garnering more social acclaim. This lacks Rennison's
outrageous relentlessness, however, and the sameness of the milder comedy begins
to wear, especially as there's little change or gain overall. This is nonetheless a true
and humorous portrait of young male confusion and hopes, and it's likely to be
welcomed by those seeking an undemanding and amusing read. DS
ANDERSEN, HANS CHRISTIAN 
The Ugly Duckling; tr. from the Danish by Anthea
Bell; illus. by Robert Ingpen. 
Minedition, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-698-40010-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
This translation retains the style as well as the anguish and tragedy of Andersen's
fable, in which the Ugly Duckling has such a rotten life that he at one point asks
the swans to kill him for being so repulsive. That mixture of pragmatic approach
and heartbreaking theme builds a sense of melancholy irony, followed by almost
unbelievable release into a new life of honor and peace, that older children will
comprehend more easily than those in lower grades. The text itself is quite long
for a picture book, and the vocabulary is relatively advanced, but emotionally pre-
cocious younger children may enjoy hearing the story read aloud, especially in
light of the quality of the illustrations. Dramatically composed mixed-media lay-
outs open the Duckling's world to the viewer, using texture and color to convey
the impression of multi-sensory stimulation through wind and water, sunlight and
snow. The perspectives shift from scene to scene, often looking over the Duckling's
shoulder, sometimes gazing through his eyes at a new persecutor, imbuing the
pages with the Duckling's sorrow, fear, and finally, joy. An exceptional treatment
of a familiar story, this book brings vibrant new life to the original tale. TC
ARBOGAST, JOAN MARIE 
Buildings in Disguise: Architecture that Looks Like Ani-
mals, Food, and Other Things. 
Boyds Mills, 2004 
48p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-59078-099-X 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Quick. What duck doesn't go "Quack"? A "duck" that's a commercial building
whose form echoes its product. Any reader whose community boasts one of these
edifices of civic pride or derision-from a barrel-shaped root-beer stand to the
198 
* 
THE BULLETIN
basket-shaped Longaberger Company headquarters-will want to grab a copy of
this tribute to U.S. mimetic architecture that examines the brazen advertising po-
tential of ducks and the more oblique, but equally zany, character of such roadside
glories as wigwam cabin motels and pagoda-styled gas stations. Lots of period and
contemporary photographs (several pairs compare the structures in their heyday
with the present), elevations and floorplans, and postcards provide a nearly irresist-
ible visual draw, while the text traces the relationship between the style's develop-
ment and the burgeoning road/highway system, and sidebars offer data on size,
date, materials, location, and national historical status. Arbogast takes her subject
seriously enough to include an index, sources, and even endpaper maps with site
locations, but it's hard to be pedantic when discussing a sixty-five-foot-tall wooden
elephant. If Gaudi and Gehry can't get kids grinning, unleash the ducks on them.
EB
BAKER, E. D. 
Once Upon a Curse. Bloomsbury, 2004 
244p
ISBN 1-58234-892-8 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Princess Emma, heroine of The Frog Princess (BCCB 2/03) and Dragon's Breath, is
back, with her beloved prince, Eadric, her bat friend, Li'l, and her beleaguered
royal family, and she's still burdened with a curse that may turn her, as it has other
good witches, into a cantankerous hag. Determined to end the curse, Emma,
Eadric, and Li'l travel through time to the point at which the curse was first in-
voked in order to hear the specific terms of its revocation. Mission accomplished,
the trio return to their own time, where Emma and Eadric then face down a venge-
ful knight, a magically engineered monster, and two dangerously bad-tempered
enchantresses (Aunt Grassina and Grandmother) before the curse is broken. This
lighthearted fairy tale benefits from the robust normalcy of the personal associa-
tions on which the action centers; Aunt Grassina, gratifyingly nasty and cynical
throughout, is a consummate grouch rather than a pillar of evil, while Emma and
Eadric, a comfortable couple given to overprotecting each other, offer readers a
sturdy basis from which to project the background for the abrogation of the family
curse (achieved out of the blue by Grandfather's ghost, who avows undying love
for Grandmother and smooches her). The characters are likable, the dialogue is
snappy, and the story is warmhearted and appealing. The narrative impetus slows
at the end of the time travel section, weakening the impact of the climax, but the
plot twist achieved with Grandfather's kiss is a pleasant innovation. Accessible
without reference to the previous volumes in the series, Emma's third adventure
invites readers on a vacation to a good-natured, generous-hearted imaginary land.
TC
BARRON, T.A. 
The Great Tree ofAvalon: Child ofthe Dark Prophecy. Philomel,
2004 
43 4 p
ISBN 0-399-23763-1 
$19.99 
R Gr. 6-10
In the Year of Avalon 694, the Lady of the Lake prophesied that Avalon would go
dark for an entire year, and during that year, a child who could bring the end of
Avalon would be born; this child could be defeated only by Merlin's "own true
heir." Seventeen years after this year of darkness, the identity of the dark child and
the true heir are still unknown, and the prophecy comes down to two orphaned
boys raised together and then accidentally separated-Scree, the eagleboy trusted
with Merlin's staff by the wizard himself, and Tamwyn, who despite his good
JANUARY 2005 
* 
199
intentions fears that his destructiveness marks him for an unwanted destiny. As
Avalon mysteriously suffers from a drought not only of water but of life, Tamwyn
and other human and nonhuman creatures band together to seek the staff of Mer-
lin and his true heir. Unbeknownst to them, the shadowy figure who is making
the drought is also seeking the staff-in order to remake Avalon to his desires.
Barron's reimagined Avalon, spread out over the seven roots of the Great Tree
grown by Merlin, is both richly conceived and imaginatively drawn: history, lore,
topography, and diverse populations are all accounted for. The characters are
compelling in their personalities and motivations, and their true natures are in
some cases purposely left unclear. The only exception is Kulwych, the evil wizard,
who is almost comical in his gloating malevolence, whiny frustration, and un-
subtle explanations of his "evil plan." Nevertheless, this high fantasy will surely
please readers with its epic, myth-laden adventure. KH
BARTOLETTI, SUSAN CAMPBELL 
Nobody's Diggier than a Dog; illus. by Beppe
Giacobbe. 
Hyperion, 2005 
40p
ISBN 0-7868-1824-7 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
As all who love dogs know, they have their peculiar charms, and Bartoletti offers a
playful descriptive encomium to those canine characteristics. Each page offers a
stanza devoted to a different trait ("Nobody's/ DIGGIER/ than a dog-/ a bury-
the-bone dog,/ a shake-a-paw dog"), with the book overall bragging that dogs are
diggier and piggier, mightier and flightier, naggier and waggier, and so on. The
list of characteristics runs on somewhat without really developing momentum,
and some of the adjectival explanations point in less effective directions (surely
there are plenty yappier dogs than the "gotta-go-NOW dog"?), but this is still a
cheerful and imaginative evocation of the endearing habits of yer basic pooch.
Giacobbe's full-bleed, double-page spreads sport figures whose opaque paints and
regular edges suggest computer generation; the slightly muted, grayed tones unfor-
tunately subdue the playfulness of the text and some interpretations of the words
are a bit questionable, but the high-energy, bold-eyed cartoony figures enhance
the comedy. The visuals also offer a silent running narrative about an energetic
brown hound who, having bolted out of his yard while chasing after a cat, attracts
the attention of a dog-catcher while his owner searches for his lost pet; the visual
thread doesn't really enhance the text, but audiences will enjoy the game of finding
the illustration-only story. This could inspire spinoff language-arts exercises as
well as offering a bouncily enjoyable readaloud tribute to man's best friend. DS
BATEMAN, COLIN 
Running with the Reservoir Pups. Delacorte, 2005 
[272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90268-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73244-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
After moving to Belfast so that his newly divorced mother could take a new nurs-
ing job, twelve-year-old Eddie is stuck in an apartment next to the hospital, with a
motorway on one side and derelict housing on the other. Accustomed to village
life, Eddie now has nothing to do except play with the traffic or loiter on hospital
grounds. While dejectedly doing the latter, he witnesses a series of lucrative scams
run by a group of toughs, and he unfortunately develops a knack for taking the
blame while they escape. As a reward, they invite him to join their gang, the
Reservoir Pups; all he has to do is break into the hospital and steal the security
200 
* THE BULLETIN
codes. During the heist, however, Eddie overhears some dangerous secrets and
barely escapes with his life. Unfortunately, no one believes him, not even when
twelve babies disappear from the hospital. Determined to prove himself, Eddie
tracks the thieves, only to find out that he has again blundered into big trouble.
This book is first in a trilogy originally published in the UK, and it retains its
specific cultural flavor. Bateman's writing is fast and funny, believably portraying
Eddie's often-exaggerated thoughts, and his tendency toward dry summary high-
lights the ridiculousness in every situation: "I attacked a disabled boy . . . then
nearly got arrested by the police but managed to break out of the security center
and escape. Then I swore to undertake a dangerous and illegal mission on behalf
of a band of outlaws. How was your day?" Readers will squirm with indignation as
Eddie is misjudged over and over, making him a strong sympathetic character and
highlighting the injustice that adults often do unwittingly to kids, particularly
boys. The well-paced action, the sure laughs, and the kid-centered premise will
make this a good choice for reluctant readers. KH
BAUSUM, ANN 
With Courage and Cloth: Winning the Fightfor a Woman's Right to
Vote. 
National Geographic, 2004 
112p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-7922-6996-9 
$32.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7922-7647-7 
$21.95 
R Gr. 5-10
When the women's suffrage issue takes the stage, the spotlight is usually on the
grandes dames of Seneca Falls and their nineteenth-century sisters at arms. Here
Bausum focuses on the riveting twentieth-century run-up to the passage of the
19th Amendment, energized and directed by two women with differing strategies.
The opening chapter presents the 1913 suffrage parade, orchestrated by Alice Paul,
which "deteriorated into a near riot" but secured unprecedented media attention.
While Paul and her National Woman's Party took the radical high road toward
full national voting rights, Carrie Chapman Catt and the National American
Woman's Suffrage Association opted for a "Winning Plan" of incremental goals to
extend voting rights in stages across the country. Although the two approaches
were often at odds, each kept pressure on a reluctant nation through World War I
until President Wilson, Congress, and public opinion were finally softened suffi-
ciently to push through the amendment and its ratification. At Bausum's hands
this is no genteel account of high-minded ideals and quaint but earnest ladies-it's
a down and dirty melee with jail, rats, hunger strikes, and force feeding, with nail-
biting tension as votes are laboriously mined and deadlines loom. Many of the
monochrome period photographs are spot-tinted in the purple, gold, and white
colors of the suffrage movement, and valuable end matter includes gossipy profiles
of leading suffragists, a chronology from 1788 to 1920, a resource guide, source
notes, a bibliography, photo credits, and an index. EB
BOLDEN, TONYA 
The Champ: The Story ofMuhammadAli; illus. by R. Gregory
Christie. 
Knopf, 2004 
4 0p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92401-9 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82401-4 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
You may think you've seen this picture book before; with its black banding and
hot color jacket art, it bears a striking resemblance to Ntozake Shange's Muhammad
Ali: The Man Who Could Float Like a Butterfly (BCCB 12/02) and Jim Haskins'
Champion (BCCB 6/02). Bolden has her own unique take on "The Louisville
JANUARY 2005 
* 
201
Lip," though, with an ever-so-readaloudable text that expands on Haskins' cover-
age and packs a decidedly jazzy punch: "Ooooooooh!-he moved so smooth!
Ooooooooh!-so fast! Ooooooooh! He boxed like nobody else: with his chin not
tucked in and down, but up and out-and proud." Though the author is silent
about his eventful private life, she strikes a laudable balance between Ali's disci-
plined rage in the ring and his Islam-inspired anti-war stand in the public arena.
Christie, with his boisterous palette and thickly applied paints, puts muscle into
every shape and figure, from the black scrawl and matte mauve Ali-Frazier match
up to the blazing triangle of spotlights over the Madison Square Garden ring.
Even the highly styled portraiture is unmistakably Ali, with wide-set eyes crinkling
with mischievous laughter or drilling the viewer with raw determination. Here's
one of those rare biographies-a treat for the ear and the eye, and a thought-
provoking exploration of a pugilist and pacifist. Endnotes and a list of selected
sources are included. EB
BORDEN, LOUISE 
The Greatest Skating Race: A World War II Storyfrom the Neth-
erlands; illus. by Niki Daly. 
McElderry, 2004 
48p
ISBN 0-689-84502-2 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Narrator Piet looks back to 1941, when he was a ten-year-old boy whose goal was
to emulate his hero, Pim Mulier, who organized the 200-kilometer skating race
along the canals that connect eleven towns in the northern Netherlands. Although
Piet wouldn't actually skate in the Elfstedentocht race for many years, he covered
the route on a far more important mission in 1941 when he was called upon to
accompany two children to the safety of their aunt's home in the north after their
father was apprehended by the Nazis. With impressive stamina and quick-
wittedness, Piet guided his classmate and her younger brother over the ice and
under the noses of German soldiers, pretending to be no more than siblings on a
local errand for their parents. Although this has the feel and ring of a memoir, or
at least a wartime legend, concluding notes on the Elfstedentocht and the history
of skating verify that Pim Mulier was an historical figure but remain silent about
Piet. Ragged-right blocks of text, which look suspiciously like poetry but sound
like prose, run on longer than necessary for the plot, but the wintry brown and
amber scenes set against an icy white backdrop provide some cool visual appeal.
Readers whose literary acquaintance with the Netherlands is limited to "The Boy
Who Held Back the Sea" can now add another tale of quiet heroism. EB
BRUGMAN, ALYSSA 
Finding Grace. Delacorte, 2004 
229p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90142-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73116-7 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Rachel has finished high school and she's preparing to start university, but she's
got no idea what she wants to do with her life, so she decides to accept the job of
live-in caretaker to a woman unable to live on her own. Brain-damaged Grace,
who's largely unresponsive, initially stymies Rachel, who's not sure if she's doing
her job properly or not; gradually, though, Rachel begins to see flashes of the
person beneath the limitations, and she also begins to delve into Grace's past out
of both curiosity and a desire to understand the life that was suddenly interrupted.
Though Grace's backstory is somewhat overly melodramatic (she was hit by a car
after discovering her lover, by whom she was pregnant, was a cad; that lover's
brother, then her employer, loved her from afar and is now her devoted friend)
202 
* THE BULLETIN
and Rachel's discovery of it through hidden papers a bit contrived, there's consid-
erable subtlety and power in the depiction of Rachel's growth as a person and her
strengthening connection with Grace. Rachel's voice is young for her eighteen
years, but that's in character, as is her intelligence and humor. Her reactions to
Grace herself are honestly depicted as a mixture of sympathy and semi-supersti-
tious fear, and her overall maturation is believable, involving not only her close-
ness with her charge but a budding relationship with a university classmate and
even a renewed appreciation of her own mother. Readers drawn by the unusual
premise will stay for the rewarding literary company. DS
CARMAN, PATRICK 
The Dark Hills Divide. Orchard, 2005 
[272p]
ISBN 0-439-70093-0 
$11.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Alexa, the twelve-year-old daughter of the mayor of Lathbury, has the run of the
government buildings and main library in the principal city of Bridewell. What
she doesn't have-what none of the citizens of the four Walled Cities has-is free
access to the lands outside the walls: the Dark Hills, harsh, frightening terrain full
of wild beasts and a legendary magic. Alexa's unique privileges allow her to un-
cover a secret way outside the walls, where she is recruited by a cadre of wild
animals (headed by the bear Ander, King of the Forest) to search out and bring to
justice the founder of an evil plot that will enable escaped convicts to infiltrate and
overpower the citizens of Bridewell. Alexa's warm relationships with nearly every
adult male she knows set up her world as a quiet and protected one, and her eager-
ness to get outside the walls and her intelligence in deducing the answers to the
clues left for her define her as a likable, spunky heroine. However, her baseless
willingness to follow a complete stranger into the forest and her quick acceptance
of talking animals stretch the reader's disbelief. Additionally, the psychological
power of the danger and mystery is defused as the animals themselves, rough coats
and sharp teeth notwithstanding, manage to be more fuzzy playmates than inspir-
ing icons, and the convicts turn out to be misunderstood, misled unfortunates just
looking for a home. A series of puzzles and an illustrated chess game lighten the
overall mood, creating some confusion about the tone of the tale but offering
readers an easy way to enter into the story. A map and a note from the author are
included. TC
CARMODY, ISOBELLE 
Night Gate. Random House, 2005 
[272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93016-7 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83016-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
"Rage" Winnoway and her mother have been living on Winnoway Farm, where
her mother returned to care for Rage's suffocatingly cruel but dying grandfather.
Now, with her grandfather dead, Mam in a coma from a car accident, and Mam's
brother nowhere to be found, Rage is looked after by her neighbors and her four
dogs. She knows that eventually the dogs will be sold and she will have to leave the
farm, so she runs away, intending to sneak into the hospital to wake Mam. In the
hills, Rage finds a gate in a wall of brambles, and a mysterious creature tells her
that it leads to a world called Valley, where a wizard with "waking magic" can help
her. She enters the gate with her dogs, who become human or curious-looking
crossbreeds in the process, only to find that there is no wizard waiting for her.
JANUARY 2005 
* 203
Instead, she receives an hourglass inscribed with a riddle; if she can answer it, she
will find the wizard, ensure Valley's survival, and save her family from suffering
another terrible loss. The book sometimes hammers its point home unsubtly, and
the ending, which uses the "magical" healing power of love as a cure-all, is message-
driven rather than realistic. Nonetheless, this Australian import effectively
interweaves Rage's family history with the origin and history of Valley, and the
parallels of neglect and abandonment that cause the devastation in both are
believable; the transformation of Rage's dogs adds depth to their loyalty as well as
another example of family dynamics. Rage herself is an appealing and warmhearted
heroine, too thoughtful and careful to deserve a name with such fiery implications,
and readers will be pleased to see her reach the happy ending of her family-centered
quest. KH
CASSIDY, CATHY 
Dizzy. 
Viking, 2004 
247p
ISBN 0-670-05936-6 
$15.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Dizzy's mom ("Call me Storm") unexpectedly appears at her daughter's doorstep
on Dizzy's twelfth birthday, gets Dizzy's dad drunk, and convinces Dizzy that he
has okayed an extended trip; when Dizzy goes in to say goodbye to her dad next
morning, he's too groggy to understand that Dizzy is not simply going to school.
Storm takes Dizzy to one festival after another throughout the Scottish country-
side, introducing her to the New Age traveler lifestyle. Dizzy is enchanted at first,
though a bit unsettled by the grunge and close quarters of living in a teepee with
strangers. She soon finds community, though, with a slightly older boy named
Finn and with Mouse, the estranged and neglected son of her mother's boyfriend.
The three form a bond that proves to be the education of Dizzy (Storm really just
wants Dizzy along to help look after Mouse) and the saving of Mouse, who finds
love and consistency for the first time through the care of Dizzy and Finn. Dizzy
and Finn remain believably ambivalent about the festival life-they love the free-
dom of it and even agree with some of the earth-loving principles, but they are
clearheaded about the lifestyle's limitations and the prejudice it engenders. The
mystery of Dizzy's dad's seeming apathy won't be a mystery to readers, who will
grasp that Storm has kidnapped Dizzy and is hiding her from her father. Storm
herself is prickly through and through, with a calculating heartlessness that adds to
Dizzy's sense of parental betrayal; Finn's gentle wisdom and tolerance and Mouse's
crying need soften her anguish and help Dizzy realize that she can find and give
love even when the adults in her life can't. Cassidy successfully wraps old themes
(parental disappointment, first love, trust, tolerance) in new cloth here, giving
readers a glimpse of the ragged realities as well as the appeals of her protagonist's
alternative existence. KC
CHESHIRE, SIMON 
Kissing Vanessa. 
Delacorte, 2004 
136p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90242-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73212-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
The popularity of chick lit books for adolescent girls couldn't help but spawn a
corresponding species of "lad lit," where boys get a turn at showing the funny side
of teenage hormonal flux. Self-proclaimed background guy Kevin Watts embarks
on the new school year with optimism, only to have it dashed before the first
assembly is over. Then in walks Vanessa, the new girl, tall, slim, and gorgeous, and
Kevin has a whole new reason to live. Desperate to impress the elegant Vanessa,
204 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Kevin signs on to be a case study for best friend Jack, who hopes to make it big as
a self-help guru with his tips on girlfriend management. Kevin's attempts to fol-
low Jack's rather dubious program lead to one comedic disaster after another, until
he has his final epiphany, which leads to some mild heroism on Vanessa's behalf,
and secures him his sought-after kiss, with a promise of many more. Kevin's first-
person narration has an earnest, openhearted quality that makes his spectacular
failures all the more pitifully funny; every time he goes for cool, he ends up more
deeply mired in loser agony. Vanessa is remarkably nice for being so beautiful; her
character has dimensionality and insight which furthers the plot by bringing Kevin
up short on various occasions. Jack's character, on the other hand, is delightfully
underdeveloped; we get minute glimpses of Jack's interaction with girls, always
down the hall and too far away for Kevin to hear what's being said, which Kevin
interprets as successes, but which the reader may view more skeptically. Cheshire
is as adept at creating the anticipation of the awkward moment as he is at following
through; readers will find themselves wanting to warn the naive Kevin before he
does one more stupid thing. Like its chick lit counterparts, this book performs the
important work of finding the comedy in teen romance, this time from the boy's
side. KC
CHIPMAN, Liz 
From the Lighthouse. Dutton, 2004 
[192p]
ISBN 0-525-47312-2 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Louise, known as Weezie, loves living on the lighthouse in the middle of the Hudson
River, at least until her mother takes off, leaving Weezie, her three brothers, and
their father the lighthouse keeper on their own. Though Weezie initially tries to
keep believing that her mother will return soon, the long silence and cursory com-
munication (after several months, a signed Christmas card appears) make the girl
realize that her family has permanently changed. Chipman vividly creates Weezie's
world, giving full credit to the natural beauties of the upper Hudson but also
drawing a believable picture of a close Depression-era community and the special
ways of life on a lighthouse. She also underpins what could have been a predict-
able melodrama with solidity and substance, giving credible voice to the different
reactions of Weezie's family (her older brother tries to take off as well, only to be
brought back by their furious father). Careful plotting effectively weaves the ini-
tial event into Weezie's ongoing existence, with the book making clear, especially
with a shocking subsequent family tragedy, that one significant event isn't all that
defines a life. The romantic setting will draw readers, and they'll find a moving
family story as a result. An author's note provides some background on the Hudson-
Athens lighthouse. DS
COBB, VICKI 
I Fall Down; illus. by Julia Gorton. 
HarperCollins,
2004 
40p 
(Vicki Cobb Science Play)
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17843-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17842-1 
$15.99 
R* 4-7 yrs
Cobb returns to her series of science investigations for pre- and primary schoolers,
focusing on that intangible but clearly demonstrable force, gravity. The freckled
boy with the baseball mitt and multiple bandages may not yet know gravity's name,
but he's surely made its acquaintance. He leads listeners through a series of obser-
vations, questions, and tests that alert them to something they intuitively know--
JANUARY 2005 
* 205
falling is a one-way trip downward. To demonstrate this, he and fellow experi-
menters drop keys and blocks and drizzle gooey honey off a spoon. Others obser-
vations aren't quite so obvious: a dropped key and a penny hit the floor at the
same time, but as a wailing baby and the aching narrator attest, not everything hits
the ground with the same force. Finally, the boy shows how to observe gravity
without dropping anything: he ties a kid's shoe to one rubber band and his mom's
shoe to another, creating simple scales that work in essentially the same way as the
bathroom scale, a pain-free device that "tells you how hard you fall-without you
falling at all!" As in I Face the Wind (BCCB 9/03), explanations are concise, and
the artwork, which has a spare, computer-generated look against generous swaths
of white space, reinforces each point clearly. An opening note implies that the title
is intended for joint parent/child participation, but the limited vocabulary and
chunky, stylish type could also encourage solo efforts by able new readers. 
EB
COOPER, FLOYD 
Jump!: From the Life ofMichael Jordan; written and illus. by
Floyd Cooper. 
Philomel, 2004 
40p
ISBN 0-399-24230-9 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
This earnest biography, apparently based on secondary sources, traces Jordan's
early years, focusing on his relationship with his adored older brother, Larry, and
young Michael's determination to improve his play in spite of his frustratingly
small stature. Listeners who come for the game will find it hard to dodge thinly
veiled messages on the value of fortitude in overcoming obstacles, from racism
(Cooper cites an episode in which Michael faced discrimination at a public swim-
ming pool) to garden-variety teasing ("With each dribble, he was scoffed at for his
'little boy' haircut and the way his ears stuck out. . . . And right in front of the
girls!"). Details of Jordan's career are stashed in a biographical note, and it won't
be surprising if some listeners ask the reader to flip straight to the back. Still,
Cooper's warm, softly textured pictures feature plenty of action scenes, and a fold-
up-and-out spread of Michael (with an eerily adult face) beating brother Larry at a
jump shot is the undisputed highlight of the title. EB
CROSS, GILLIAN 
The Dark Ground. Dutton, 2004 
26 4 p
ISBN 0-525-47350-5 
$15.99 
R Gr. 6-10
In a surreal and supernatural moment, Robert suddenly materializes naked and
starving amid a forest of bizarre plants. A nearby colony of humans takes him in
and teaches him to survive in his new surroundings, but not before he realizes that
the surroundings aren't so very new; by normal standards, he's only a short distance
from his family's house. Normal standards are useless, however, when you're
suddenly a very few inches tall and have no one but yourself and your equally tiny
friends to rely on. There are no cute Borrowers here; Robert is viciously attacked
by a "nightbird" soon after his arrival, the colony subsists on seeds, beetles, and
snails, and every winter a considerable number of the colony can expect to die of
starvation and the cold. Robert's transformation is described in well-chosen
emotional and physical detail rather than explained, as are the majority of his
experiences throughout the book, a technique that increases reader investment in
the story and strengthens commitment to the suspension of disbelief. The well-
defined characters and life-threatening challenges he encounters further engage
the reader, gradually increasing the stakes at each stage of the plot. Robert's
proximity to his family's home is a bit coincidental (his initial transformation takes
206 
* THE BULLETIN
place far away, on a distant airplane), but his determination to use that nearness to
find some way out of his situation-for himself and for the colony who took him
in-is believable and moving. Stark but rich, this novel offers readers an unusual
and vivid experience. TC
DAHLBERG, MAURINE F. 
Escape to West Berlin. Farrar, 2004 
179p
ISBN 0-374-30959-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Heidi has spent her entire thirteen years in a divided Berlin, and she's accustomed
to life in the East under friendship with the Soviet Union. 1961 brings increasing
tension between East and West, however, with those who commute to West Ber-
lin, like Heidi's father, pressured to take whatever work, however poorly paid or
equipped, that East Berlin offers, and rumors abounding of plans to build a divi-
sion between West and East. Heidi's parents' plans for the family's escape to West
Berlin are thrown into confusion when Heidi's stepgrandfather dies; Heidi's father
and mother cross to the West with the intention that Heidi and her grandmother
will follow after the funeral, but the sudden erection of the new guarded fence (a
precursor to the wall) between the sides of the cities leaves Heidi and her grand-
mother with the challenge of making it to the West on their own. Many young
readers won't be familiar with the historical division of Germany and Berlin, and
Heidi's viewpoint effectively conveys the reality of life in an increasingly authori-
tarian East Berlin without foregoing common teen concerns of friends and fash-
ion; it's particularly authentic that Heidi thinks with angry satisfaction of how
sorry her estranged friend will be when Heidi's family has gone. The approach is
old-fashioned, however, with a main plot predictable from start to finish (the Nancy-
Drew-style cover is actually a fair representative), and the secondary plot strands,
especially that of Heidi's fear of water, are contrived and unnecessary; it's also too
bad there's no historical note or further reading for kids unfamiliar with the larger
Cold War picture. Nonetheless, the novel treats a dramatic time in history, and it
will enlighten contemporary youngsters about divisions of the past that may have
influenced their own family's experiences. DS
DE GUZMAN, MICHAEL 
Beekman's Big Deal. Farrar, 2004 
213p
ISBN 0-374-30672-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Beekman's dad, Leo, is always on the verge of the big one-the one deal that will
change their lives. Meanwhile, Beekman has to move from place to place, and
from school to school, most often because his father can't afford to keep paying
rent and tuition. Finally, Beekman has had it: he is determined that his new house
will be a permanent home, especially after he meets his rather eccentric set of neigh-
bors, who include a cross-dressing ex-boxer, a very pretty single woman just right
for his dad, and a fortune-telling grandmotherly type, Madame de Campo,.who
dresses all in purple. His new school has perils of its own, however, as Beekman
finds himself the victim of a bully, and the reluctant best friend of a strange boy
named Marcus who won't leave him alone. de Guzman creates an attractively
quirky character in Beekman, playing up his little-old-mannish ways and focusing
attention on the optimistic daily rituals that keep his father and him afloat through
their various difficulties. However, some ofBeekman's behavior seems more un-
motivated than merely quirky-for instance, his instant attraction to Marcus's
really nasty twin sister is as abruptly rendered as his instant dislike of Marcus, who
has to pester him into friendship. The odd lengths to which he goes to win her
JANUARY 2005 
* 
207
affections, which include dressing up as Emily Dickinson and reciting poetry to
her in front of her posh girls' school, seem a bit out of character for a kid who in
other circumstances has wanted nothing more than to keep his head down. The
all-around happy ending comes out of nowhere-both father and son get their
girls, and the neighborhood association votes to let them stay and pay for their
house when they can-but readers who have succumbed to Beekman's offbeat
charm will be gratified that all of his big deals come through. KC
DORROS, ARTHUR Julio's Magic; illus. by Ann Grifalconi. 
HarperCollins,
2005 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029005-6 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029004-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Julio and his elderly friend, Iluminado, love to carve wood into beautiful shapes.
Julio hopes to win the annual carving contest offered in the far-off city (probably
Oaxaca, Mexico, from hints in the book), but Iluminado, whose eyesight is failing
and whose farm is suffering from drought, needs the prize money more. Though
his own carvings this year are the best he's ever done, Julio puts aside his dream in
order to help his friend win the contest. There are plenty of good themes here-
teamwork, artistic value, altruism-and viewers will be intrigued by the young
boy's equal participation in the contest. Unfortunately, the story is overly pared
down, with the choppy sentences clipping through the events too quickly to gen-
erate much audience sympathy, so the climax loses much of its emotional signifi-
cance. The book offers plenty of visual interest, with eyecatching spot art of the
carvings and complex mixed-media collages that depend strongly on enhanced
photographs; the visuals are sometimes more dramatic than effective, however,
with compositions often confused and Julio's obscured face and the changing tints
of his clothing making him a challenge to find in some images. This may nonethe-
less whet viewer appetites for more information about Julio's carving, so it could
be a piquant introduction to Cohn's Dream Carver (BCCB 10/02) or other titles
on the art form. TC
DURBIN, WILLIAM 
The Darkest Evening. Orchard, 2004 
232p
ISBN 0-439-37307-7 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 7-9
Twelve-year-old Jake's Finnish immigrant family decides to join some of their
countrymen in leaving Depression-straitened Minnesota for the province of Karelia
in the Soviet Union, planning to build a brave new world based on the tenets of
Marxism. Once there, the family finds that their new government is even more
corrupt and slower to respond to its constituents than the old one in America.
Though other Finnish families move back to the United States, Jake's father re-
fuses to give up the dream, instead writing letter after letter to the authorities
pointing out inconsistencies in Soviet policy. The secret police deal with Jake's
father and Jake's older brother in the predictable way-a furtive raid and impris-
onment, followed by denials and misinformation-leaving Jake, now sixteen, to
lead his mother and sister over the mountains to Finland and freedom. While this
is a refreshingly new topic for a historical novel (most readers will be unfamiliar
with the history behind the story), it receives disappointingly superficial treat-
ment. Jake's character is not so much developed as added up from a selection of
whiny, overly prescient comments about the evils of socialism and a jumble of
208 
* 
THE BULLETIN
episodes involving the delights of baseball. The growth of all the characters over
the course of four years is imperceptible; even little sister Maija, who is twelve at
the end of the book, continues to act out and complain in the style of the eight-
year-old she was at the beginning. The terror of Stalin's purge is kept distant from
the family: when the trials of living under this brutal regime are mentioned, the
family's emotional reactions are either muted or nonexistent. Ultimately, the po-
tentially riveting story is mired in the heavy-handed anti-socialist message, leaving
this overwhelmed as an adventure story and unsuccessful as a historical explora-
tion. A historical note is appended. TC
DUVALL, DEBORAH L. 
Rabbit Goes Duck Hunting: A Traditional Cherokee Leg-
end; illus. by Murv Jacob. 
University of New Mexico, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-8263-3336-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
One summer morning, Rabbit, "whose name is Ji-Stu," and his friend, Otter,
discover a giant wood duck swimming with a host of smaller ducks in the river.
Otter catches a small duck, but Ji-Stu is determined to outdo his friend, so he
carries a grapevine noose underwater to snare the "Chief of All the Wood Ducks."
The Chief, understandably startled by being roped at the neck, takes flight, carry-
ing Ji-Stu away from the river and into the dangerous territory of the human vil-
lage. Luckily, Ji-Stu's ability as a trickster serves him well, and he returns unharmed
to his house in the broom-grass meadow. In this latest addition to the Duvall-
Jacob Grandmother Stories series, the sprightly prose builds vivid pictures that
draw the reader through the story world, albeit at a decorous pace. The woodcut-
styled, black-and-white pictures sport intricate borders and internal graining in
their quick glimpses into Ji-Stu's adventures. Unfortunately, their lines are clut-
tered and undifferentiated, making it a task for readers to extricate the featured
figures. This is still a useful offering of a rarely published trickster tale, and it will
provide storytelling opportunities with tradition-centered appeal. No source note
is given. TC
ELLIS, DEBORAH 
The Heaven Shop. 
Fitzhenry & Whiteside, 2004 
186p
ISBN 1-55041-908-0 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Between her role on the Malawi radio program "Gogo's Family," her status as
prefect in the private school she attends, and the work she does helping her father
make coffins for their family business, Binti is proud and satisfied with her life. All
that is taken away, however, when Binti's father dies of pneumonia and her grand-
mother reveals publicly that he had AIDS. Binti and her sister Junie are sent to
live with (or rather, work for) her uncle, while their brother Kwasi is sent to an-
other uncle. When the girls are accused of stealing, Junie takes off and tells Binti
to go to their grandmother, who, as it turns out, cares for a large group of AIDS
orphans. Binti finds a home there, but she also finds that her sense of self, predi-
cated as it was on all the ways that she felt special, slipping away. Slowly, she
begins to realize that useful is better than special, as she manages to bring her
family back together-finding Kwasi in prison and Junie living as a prostitute-
and reopen Heaven Shop Coffins in her new home. Stratton's Chandra's Secrets
(BCCB 10/04), is a more compelling account of the AIDS crisis in sub-Saharan
Africa: for the sake of a packed, swiftly moving plot, Ellis sacrifices atmospheric
detail about settings and customs and leaves characters and their motivations rather
undeveloped, all of which may lead to some bewilderment on the part of readers
JANUARY 2005 
* 209
new to the subject and the setting. An author's note and interview provide some
explanation and context, but they don't fully address the superstitions and cus-
toms that perpetuate the AIDS crisis in sub-Saharan Africa, some of which are
pertinent to, but remain unexplained in, the story itself. The children are admira-
bly resilient and stolidly pragmatic regarding their fate, however, and the message
that kids like these are the hope beyond the grim statistics may well spur readers to
seek out ways they can help. KC
FARRELL, MARY CRONK 
Fire in the Hole! Clarion, 2004 
170p
ISBN 0-618-44634-6 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In the year 1899, fourteen-year-old Mick Shea has grown enough to work in the
mines near his Idaho home with his father, but claustrophobia and the desire to
stay in school have so far kept him aboveground. Then Mick's father is implicated
in an act of vandalism against the mine's owners, who refuse to acknowledge the
demands of the local miners' union. The governor declares the area to be under
martial law and sends in African-American troops to collect the white miners in an
internment camp (with the idea that racial and cultural differences will prevent
fraternization between the guards and their prisoners). Though arbitrarily impris-
oned with his father, Mick escapes the camp and returns home to find his mother
dying; after the burial, Mick, his stalwart sister Birdie, and his little brother, Nat,
map out a plan to spring their father from the camp and hightail the whole family
over the mountains to Washington, where union miners are welcomed. The writ-
ing tends to be pedestrian, and the book strains credibility with the multitude of
events and with the rapidity with which Mick overcomes his claustrophobia in
order to work in the mines to support the family. Nonetheless, many of the catas-
trophes are historically justified, the high stakes of the story come through in the
characters' emotions and actions, and the reader is drawn into the fast-moving
stream of the tale. This swiftly paced story of physical and moral valor incorporat-
ing actual events may involve readers who enjoyed Hughes' Breaker Boys (BCCB
10/04) or other recent stories of the labor movement. TC
GILDERS, MICHELLE 
The Kids' Guide to Zoo Animals. 
Red Deer,
2004 
264p 
illus. with photographs
Papered. ISBN 0-88995-301-5 
$12.95 
R Gr. 3-8
The idea of a field guide to zoo animals may sound oxymoronic, but for many
young animal enthusiasts the zoo is their field for exploration. Gilders presents
some two hundred critters ("Using ISIS [International Species Information Sys-
tem] as a guide, species were selected that could be seen at most zoos") and ar-
ranges them in standard field guide order based on scientific classification. Each
entry includes classification, length, height, weight, lifespan, description, diet, habi-
tat, behavior, IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natu-
ral Resources) endangerment status, current threats, a range map, two color
photographs, and a sentence or two on a particular trait or curiosity. Introductory
materials elaborate helpfully on how measurements are figured and how to inter-
pret endangerment status, which cannot always be taken at face value. A lengthy
glossary and a common-name index should be boons to kids who tote the guide
with them on their zoo treks. Even if no outing is in the offing, fauna fans will
want to page through for their favorite exotica. EB
210 
* 
THE BULLETIN
GRANDITS, JOHN 
Technically, It's Not My Fault: Concrete Poems; written and
illus. by John Grandits. 
Clarion, 2004 
43p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-618-42833-X 
$15.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-618-50361-7 
$5.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
In this collection, two dozen short humorous pieces gain an extra dimension through
creative arrangement on the page. With occasional exceptions ("The Tower" is a
rant from Rapunzel's frustrated prince), the subjects are generally kid-relevant or
kid-voiced, ranging from the circularity of your basic schoolday ("My Stupid Day")
through a basketball exploit ("The Lay-Up") to late-night conversations with vis-
iting relatives ("Sleepover Conversation"); there's a particular emphasis on the earthy
in verses such as "The Autobiography of Murray the Fart" and "Spew Machine."
Most of these are more prose than poem, despite the patterning (which not all
entries sport-some are merely intertwined with the illustrations, and some are
simply conceptually, rather than visually, piquant), and the language is fairly pe-
destrian, but the ideas are well pitched to a youthful readership. The design
(Grandits is a professional print designer) is key here, of course, and the dichro-
matic color scheme (black and red, creatively employed) effectively emphasizes the
linear movement of the text on the page; playful layouts will particularly entice
reluctant readers, who will also be reassured by the brevity of the entries and the
generous spacing. While this isn't up to the standard of Janeczko's collection A
Poke in the I(BCCB 6/01), it'll suit kids looking for a quick, funny, and painlessly
poetic read. DS
HAYCAK, CARA 
RedPalms. 
Lamb, 2004 
327p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90883-0 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74648-2 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Impoverished by the Great Depression, Benita's family moves from their mansion
in Guayaquil, Ecuador, to Pafta, a tiny island off the coast. Here Benita's Leba-
nese father attempts to establish a coconut plantation by exploiting the good will
and strong backs of the indigenous people. Here, too, Benita becomes infatuated
with a well-muscled local, Rail, and runs away with him to experience sex and
freedom on the other side of the island. Unfortunately, Radl turns out to be just as
controlling and narrow-minded as her father, so when he is immobilized by a
wound from a jungle cat, Benita takes advantage of her new liberty to make friends
with an enigmatic old woman living in a hut nearby. Through her association
with her new friend and her growing embrace of the native woman's animist reli-
gion, Benita finds the strength and the wisdom to heal Raul, her father, and her-
self. With her self-centered short-sightedness and unthinking adoration of her
father and Rail, Benita is a thoroughly believable spoiled fourteen-year-old girl.
Her growth to independent womanhood over the course of a year is well sup-
ported with events and details, as are the character developments of Raul and her
parents (her brothers, however, suddenly become young men in the four months
she's away with Rail). The author's deceptively straightforward prose manages to
blend dreams, visions, and reality to achieve a multidimensional mix of cultures
and spiritualities within which Benita's perspective slowly shifts from male to fe-
male authority without spotlighting the process. Even the central image of red
palms is subtle as it marks every major turning point in Benita's life on the island.
A surprisingly persuasive exploration of an alternative paradigm, Benita's unusual,
sensation-filled bildungsroman will attract readers from a wide variety of back-
grounds. TC
JANUARY 2005 
* 211
HAYES, JOE La Llorona: The Weeping Woman; illus. by Vicki Trego Hill and
Mona Pennypacker. 
Cinco Puntos, 2004 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-938317-86-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
The traditional Latino story of a cast-off wife who drowns her children, dies of
grief, and spends each night thereafter stalking the riverbank as a wailing ghost
finds corporeality in this bilingual picture book. Hayes' sentences are compact but
evocative; he limits the ghostly effects, making this telling more suitable for timid
youngsters than creepier versions, but there's still plenty of pathos in the drama.
Each page tells the story in English and Spanish, the English paragraphs leading,
and the languages read in close parallel; appropriate figures of speech are used in
each version, widening the potential audience and opening doors to cross-cultural
sharing as the differences in word choice are noted by readers and listeners. While
there's occasionally awkward drafting in the line-and-watercolor illustrations, some
graceful compositions stand out (most notably the lemon and violet spread of the
protagonist at the river) and the stipple and hatch textures lend a subtle patina.
For such a widely told folktale, this story is rarely published in picture-book form,
and this is a solid and effective retelling that will resonate strongly with children
who have heard the story at home and serve as an evocative introduction for young-
sters unfamiliar with the legendary weeping ghost. A brief overview of the His-
panic storytelling tradition introduces the tale; the last page answers the question
"Is the story really true?"; and a three-paragraph "Note to Readers and Storytell-
ers" gives background information. TC
HOLMES, VICTORIA 
Rider in the Dark: An Epic Horse Story. 
HarperCollins,
2004 
305p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-052026-4 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-052025-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Helena Roseby is the daughter of a prominent West Country family in Georgian
England, and she shares her father's pleasure in fine horses, riding out as often as
she can with her friend, the stableboy Jamie. When a beautiful new stallion ar-
rives, Helena longs to ride him, despite his unpredictable behavior. As she secretly
attempts to gentle the new horse, she discovers a bigger secret: her friends and
neighbors are engaged in the common West Country pursuit of receiving shiploads
of smuggled goods, and they're in increasing danger of capture and prosecution.
This is a historical romance rather than historical fiction, with Helena's sensibili-
ties largely those of a contemporary young girl transplanted to the eighteenth cen-
tury; the horse-training plot sometimes fails to convince (the actions that get the
stallion labeled as dangerous seem mildly bumptious at worst), and its detailed
(and sometimes anachronistic) treatment tends to slow and undercut the more
glamorous adventure story. There is still plenty of charm here, with atmospheric
lashings of thundering hooves, nocturnal chases, sinister authoritarian figures, and
luxurious historical costumes. The horsey elements, both the training chronicles
and the time-honored theme of the daring girl who rides the untamed stallion,
should draw young equestrians, and readers in general will relish the subversive
pleasures of being on the side of the smugglers (which are differentiated from the
murderous wreckers) and the opportunity to experience entry-level gothic on the
way to Daphne du Maurier. DS
212 
* THE BULLETIN
HORNING, SANDRA 
The Giant Hug; illus. by Valeri Gorbachev. 
Knopf,
2005 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92477-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82477-4 
$15.95 
R 4-6 yrs
Owen, a bristle-covered piglet with pop-eyes and delicate little trotters, decides to
send his grandmother "a GIANT hug" through the mail for her birthday. To do
this, he gives the postmaster a hug to pass on along with his salutatory letter to
Granny. Postal worker after postal worker is hugged and in turn hugs the next in
line, spreading bliss (and in one case, romance) throughout the ranks. Cross-
hatching and striation provide structure and depth to the watercolor illustrations,
giving each animal character textured dimensionality as well as a charismatic per-
sonality. The breezy text, mostly polite but friendly conversation, develops the
characters' motivations and extends the small-town feeling of the story in which
no one is offended and everyone's day is made brighter by the sharing of Owen's
hug-and, on the way back, Granny's "big, wet kiss" for Owen. Schools (and
postal workers) with "no touching" policies had better watch out; after experienc-
ing this love-fest, ebullient young piglets will be hard to hold back. TC
HOROWITZ, RUTH 
Big Surprise in the Bug Tank; illus. by Joan Holub. 
Dial,
2005 
(Dial Easy-to-Read) 
48p
ISBN 0-8037-2874-3 
$14.99 
R* Gr. 1-3
Breakout in the Bug Lab (BCCB 7/01) introduced readers to the narrator and his
brother, Leo, and their entomologist mother. In this new outing, the boys wheedle
their mother into letting them have an adorable pair of giant hissing cockroaches
as pets, but the pair soon turns into a family with the threat of more to come.
Much to their surprise, the brothers have difficulty finding welcoming homes for
the cockroach offspring, and they begin to wonder if they're ever going to solve the
problem of cockroach population explosion. The easy-reading story uses its pared-
down vocabulary cleverly, and running jokes, recurring refrains, and imaginative
scenes make this into a witty and well-crafted story even apart from its piquant
buggy subject. Horowitz (herself locally, and one hopes affectionately, known as
"The Cockroach Lady") portrays the cockroaches with a full understanding of
their magnetism to kids ("Our pets are so cool," says Leo, "grown-ups will not
touch them") and the revulsion they inspire in most adults, giving the book an
additional delicious frisson. Holub's illustrations are strong on verdant greens,
energetic aquas, and warm ochres, playing off contrasts in every scene and
overstuffing the ragged-edge vignettes with roundly three-dimensional figures and
exaggeratedly expressive faces (sometimes on the cockroaches as well as the kids).
Use this to spice up a biology unit, or just to provide a bracing alternative to
emerging readers bored by cuddly protagonists. DS
JAMES, SIMON 
Baby Brains; written and illus. by Simon James. 
Candlewick,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-2507-8 
$15.99 
R* 4-7 yrs
"Be careful what you wish for" seems to be the best advice for Mr. and Mrs. Brains.
Desirous that their baby will be very smart, they take great pains, before Baby
Brains is born, to read him stories, play music and language tapes to him on
wombphones, and turn the news up loud so that he can hear from inside Mommy's
tummy. Sure enough, the day after his birth finds Baby Brains reading the news-
JANUARY 2005 
* 
213
paper, fixing the car, and asking to go to school. After he finishes medical school,
Baby Brains' fame elicits a call from some space scientists, who want Baby Brains
to go on a mission. The vast reaches of space prove too much for the little dear,
however, and he wails, "I want my mommy!"-much to the relief of Mrs. Brains,
whose facial expressions throughout have revealed her comic distress over her pre-
cocious child's independence and ever-widening career. She demands his return,
and an embarrassed baby (note the fiery blush on his pudgy cheeks) is soon re-
stored to his parents and the world of proper babyhood, though he doesn't quite
give up his career in medicine. Simon's mild satire pokes such gentle fun at clever
babies and their anxious parents that there is no harsh edge to this deliciously
absurd comedy. His large-nosed, mussed-hair adults contrast hilariously with the
diminutive tonsorial splendor of Baby Brains, whose portrayal alternately in
jammies, lab coat, space suit, and diapers provides visual humor. The incongruity
of a diapered baby making arrangements on a cell phone for his first space flight
and undergoing a stress test will elicit giggles from young and old alike, who will
likewise be touched by Baby Brain's plaintive call for Mommy from outer space.
This is sure to be an all-around crowd-pleaser. KC
JOOSSE, BARBARA 
Nikolai, the Only Bear; illus. by Renata Liwska. Philomel,
2005 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-399-23884-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Nikolai is one of one hundred orphans in a Russian orphanage, but he is the only
bear. No one there understands his bearishness, which makes him claw the air
instead of waving goodbye and growl instead of singing. The couple who travel
from the United States to adopt Nikolai possess qualities that immediately attract
the little bear: the man has a furry face, and the woman is the only person who
responds to the bear's gruff greeting in kind. By the time the couple suggests to
Nikolai that they would like to take him home with them, he feels so united to
them already that translation of their proposal from English to Russian (or even to
Bear) is unnecessary. The story is somewhat sentimental and the message pointed;
Nikolai's family-finding experience is largely an optimistic fantasy, albeit an ap-
pealing one. Aquas, tans, oranges, and browns layered over sepia backgrounds
create an institutional atmosphere full of thick-limbed humans with large, round
heads, their uniformity underscoring Nikolai's uniqueness. The bleakness of the
palette makes Nikolai's opportunity to leave with the American couple seem par-
ticularly enticing. Nonetheless, this is a gentle, engaging fantasy inhabited by a
lovable little bear whose doubts and concerns make the predictable train of events
seem desirable. An interesting balance might be achieved by combining this book
with the more lively adoption story found in Chen's Guji Guji (BCCB 9/04). TC
KELLER, 
HOLLY 
Pearl's New Skates; written and illus. by Holly
Keller. 
Greenwillow, 2005 
[24p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-056281-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-056280-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Little rabbit Pearl gets a pair of shiny new ice skates for her birthday-real, grownup
skates with a single blade each, not "double runners." Pleased and proud, Pearl
parades down to the pond to show off. Unfortunately, the single blades are hard
214 
* THE BULLETIN
to manage, and Pearl and her pomposity "hit the ice with a thump." After the
beloved skates are tugged off and rejected, Pearl goes home to mope, until kind
Uncle Jack wheedles her into sneaking off to the pond early in the morning to
practice skating in private so she can learn to stay upright. The concise prose,
arranged in short lines with ragged right edges, reads with understated humor and
conveys just the right amount of information to characterize Pearl and her family
and friends. The rabbits' simplified features, with eloquent, rose-tipped ears and
subtle, sketched-in faces, make each character distinct via her or his expressively
conveyed emotions and reactions, and the deemphasized backgrounds center the
viewer's attention on the action. Many young listeners will be happy to sit down
for a quick readaloud with the classic appeal of birthday surprises and skills mas-
tery. TC
KERR, P. B. 
The Akhenaten Adventure. Orchard, 2004 
355p
ISBN 0-439-67019-5 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old twins Philippa and John make a good team, whether they're win-
ning at Pictionary or saving seventy lost genies from being coopted by the forces of
Evil (i.e., malevolent djinn). That second achievement becomes possible after the
twins come into their full power as high-ranking djinn (upon the appearance and
extraction of their wisdom teeth), an event their quiet-living parents (one human,
one genie) find overwhelming. Enter swanky Uncle Nimrod, a mysterious, cigar-
puffing egotist with a one-armed English butler and a taste for luxurious living,
who teaches the twins how to use their power and leads them on an international
quest to locate and rescue a whole mess of djinn imprisoned in an ancient Egyp-
tian artifact. The plot is as thin as a mummy's shroud, but Philippa's braininess
and John's affection for vehicles make the twins distinct from each other without
caricaturing them, and the fact that these two very ordinary children are the point
of entry for the reader makes the other, highly theatrical characters even more
entertaining. Nimrod's opinionated commentary elicits snickers throughout the
story, his hoity-toity perspective-and, by extension, that of the magical tribe he
represents-nicely contrasted by the sulky muttering of his butler (who has spent
years trying to choose his third wish). With such quirky and sardonic expedition-
mates, readers will jump aboard just for the fun of it. TC
MARRIN, ALBERT 
Old Hickory: AndrewJackson and theAmerican People. 
Dutton,
2004 
262p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-47293-2 
$30.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Marrin has established a glowing track record for evenhanded, compassionate treat-
ment of complex figures in American history (e.g., U. S. Grant in Unconditional
Surrender, BCCB 3/94), and certainly the seventh United States president should
fall within his forte. Ruthless Indian fighter, unapologetic slaveholder, and hot-
headed duelist-and most shockingly, an outspoken advocate of the common sense
of the common man-Jackson was a jolt to the antebellum capital even as he
pointed the way toward an executive style far more "modern" than that of the
founders. Marrin capably conveys how startling Jackson must have appeared to
his Washington, D.C. contemporaries-the scandal involving his irregular nup-
tials to his beloved wife, Rachel, his tendency to take the opinions of the unlanded
very seriously, his antagonism toward the federal banking system, and his applecart-
tipping policy of replacing office holders who thought they were set for life. The
JANUARY 2005 
* 215
dense text, however, is fraught with long stretches of background information that
often derail momentum, and punctuated by leaden segues and pedantic asides. In
what is probably a "slip of the lip," the book reverses the correct meaning of the
Constitution: "Under the 'three-fifths clause,' three slaves counted as five people
in deciding the number of seats a state had in the House of Representatives, which
was based on population." While careful sourcing, index, and illustrations will
make this title useful to students of Old Hickory, readers who enjoy rousing politi-
cal biographies will be better served by Marrin's Civil War works on Grant and
Lee. EB
MARTIN, ANN M. 
Here Today. 
Scholastic, 2004 
30 8p
ISBN 0-439-57944-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Ellie's mother, Doris, tries valiantly to realize her dreams of stardom in the little
town of Spectacle, New York in 1963-she auditions for TV spots, persuades
department stores to hold fashion shows so she can model, and even convinces the
chamber of commerce that they need to host a festival so that she can be crowned
Harvest Queen. Ellie senses, rightly, that these dreams will pull Doris away from
her, her overworked father, her sullen brother, and her sweetly hopeful little sister.
Kennedy's assassination proves the catalyst that prompts Doris to move out, as she
realizes that life is too short and unpredictable to stay where you're unhappy.
Meanwhile, Ellie struggles with the problems of living in a neighborhood of cul-
turally ostracized characters-the only Jewish people in town, a pair of middle-
aged lesbians, a poor French-American family, and her best friend, Holly, born to
a teenaged mother who's never married. Martin convincingly realizes the complex
emotions of Ellie's situation; Ellie emerges as a strongly maternal advocate for the
little kids in the neighborhood but retains her vulnerability with her elders. At
first, she displays classic enabling behavior with Doris, trying to persuade her to
stay by offering to help more around the house and biting her tongue when she
thinks of criticizing her mother's dreams. Soon she realizes what the reader al-
ready knows-that her mother has never been interested in parenting, and that, as
her grandfather points out, while her mother might not be too big for her town,
her town is always going to be too small for her. Martin further nuances the story
through the presence of "the ladies," who are plagued by acts of vandalism yet
provide the most consistently nurturing presences in the neighborhood. Despite
the book's considerable length, the plot is eventful enough and the atmosphere
sufficiently fully rendered to keep the reader invested in Ellie's world and fate. KC
MASON, SIMON 
The Quigleys Notfor Sale; illus. by Helen Stephens. 
Fickling,
2004 
164p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75047-1 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75043-9 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-4
The Quigleys (from The Quigleys, BCCB 9/02, and The Quigleys at Large, 12/03)
lead an ordinary family life, but Mason's gift lies in a focus on the particularities
that illustrate the glorious absurdity of daily existence. As usual, he offers four
chapters, each tied loosely to a different family member: nine-year-old Will even-
tually acquits himself with charm during a special stay at a hotel, little Lucy pur-
sues a plan to bring some extra money into the family's straitened budget, the
family goes for a walk on Mother's Day, and Dad decides it's time to sell the family
house. The simple prose is carefully honed to allow for the comedy of youthful
216 
* THE BULLETIN
perspective (Will and Lucy are horrified to discover naked grownups in the hotel
sauna) and of quotidian details ("Best of all, you could make yourself heard any-
where in the house without having to get off the toilet"), and the book deftly
recreates the loopiness of family life under close examination, with strange nick-
names, kids' friends' spontaneous appearances, and queries such as "You've been
doing pictures of cows on people for money, haven't you?" utterly unremarkable
in context. Those who've already embraced the Quigleys, as a readaloud or reada-
lone pleasure, won't be disappointed by this new yet warmly familiar outing.
Stephens' jauntily scrawled illustrations are scattered thickly throughout, adding
to the book's open friendliness. DS
MAZErTI, KATARINA 
God and I Broke Up; tr. by Maria Lundin. 
Groundwood,
2004 
160p
ISBN 0-88899-584-9 
$15.95 
R Gr. 9-12
Linnea knows she generally has a good life ("My God, I had so much to not com-
plain about! I was scrubbed and well-fed and Swedish and educated"), but she's
still feeling lonely and isolated in her teenage years until she meets Pia. Unselfcon-
scious, quirky Pia, who gleefully drives boys crazy, becomes Linnea's soulmate and
safety valve, especially as Linnea's family undergoes upheaval; Linnea's absorption
in her own issues, however, makes her blind to Pia's pain, and now she's trying to
pull herself together following Pia's suicide. Though the snapshot-like retrospec-
tive vignettes of this Swedish import make it a little difficult to get involved with
Linnea's life, the book is otherwise sharp and effective. Linnea's voice is touched
with grief and bitterness, but the narration is also steeped in wry and perceptive
wit that speaks to the young adult experience ("I do remember thinking, I'm sit-
ting here wanting to learn things and they're up there wanting to teach things. It's
weird how we hardly ever connect"). The book departs from novelistic conven-
tion by leaving Pia's reasons for suicide unknown even to her dearest friend (there's
a suggestion that a man and perhaps even a pregnancy are involved, but there's
nothing conclusive), which adds a sad realism while also keeping the focus on
Linnea's regrets rather than Pia's downward spiral; Pia's death effectively locks
Linnea out forever from her friend's story. Readers relying on or struggling with
their own important friendships will appreciate the book's keen understanding of
both the significance of personal bonds and the difficulty in connecting with those
you love. DS
McDONALD, JANET 
Brother Hood. Foster/Farrar, 2004 
16 6p
ISBN 0-374-30995-7 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
At the prestigious Fletcher School, sponsored by a university program that targets
promising urban public school students, Nate Whitely is a blazer-clad lacrosse star
who struggles with French vocabulary; on 125th street in Harlem, he's Schoolie, a
dude in a red leather bomber and a white do-rag, hitting the strip with his homeboy,
Hustle. Nate's private-school success wears on his underachieving brother, Eli,
but Nate gets along well at Fletcher even while maintaining close ties with his
former friends, despite the fact that Hustle has developed a thriving criminal lifestyle.
When both Eli and Hustle get into trouble, Nate falters at first, but he ultimately
stands by his desire to avoid "getting tripped up and trapped down by street-thug
madness that lands you in jail." McDonald's keen ear for dialect really shines
when she addresses intraracial issues, as she does when Nate becomes interested in
Willa, a wealthy black girl at Fletcher. Nate is put off by Willa's parents' open
JANUARY 2005 
* 217
snobbery, just as Willa is offended by Hustle's lascivious come-ons when Nate
takes her to Harlem. Jeannette, another scholarship student at Fletcher, ably explains
the problem ofhomeboys: with no role models, they have nothing to offer a girl in
the long run, and since "they can't hold us ... they just wanna roll us." Willa
doesn't buy that any more than Nate buys Eli's excuses; their shared integrity on
these separate issues gives depth to their relationship. In her previous offerings
about life in the 'hood (Chill Wind, BCCB 1/03, Spellbound, 10/01), McDonald
slips into rather unrealistic Cinderella scenarios; here, she stays within the realm of
the grittily plausible, with Nate and Jeannette believably code-switching between
their prep school and project personas. Less poignant and more buoyant than
Walter Dean Myers' The Beast (BCCB 1/04), Nate's story affirms and celebrates
life in a changing but still-challenging Harlem. KC
McKEE, DAVID 
The Conquerors; written and illus. by David McKee. 
Handprint,
2004 
32p
ISBN 1-59354-078-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Pink-cheeked, bell-shaped soldiers in martial red and blue goose-step forth to con-
quer neighboring countries at the behest of their General: "'It's for their own
good,' he said, 'So they can be like us.'" The General's desire for sameness per-
vades his own country as well, where everyone looks and dresses alike-blond-
haired women and girls in pink frocks, and boys and civilian men in inverted
soldier costumes, with red hats and blue tunics as opposed to the blue hats and red
jackets of their heroes in arms. Finally, there is only one little country left to
conquer. The General invades but meets with kindness rather than resistance, and
soon his soldiers are enjoying the hospitality of the land and helping out with
chores. This infuriates the General, who calls in replacement troops, only to have
them assimilate as well. Realizing that these people pose no threat, he leaves a
small unit to occupy the land. They immediately divest themselves of their solider
garb and demeanor and take up the customs and work of their new home. Mean-
while, back at the General's country, small changes are taking place; the food,
games, and clothing (which includes burkas for the women, which the blond women
do not adopt) of the little country-the "spoils of war," as the General sees them-
have begun quietly to disrupt the sameness of his land, and when the General sings
to his son at night he himself sings the songs of the little country. The ending is
rather abrupt and subtle, if not ambiguous: The General, perched on his son's bed
in full military regalia, never seems to realize that the "little country he had con-
quered" has really conquered him. Like many picture-book fables (such as Dr.
Seuss' Butter Battle Book), this is somewhat dogmatic, and its implications will be
more readily grasped by adults. Nonetheless, the theme of military vs. nonviolent
cultural transfer is an unusual one that goes beyond the usual simple advocacy of
peace. As a result, there is much fodder for discussion here; with the world scene
as it is, such discussion couldn't be more timely. KC
McKISSACK, PATRICIA C. 
Precious and the Boo Hag; written by Patricia C.
McKissack and Onawumi Jean Moss; illus. by Kyrsten Brooker. 
Schwartz/Ath-
eneum, 2005 
40p
ISBN 0-689-85194-4 
$16.95 
R 4-6 yrs
When Precious stays home alone with a stomachache, Brother warns her not to let
anyone in the house, "'cause if you let somebody in, you never know. It just might
218 
* THE BULLETIN
be Pruella the Boo Hag." Sure enough, while the rest of the family is at work in
the fields, the Boo Hag lays siege to the house with tricks and disguises designed to
get herself invited indoors. Luckily, Precious uses her own quick mind and the
folk wisdom passed on by her brother to keep herself safe from this frightening
shape-shifter. Mixed-media illustrations spotlight the action of the story, their
bowed lines and angles imbued with kinetic energy and textured dimensionality
that makes the inner world of the story seem bigger than the spread of the pages
that represent it. The refrain used by Precious to shore up her courage is placed
within the illustrations rather than the text, drawing the images and words closer
together and providing young listeners with something to shout to chase away
their own fear. The prose is nicely vernacular without being stereotypical, and it
has a conversational rhythm that lends itself to being read aloud with flair. Read-
ers aloud may want to condense the text-heavy opening for squirmier crowds, but
the action quickly gets exciting, making the tale thrilling enough to keep an audi-
ence fully engaged. The final spread suggests that Precious will have to outwit the
Boo Hag many more times before this battle is won, leaving listeners with a deli-
ciously sinister chill (though one does wonder: will Precious ever be able to leave
the house?). The story is set in harvest time, but the implication of an ongoing
conflict between child and hag will have youngsters requesting the tale throughout
the year, and Precious is an admirable companion to McKissack's clever Flossie
(from Flossie and the Fox, BCCB 9/86). TC
MCNAUGHTON, JANET 
The Secret under My Skin. 
Eos/HarperCollins,
2005 
[272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-008990-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-008989-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
In the twenty-third century, children without parents and with a low Use-Rating
are lucky to have a roof, a bed, and food to eat-many of their unlucky peers have
nightmarish lives or have even been killed by government-sponsored Death Squads.
When visitors to her workhouse identify Blay Raytree from her library records as a
good reader who can help tutor Marrella, the new bio-indicator (a young woman
holding a ceremonial position carried over from the Dark Times, when pollution
eroded the ozone layer and people with allergic sensitivities were used to determine
safe environments), former street waif Blay moves to the residence of the Master of
the Way, a religious leader with considerable influence. Marrella pushes the bur-
den of studying onto Blay, who blossoms as she educates herself about the world
around her. As Blay's identity and the fate of her parents are discovered bit by bit,
the political structure of the society she lives in becomes increasingly unstable,
these tensions culminating in a near-bloodless revolution and a reversal of Blay's
status. Blay's world is well-developed through physical detail, action, and inciden-
tal explanation. Her first-person narration becomes more sophisticated almost
imperceptibly as her understanding of herself and the world alters, creating a satis-
fyingly unified narrative. Though the military's willing involvement in the revolu-
tion and modest recusal from political authority are a bit hard to swallow, the
otherwise robust tale offers an intriguing exploration of ideas of social justice, be-
longing, and ecological responsibility, as well as a sympathetic protagonist on an
emotionally rewarding internal journey. Readers ofdystopic fiction will find this
novel's optimistic vision of social and personal recovery both refreshing and in-
triguing. TC
JANUARY 2005 
* 219
MCWHORTER, DIANE 
A Dream ofFreedom: The Civil Rights Movementfrom 1954
to 1968. Scholastic, 2004 
160p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-439-57678-4 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
From Brown v. Board to the assassinations of Dr. King and Senator Kennedy,
McWhorter traces the decade of upheaval in which African Americans' rights as
citizens were legally recognized, even if not fully enforced. An early chapter sup-
plies some cursory background on Constitutional interpretations that led to the
passage, and finally the downfall, of the "separate but equal" doctrine, then the
text shifts to a close examination of landmark events in eleven pivotal years. Cer-
tainly most readers will have encountered much of this information in hit-and-
miss fashion, but McWhorter limns the trajectory of these episodes and discusses
not only societal obstacles to desegregation but also the tensions within the move-
ment itself that often imposed additional stumbling blocks. McWhorter respects
the movers and shakers enough to portray them as complex human beings rather
than ossified icons, and readers accustomed to envision the civil-rights heroes with
halos attached will, for instance, see Rosa Parks as a wily strategist and Martin
Luther King as a man who was often not the leader, but the led. Growing up as a
member of the white middle class of Birmingham in these critical years-and know-
ing her father actively opposed integration-informs McWhorter's view of the
era, and although the title is neither apologetic nor confessional, she does offer
insight into how respectable white citizens of South and North rationalized their
efforts to relegate blacks to second-class citizenship. The density of the double-
columned text is mitigated by slightly oversized font, a wealth of black-and-white
photographs, and relentless pacing. A bibliography, an index, and a list for further
reading are included. EB
McWILLIAMS, KELLY 
Doormat. Delacorte, 2004 
131p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90204-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73168-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Jaime is a self-proclaimed doormat-the supporting actress to her glamorous friend
Melissa's leading role. When Melissa suspects she's pregnant, Jaime begins to
question her usual habit of taking on Melissa's drama, but in typical doormat
fashion she's drawn in, buying the pregnancy test and worrying over Melissa's fate.
When her and Melissa's fears are confirmed, Jaime waffles even more; after all, this
is Melissa's problem, and her moodiness and refusal to tell Jaime who the father is
makes Jaime wonder just what it means to be a friend to this girl. Enter Zach, who
becomes part of their secret when he overhears a private conversation. As Jaime
starts to crush on Zach, and as she develops her own star qualities as the lead in the
school play, she learns to separate her emotions from her friend's and begins to
tackle some important issues that she's been putting off, like confronting the fa-
ther who abandoned her and homing in on her dreams for her future as a play-
wright. At times, McWilliams has a fresh, winning voice, but her narration is
inconsistent, moving between world-weary proclamations and winsome teenspeak,
with an occasional direct address to the reader. Her secondary characters seem
rather thin and insubstantial; it's as if their seemingly capricious actions could
have plausible motivations, but we aren't privy to what those might be. The plot,
then, like a slice of high school life, limps along rather haphazardly, with all messes
tidily resolved without too much drama (even Melissa's dreaded revelation to her
parents went relatively smoothly, and mother and baby are doing nicely). Funny-
220 
* THE BULLETIN
that's the way it happens most of the time, and readers who understand and appre-
ciate that will find a friend in Jaime. KC
MILLS, CLAUDIA 
Makeovers by Marcia. Farrar, 2005 
[160p]
ISBN 0-374-34654-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Marcia is determined that eighth grade will be the time Alex Ryan finally asks her
out (specifically, asks her to the October dance), so she's using all the boy-catching
tricks she knows to ensure his interest. When her social studies class requires her
to volunteer at a nursing home, she hopes the fact that Alex is also volunteering
there will make the dreaded assignment more bearable. She's surprised to dis-
cover, after an uneasy start, that she enjoys the company of some of the old ladies
at the nursing home, and that some of her greatest pleasures in life-matchmaking
and applying cosmetics-delight her new acquaintances as well. Mills has been
following this group of fictional kids for several books now (starting with Losers,
Inc., BCCB 4/97), and she manages to develop the interpersonal dynamics in a
way recurrent readers will appreciate while still including enough single-volume
focus for new fans. As the boy-crazy popular girl perennially concerned with ap-
pearance, Marcia could have been written off as shallow or been treated to stern
authorial reproof, but the book gently gives Marcia a chance to expand her view-
point (her talent for art provides her with a way to demonstrate the change in the
way she sees people); more significantly, it doesn't devalue Marcia's pleasures, in-
stead putting her interest in romance and self-presentation in a larger context.
Marcia's focus also amiably overlaps with much of the currently popular chick-lit
titles, so this will suit girls keen on the lip gloss and flirtation but looking for a bit
more thought behind them. DS
MITCHELL, ELIZABETH Journey to the Bottomless Pit: The Story of Stephen Bishop
SMammoth Cave; illus. by Kelynn Alder. 
Viking, 2004 
99p
ISBN 0-670-05908-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
The nineteenth century's appetite for spectacle meant that tourist traffic to natural
wonders could be big business, and that's what happened with Kentucky's Mam-
moth Cave. One of the cave's biggest selling points was its guide, Stephen Bishop,
a slave owned, like the cave itself, by lawyer Franklin Gorin (ownership of the
facility and slaves was later transferred to a Scottish doctor). Seventeen when he
began guiding in 1838, Bishop reveled in his unusual job, developing an excellent
rapport with his variety of clients, expanding the exploration of the cave consider-
ably, and mapping its new frontiers until his death in 1857. This is an intriguing
story, but the writing is unfortunately plodding and often choppy, with general
information about slavery awkwardly shoehorned in at odd intervals; the text some-
times glosses over complicated issues, such as client appreciation of Bishop's hu-
mor. The bland fictionalized dialogue recalls the bad old days of old-fashioned
series biography, and the absence of any source information raises questions about
the representation of Bishop's viewpoints and opinions. Many readers will be
surprised by Bishop's unusual life, however, and there's appeal in the tense danger
of his exploratory spelunking as well as in his departure from usual images of en-
slaved African Americans. Alder's moody charcoal illustrations suffer occasionally
from cavelike darkness, but they provide some haunting portraits; it's too bad
there are no photographic images of the cave itself, though a map, apparently a
JANUARY 2005 
* 221
reproduction of Bishop's own, appears on the endpapers. There is a brief timeline,
but no index. DS
MLYNOWSKI, SARAH 
Bras and Broomsticks. 
Delacorte, 2005 
[30 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90218-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73181-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Though she refuses to realize it, Rachel has been ditched by her best friend, Jewel,
who has joined the popular A-list crowd as a result of being chosen as a dancer in
the annual high-school fashion show/dance concert. A new friend, Tammy, faith-
fully stands by Rachel, willing even to forgo the Spring Fling to attend Rachel's
father's wedding to STB (short for Soon-To-Be-Wicked-Stepmother). Rachel, on
the other hand, isn't willing to give up on making the A-list herself-or to accept
her father's upcoming second marriage. Help arrives in the form of her twelve-
year-old sister, Miri, and Miri's newly discovered magical powers. Via a series of
food-based spells, Rachel endows herself with dancing talent, enabling her to join
the dance team and launch her social career, and she also masterminds a plot to
dismantle her father's relationship with STB, thus freeing up that Saturday night
for a triumphant promenade with the gorgeous Rafat the Spring Fling dance. The
tone is gleefully hammy throughout, underscoring Rachel's strong emotions and
providing context for the reader's acceptance of the over-the-top train of events.
However, Rachel's hyperbolic first-person commentary both disguises and reveals
her basic niceness and innate intellect, with her scatterbrained patter endearing
and genuinely funny, but through her observations all the primary (and several of
the secondary) characters develop gradually into realistic personalities that chal-
lenge Rachel and Miri's attempts to manipulate them by magic. As the first in a
series, the novel is a bewitching lure for fans of chick lit looking for supernatural
twists on the theme of girl-meets-world. TC
MORRIS, JENNIFER 
Come, Llamas. Delacorte, 2005 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90229-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73197-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Nine-year-old JT Kinnaman is taking his first steps toward becoming a fully fledged
partner on his family's ranch, but taking care of business on a llama ranch in
Alaska can be both dangerous and difficult. JT and his family must cope with a
rogue bear attack that scatters the llama herds over miles of wilderness, while at the
same time his beloved grandfather, with whom he shares a bedroom, succumbs to
his persistent heart trouble. Now bereft of Grandad's emotional support, JT must
take on many of the responsibilities of an adult while his family is handicapped by
their grief. Unassuming prose that effortlessly carries multiple layers of informa-
tion distinguishes this sensitive yet vigorous portrait of a young boy's struggle to
define himself in relation to his family. JT's thoughts and feelings will resonate
with young readers as he first refuses to recognize his impending losses (JT's or-
phaned two-week-old llama, savaged by the bear, also hovers between life and
death) and then reinterprets events to create hope for himself and a new under-
standing of his role on the ranch. JT's world is furnished with local attitudes and
customs as well as images of Alaskan terrain, providing the story with a sense of
concrete reality that balances the emotional impact of the various crises. The
222 
* THE BULETIN
unusual location and the dangerous edges of JT's Alaskan existence will attract
survival-story fans, while the high profile of the llamas will entice animal story
readers; both audiences will be ultimately be hooked by the quality of the writing.
TC
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
Bound. Atheneum, 2004 
186p
ISBN 0-689-86175-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
In this Chinese Cinderella story, Xing Xing believes her dead mother has returned
as a beautiful carp in the family pond. When her stepmother abuses her, Xing
Xing goes to the carp for comfort, and when Xing Xing confronts danger during a
brief journey, she sees the carp in waterways nearby and draws courage from the
sight. However, even a reincarnated mother cannot save Xing Xing from the mal-
ice of her stepmother-only the girl's own ingenuity and strength can do that. A
retelling of one of the oldest tale types, this deftly written novel creates a unified set
of folklife rhythms and nuances and makes them accessible to the modern reader.
Xing Xing is a dutiful, honorable daughter who does not think to question most of
the customs that bind her to her fate; even when she speaks out for her own welfare
in the final scene, her bid for freedom is a moderate one, limited by the opportuni-
ties given women in her world. However, her bravery and intelligence, couched in
the author's lilting prose and the absorbing details of the historical period, will win
her many fans among today's readers. An author's note describes the sources and
experiences behind the writing of the book and sets the tale in the Ming period.
TC
NORMAN, HOWARD, comp. 
Between Heaven and Earth: Bird Tales from Around
the World; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2004 
78p
ISBN 0-15-201982-0 
$22.00 
R Gr. 3-5
Five folktales with avian characters from Australia, Norway, Sri Lanka,
Matabeleland, and China feature outwardly simple yet many-layered plots with
lively characters caught in universal dilemmas. The stories, which include such
titles as "The Disobedient Pelican Daughter," "The Beautiful Quail," and "The
Swan-Scholar's Great Secret," are told in rich but not overblown language that
communicates a sense of the tales' primary oral and cultural traditions while achiev-
ing a graceful conversion to print. Leo and Diane Dillon's iconic illustrations, in
colored pencil and watercolor, are breathtaking in their energy of line, balance of
composition, and variety of design, each frame textured almost solely by means of
a thick monochrome outlining and patterning that strongly invokes images of
both appliqud and stained-glass artistry. While it's not clear if Norman has pro-
vided any adaptation of his own, an introduction and endnote explain that these
stories are indigenous in origin and were collected from individual storytellers dur-
ing a series of folklore workshops. TC
PAULSEN, GARY 
The Time Hackers. Lamb, 2005 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90896-2 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74659-8 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
When twelve-year-old Dorso opens his locker to find a half-dissected cadaver hang-
ing inside, he shuts the door and waits for it to go away. Except for the smell, such
JANUARY 2005 
* 223
intrusions always disappear quickly-like the times he found his locker stuffed
with rotten earthworms or dead frogs. As far as practical jokes go, these are harm-
less, since such images captured and brought forward from the past can't do any-
thing in the present except stink. The scientists who had "cracked time" hadn't
figured out how to do anything else. Though Dorso doesn't know why anyone
would bother to fill his locker with the hologram of "seven hundred and twenty-
one and one-half dead lab rats," he's learned to accept it-until he is confronted
with a hologram of General Custer that actually sees him. Soon, Dorso and his
friend Frank are getting tossed by a woolly mammoth, captured in a pirate attack,
shot at in the Battle of Gettysburg, and so on, and unless they can figure what's
going on, they might just find themselves dying before they'd even been born.
Akin to Scieszka's Time Warp Trio series, but older in audience, Paulsen's latest is
a fast, funny read that combines slapstick and sophistication in equal measures
(well, maybe a bit more slapstick). Dorso's resigned-to-his-terrible-fate attitude
contrasts perfectly with Frank's continually upbeat scheming (among other things,
his attempts to circumvent blocks on viewing images of naked historical women,
like Cleopatra in her bath). The character of their friendship is built as much on
wisecracks as on wisdom, and their dialogue is both witty and natural, a hard
combination to strike. Though the appeal is broad, reluctant readers in particular
will revel in the book's grossness, as well as its nonstop action, sly humor, and
short page count. This will booktalk itself. KH
PETERSEN, P. J. 
Rob&Sara.com; by P. J. Petersen and Ivy Ruckman. 
Delacorte,
2004 
210p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90202-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73164-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Sara posts a poem to an online bulletin board for teen poets, only to have it ripped
apart by the site's critics. Rob, however, writes to her privately about how much
he liked it, and they begin an email relationship that blossoms into attraction and
dreams of a future together. Sara learns that Rob is at one of those boarding
schools for rich, difficult kids, but he is reluctant to reveal too much about himself.
She, on the other hand, is completely open about her situation and her worries; as
a military kid usually on the move, she just wants to stay in one place and do
normal high-school things. When Rob disappears from email for a while (which
happens periodically, due to either restriction of his privileges or trouble with hackers
at the school), Sara tracks down another member of the bulletin board, Shannon,
who is at the same school as Rob. Shannon reveals some disturbing things about
"Rob," who isn't using his real name. Sara doesn't want to believe Shannon, but
Rob has been reticent enough about the details of his life that she falls into some
doubt about who he really is. In fact, Shannon is lying, but it is her intrigue that
adds what texture there is to this rather predictable plot. Rob and Sara are unusual
and not entirely credible in their email habits; they treat their correspondence as
real letters and avoid cutesy online abbreviations and emoticons. Though they
occasionally rely on bad poetry to express their inner feelings, the characters that
emerge from these epistles are solid, if rather bland, and the usual uplifting themes
of overcoming destructive tendencies toward rebellion, finding true love, and de-
veloping into more mature people than your parents ever expected you to be guide
the narrative. Fans of Sarah Dessen will be at home here. KC
224 
* THE BULLETIN
PRICE, SUSAN 
A Sterkarm Kiss. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
277p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-072198-7 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-072197-9 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Several months after returning to the twenty-first century, Andrea finds herself in
a bar, face to face with Per, her boyfriend from the sixteenth century. The attrac-
tion is too great to resist; Andrea abandons her current lover and returns to work
in the sixteenth century for the multimillion-dollar corporation that sent her back
in time in The Sterkarm Handshake. However, just as the first Per was an inhabit-
ant of an alternate reality, this new Per is from yet another alternate world, and he
has none of the history with Andrea that went to build the devotion his double felt
for her in the first book. This pattern of interaction, in which the contemporary
protagonists base their actions on a history that their other selves cannot even
guess at, gives Andrea a dangerously false sense of security with the mercurial
Sterkarms and allows her devious employers to exact revenge for humiliations vis-
ited upon them by the first set of Sterkarms. This story requires knowledge of the
first book for successful impact; on the other hand, Price's ability to craft intricate
characters, plot, and themes through articulate prose makes this highly complex
episode in the Sterkarm saga seem a natural outgrowth of the previous outing and
provides a steadily increasing narrative tension that will catapult readers into a
third volume. Laden with plausibly contemporary folksongs and physical and
cultural detail-including some horrifically gory battle scenes-the parallels of-
fered by characters in the Sterkarm series to present-day attitudes and practices
provide a discreetly self-aware lens for readers dealing with their own shifting cul-
tural boundaries. TC
RAPPAPORT, DOREEN John's Secret Dreams: The Life ofJohn Lennon; illus. by Bryan
Collier. 
Hyperion, 2004 
48p
ISBN 0-7868-0817-9 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Rappaport and Collier (from Martin's Big Words, BCCB 1/02) team up again to
commend another influential cultural icon and advocate of peace to the attention
of young readers, this one perhaps less well known to twenty-first century children
than Martin Luther King, Jr. Combining selected biographical details of John
Lennon's life with his song lyrics, Rappaport manages to convey the profound
influence Lennon and the Beatles had on rock'n'roll as well as the stages his art
went through. In addition, she gives enough biographical detail to suggest the
root causes of his eventual disillusionment and how he was on his way toward
healing and joy when he was killed. What makes this book sing, however, is
Collier's synesthetic vision of Lennon's life and work. His painterly collages start
with a dreamy young John leaving his home in Liverpool and proceed to portray,
through the symbolic use of various kinds of circles and the manipulation of color
and texture, the driving emotions of the Beatle's rise to fame, the desperate frag-
mentation of Lennon's inner world, the psychedelic dreams of mid-career, and the
wistful calm that settled over his life as Yoko encouraged him to write his pain into
his music, returning us finally to the tangerine and marmalade dreams ofLennon's
vision of world peace and unity. Collier's riff on the famous Abbey Road album
cover, with each of the Beatles going a different direction instead of in a line, is an
especially moving spread for those who are familiar with the original, but for read-
ers who aren't, this book provides more than enough inspiration to seek out the
work of this rock'n'roll dreamer. Extensive author and illustrator notes are in-
JANUARY 2005 
* 
225
cluded in the beginning, and a timeline, discography, and recommended research
sources on both Lennon and the Beatles appear at the end. KC
ROTH, SUSAN L. 
Hard Hat Area; written and illus. by Susan L.
Roth. 
Bloomsbury, 2004 
40p
ISBN 1-58234-946-0 
$17.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
Apprentice ironworker Kristen makes her morning rounds up the rising frame-
work to check on the needs of the construction workers. The connector needs
more bolts and a blueberry muffin; the hooker-on wants cookies, hot chocolate,
and a choker cable; the tag-line man's in for juice, a danish, and another tag-line
hook. The who needs a what? Enlightenment awaits at each stop, as numbered
yellow dots on the illustration of the worker in action correspond to adjacent ex-
planations. Kristen, her coworkers, and the structure and tools are rendered in
mixed-media collage set against a photo montage of the cityscape far, far, very far
below. Lest listeners of a prickly feminist bent object to Kristen's role as a go-fer,
Roth assures her audience in an final note that all ironworker apprentices go through
the same round of tasks, so that they "learn to be comfortable working high up on
unfinished, potentially dangerous building sites." Roth finishes the job with a
spread of all eleven ironworkers in motion and a challenge, "Do you know who's
who?" Cheaters can flip the page for the answers, but it will be much more fun to
just go back and read it all again. EB
RUBIN, SUSAN GOLDMAN 
L'Chaim!: To Jewish Life in America! Celebrating from
1654 until Today. 
Abrams, 2004 
176p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8109-5035-9 
$24.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Rubin marks the 350th anniversary of the arrival of America's first Jewish settlers
with this attractive, lavishly illustrated title. Organization is largely chronological,
with brief forays into the topical as the need dictates, and the emphasis is decidedly
on breadth, not depth, of coverage. Rubin keeps the history lively and specific by
focusing on individuals whose experiences illuminate a particular point in time:
e.g., colonist Phila Franks, who marries a French Protestant and is shunned by her
mother; Haym Salomon, Patriot and "Financier of the Revolution"; Rebecca Gratz,
who founded the Jewish Sunday School movement. There is no pretense that the
Jewish American experience is an uninterrupted journey along a spiritual high
road-readers meet Jewish gangsters, bootleggers, and frontier gunmen-in short,
the same colorful sinners other ethnic groups can dubiously boast. Each chapter,
which is printed on a muted colored background, features black and white period
photographs, reproductions of Jewish American art, documents, maps, or realia.
A glossary, endnotes, bibliography, and index are appended, but more casual brows-
ers may be just as happy navigating via chapter headings ("Jewish Cowboys and
Pioneers"; "The Frozen Chosen: Jews in Alaska"). Don't relegate this to the
coffee table. EB
RUMFORD, JAMES 
Sequoyah: The Cherokee Man Who Gave His People Writing;
written and illus. by James Rumford; tr. into Cherokee by Anna Sixkiller
Huckaby. 
Houghton, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-618-36947-3 
$16.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Having introduced Jean-Frangoise Champollion, the Frenchman who
deconstructed Egyptian hieroglyphs (Seeker ofKnowledge, BCCB 4/00), Rumford
226 
* THE BULLETIN
now turns to the early nineteenth century Cherokee who constructed a written
syllabary for his own people because "he did not want them to disappear in the
white man's world." 
With only sketchy biographical data available, Rumford
nonetheless crafts a fluent account in which "they tell us" and "they say" conscien-
tiously alert readers that they may be wading into the murky water of legend. The
story is framed within a tale of a 1958 family road trip to California, which possi-
bly hearkens to Rumford's own childhood, in which a father tells his children
about the Cherokee for whom the Giant Sequoia is named. Within the context of
this narration, constructed conversations attributed to Sequoyah seem quite rea-
sonable: "'I will invent writing for our people,' he said. Everyone laughed. 'Writ-
ing will make us strong.' No one believed him." The author also provides the
stately woodcut-inspired illustrations in ink, chalk, pencil, and watercolor; the
grainy texturing, achieved by laying paper over a rough wooden surface, as well as
the tall, narrow trim size, subtly underscore the redwood-high stature of Sequoyah
among the Cherokee: "He was a leader because he showed his people how to
survive-How to stand tall and proud like these trees." A brief endnote comments
on Sequoyah's legacy, and his syllabary (with English pronunciations) is included.
EB
SCHANZER, ROSALYN 
George vs. George: The American Revolution as Seen from
Both Sides; written and illus. by Rosalyn Schanzer. 
National Geographic,
2004 
64p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7922-6999-3 
$25.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7922-7349-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Schanzer agilely winds her chronological way through the rift between colonies
and mother country and the subsequent Revolt, pausing frequently to take the
political pulse on both sides of the Atlantic. She begins with brief comparative
chapters on the two titular leaders and how government was organized in England
and America on the eve of the war. After a straightforward discussion of taxes,
grievances, and opening skirmishes, she returns to the compare/contrast format to
examine the two military forces that would meet in battle. Then it's off to war,
with plenty of quoted commentary from the movers and shakers of the time. Final
spreads summarize the careers of the two Georges after the Treaty of Paris, and
while most readers will know how Washington's life progressed, many will be
touched by the compassionate respect with which Schanzer describes George III's
dignity in restoring relations with the United States and his sad descent into de-
mentia. Although the text is fairly dense for a picture-book format, a plethora of
cartoon-styled paintings with speech-bubble quotations (all of which are credited)
pull readers steadily along. A bibliography and index are included. EB
SINGER, MARILYN 
Central Heating: Poems about Fire and Warmth; illus. by Meilo
So. 
Knopf, 2005 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92912-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82912-1 
$15.99 
R Gr. 5-9
Moving on from earth (Footprints on the Roof BCCB 7/02) and water (How to
Cross a Pond, 10/03), Singer turns here to the element of fire for poetic inspiration.
Nineteen poems discuss flames literal ("Forest Fire") and figurative ("Chili Pep-
pers"), useful ("Forged") and destructive ("Landmark"). Though the poems are
somewhat more variable in quality than in the previous volumes, Singer retains her
JANUARY 2005 
* 227
gift for quietly controlled language that underscores immediacy of image with
sound ("And you lose the game,/ the marshmallow/ to the flame"-"Toasting
Marshmallows"). The design (in monochromatic red on white in both type and
illustration) evinces the same spare elegance of the earlier titles, while So mini-
mizes.her fluid watercolors and instead emphasizes block prints and naive strong-
lined drawing; the result is less polished but it provides an intriguing visual contrast.
Suitable for reading aloud, reading alone, and inspiring thematic assignments, this
is a worthy counterpart to the first two titles, and a warm if not sparkling title in its
own right. DS
SMITH, ROLAND 
Cryptid Hunters. Hyperion, 2005 
[352p]
ISBN 0-7868-5161-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
After their photojournalist parents disappear, thirteen-year-old twins Marty and
Grace leave boarding school to stay with their heretofore-unknown uncle Wolfe
on his private island. Wolfe owns a lucrative electronics company, but this is only
to finance his more pressing interests-finding and protecting "cryptids," a term
for animals not proven scientifically to exist. Once the twins arrive, Wolfe finds he
must make an emergency trip to the Congo, where Noah Blackwood, an old en-
emy whose fame hides his unethical exploitation of animals, has discovered the
secret habitat. En route back to boarding school, Marty and Grace snag a para-
chuted ride down with the supply drop over the Congo; there, Grace realizes that
everything is familiar, leading her to wonder if she's been there before, and if so,
when? Smith layers action adventure and psychological drama as the characters
converge in the Congo and discover secrets about themselves along the way. Marty
and Grace are deliberately idealized children with prodigious talents, yet they are
human enough that readers will allow these occasional forays into unlikelihood,
since they further the plot. Their relationship has everything a brother/sister duo
needs to succeed: their bickering and annoyance is tempered by love and affec-
tion, and their willingness to support each other, even when it turns out they are
not twins, is believably sweet. Smith doesn't muddy the waters with nuanced
adults, either; good guys and bad guys are straightforward and don't change sides,
allowing readers to relax and enjoy the ride. The detailed, exotic locale and the
novelty of hunting for scientifically unsubstantiated animals will be more than
enough to snare young readers. KH
SOMMER, SHELLEY John F. Kennedy: His Life and Legacy. 
HarperCollins,
2005 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-054136-9 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-054135-0 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Even forty years after his death, Kennedy remains a towering and a romantic figure
in American presidential history. Sommer, from the John F. Kennedy Library,
provides an overview of the thirty-fifth president's life, from his youth in the ram-
bunctious Kennedy clan through his schooling and army years, then onto his rise
in politics from congressman to senator to president. Information isn't always
smoothly integrated or provided, with some tidbits and terms explained late or
never, and some of the anecdotes lack impact; more significantly, this is an adula-
tory portrait that substitutes attractive irregularities for warts: Kennedy has ob-
228 
* 
THE BULLETIN
stacles (largely his physical problems) rather than weaknesses, and there's not even
a breath of questioning on his literary originality or marital fidelity. Cooper's Jack
(BCCB 2/03) is therefore a more original and involving biography, but this is still
a capable overview; the diligent scholarship, including primary research, helps fill
out the picture, and young readers may warm to the emphasis on child-relevant
anecdotes. Black-and-white photos are scattered throughout; extensive end mat-
ter includes a timeline, the text of Kennedy's inaugural address, significant Kennedy
quotes, detailed endnotes, a bibliography and a list of recommended reading for
youth, notes on Kennedy memorial sites and on websites, and an index. DS
STEWART, JENNIFER J. 
Close Encounters ofa Third- World Kind. Holiday House,
2004 
14 8p
ISBN 0-8234-1850-2 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Annie and her little sister, Chelsea, are traveling with their par-
ents to where few American kids go: a small village in Nepal. There Annie's
doctor father and his cohorts in medical assistance, aided occasionally by Annie,
use their limited resources to treat the locals as best as they can for infections and
pregnancy, minor birth defects and broken arms. Annie and Chelsea befriend a
local girl, Nirmala, and begin to look beyond the absence of modern conveniences
to the beauties of the very different land and people. Stewart, herself a veteran of
Nepalese travel, provides an effective blend of realistically offputting and realisti-
cally appealing detail about Annie's life-changing experience, and messages about
cultural difference and comparative American wealth are delivered quietly and
authentically through Annie's observations and her parents' guidance. Though
some of the plotting is a bit predictable, Annie is a credible narrator, whether she's
whining about her sister or coming to an understanding of the straits of Nirmala's
life; while she's actually an impressively good sport in her behavior, there's enough
complaint in her narration to balance out her virtues. It's unusual for a novel this
breezy and easy-reading to tackle such challenging themes, but this one manages
to bring genuine good humor to this story of an eye-opening journey. DS
STONE, DAVID LEE 
The Ratastrophe Catastrophe; illus. by Bob Lea. 
Hyperion,
2004 
273p
ISBN 0-7868-5128-7 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
A dwarf and an oversized barbarian join with a retired sorcerer, an inept thief, and
an escaped prisoner to hunt down the demon-possessed piper who has wooed
away first the rats and then the children of Dullitch city. The episodic, quick-
switch form of the narrative chops up the plot and slows its progress until the
midpoint of the story, when frequent catastrophes and even more frequent dabs at
punnery and situational comedy lighten the mood. Like fantasy writer Terry
Pratchett, Stone loads his tale with plenty of action, crude jokes, and general silli-
ness, though Stone's wordplay is less skilled and his story and characters less sub-
stantial than Pratchett's. Chapters are headed with knobbly, Claymation-esque
computer-generated illustrations that confirm the book's intended audience: fan-
tasy gamers, this book is for you. Such audiences may not mind the scattered
storytelling, and they'll be gratified to hear that this is just the first title in the
Illmoor Chronicles series. TC
JANUARY 2005 
* 229
STROUD, BETTYE 
The Patchwork Path: A Quilt Map to Freedom; illus. by Erin
Susanne Bennett. 
Candlewick, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7636-2423-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
After Hannah's mother dies and her sister has been sold to another plantation,
Hannah's father tells her it is time to use her patchwork quilt map to find their way
to freedom. Each of the quilt squares instructs the travelers how to negotiate the
distance to Canada and, in the text, marks a segment of their journey as they
determinedly put distance between themselves and their Georgia plantation. In
keeping with the timing of the quilt squares in the text, the plot emphasizes par-
ticular episodes rather than providing a full explanation of slavery, quilts, and the
Underground Railroad; though the meaning of the quilt symbols is clearly ex-
plained, their utility in Hannah's journey is sometimes more structurally conve-
nient than credible. The text is succinct but sufficient for the story, concrete
details establishing setting and mood as well as providing clues for Hannah's de-
coding of the quilt map. Hannah's own worries about safety and unquestioning
trust in her father's guidance draw listeners into her world and allow them to
imagine themselves in her situation. The oil illustrations feature a warm palette
with figures outlined in sunset shades of scarlet and gold; the deliberately angular
three-dimensionality of the style is strongly dramatic without losing touch with
realism (though the protagonists stay awfully neat and tidy in the face of their
trials). A personable introduction to African-American history and a fascinating
folk art, this would pair well with other early tales of the Underground Railroad
such as Nelson's Almost to Freedom (BCCB 3/04). An author's note gives biblio-
graphic and historical information for the story. TC
SUTHERLAND, Tui T. 
This Must Be Love. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
24 2p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-056476-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-056475-X 
$15.99 
R Gr. 7-10
Helena and Hermia are best friends, sharing an interest in the theater and ro-
mance. While Hermia subscribes to the serial boyfriend model (though she has
recently fixed her heart on Alex, a longtime friend), Helena is awaiting her one and
only soulmate, whom she thinks she has found when Dmitri enters her life. Dmitri
is uninterested until he learns that Helena's dad is the wealthiest man in town,
whereupon he begins to play the role of soulmate almost as well as even the hyper-
bolically smitten Helena could wish. It isn't destined to last, however, as the fickle
Dmitri, noting Hermia's interest in Alex, turns his attention in her direction. A
comedy of errors ensues, with much misunderstanding on the part of the girls,
who miss the fact that their romantic fortunes turn on a long-standing rivalry
between Alex and Dmitri, and who also miss the obvious fact that Helena has a
true admirer in Nick Weaver, who cons his football playing friends into trying out
for Romeo and Juliet so that he can get Helena's attention. Bliss returns in a mid-
summer night's dream, which is the Shakespearean play that the book most obvi-
ously draws upon, though there are elements of others scattered throughout.
Sutherland cleverly weaves not only Shakespearean plot points, but also attitudes,
vocabulary, and sensibilities into her multi-genre storytelling (letters, emails, son-
nets, dramatic scenes, play reviews, instant messaging). Each girl has a distinct
voice, with Helena's being comically melodramatic and littered throughout with
230 
* THE BULLETIN
SAT words (by her own admission), and Hermia's a smart-alecky, keep-it-real riff
that plays remarkably well against her best friend's affectations. Pair this with any
of Shakespeare's comedies, especially A Midsummer Night's Dream, and all will be
well that ends well. KC
TAYLOR, G. P. 
Wormwood. 
Putnam, 2004 
259p
ISBN 0-399-24257-0 
$17.99 
M 
Gr. 8-12
In a fantasy set in an approximation of early nineteenth-century London, a magi-
cal book, the Nemorensis, predicts the end of the world will be heralded by dogs
and horses running amok and a rogue comet-Wormwood-crashing into the
City. Various lowlifes and highbrows and a couple of warrior angels cheat, terrify,
and murder one other in order to get their mitts on the Nemorensis before the
comet hits, in what is intended to be a thrilling race to aid or hinder the rebirth of
the Queen of Evil at the End of the Age. Unfortunately, the incessant gory de-
scriptions overwhelm the paper-thin plot, unnecessary repetitions slow the action,
and stilted prose distances the readers from the characters. The flat, ill-defined
characters switch allegiances and motivations at the drop of a hat; little compas-
sion is evident in anyone, and when it does arise, it's found in characters who never
displayed such virtue before and have no reason for doing so now. For readers
drawn to gothic-tinged fantasy or London-based historical adventure, better-drafted
characters and themes can be found in Sedgwick's The Book ofDead Days (BCCB
12/04), Updale's Montmorency (BCCB 4/04), or Wooding's The Haunting of
Alaizabel Cray (BCCB 9/04). TC
TRUMBORE, CINDY 
The Genie in the Book; illus. by R. W. Alley. 
Handprint,
2004 
[120p]
ISBN 1-59354-042-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
If only a national chain weren't threatening to send the family coffee shop out of
business. Then Mom and Dad would have been free to come with ten-year-old
Will and his little sister, Maddy, to visit Grandma on Cape Cod this summer.
Instead, the parents stay home to tend the struggling shop while the kids go alone,
which is actually rather good luck, since the absence of parents allows Will, Maddy,
and their out-of-control cousin Jerome to live out their wildest dreams with the
help of a genie Will accidentally summons from a copy of The Arabian Nights.
Heck, Homer the Genie even pitches in to help the kids turn the coffee-chain
invaders into dang good neighbors. A series of romps through scenes from tradi-
tionally beloved children's books (including National Velvet, Five Children and It,
and even A Child's Atlas of the World), this tale is unapologetic tribute fiction,
which potentially limits its readership; most kids taking on a book of moderate
length such as this probably haven't read those longer books listed in this text.
The condescending tone and puppet-like characters only increase the distance be-
tween the author and her intended audience; however, the fast pace and sheer
variety of the adventures partially make up for these weaknesses, and the plot holds
together awfully well for a lightweight read. Children whose caregivers have read
aloud a range of the established children's favorites will get a kick out of reading
this bubbly adventure on their own, while children less acquainted with the clas-
sics may find their literary interest excited and be led to search out the longer tales
for later reading. Final illustrations not seen. TC
JANUARY 2005 
* 231
VANDE VELDE, VIVIAN 
Now You See It... 
Harcourt, 2005 
[288p]
ISBN 0-15-205311-5 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Fifteen-year-old Wendy has terrible eyesight, which is why it's such a tragedy when
her glasses get smashed on the bus. Luckily, she still has the sunglasses she found
the night before, which seem to be in her prescription. She eventually realizes that
the sunglasses do more to her vision than correct it, as she sees that the head cheer-
leader Tiffanie is an ugly crone, that the boy Julian is an elf, that little blue men are
the cause of all the petty annoyances in our lives, from the misdirected spray of the
water fountain to the jammed Kotex machine. With glasses like these, adventures
are inevitable, as Wendy finds when she goes through an archway to Kazaran
Dahaani, where she sees Julian kidnapped by elves in a plot against his father, the
king. Suddenly faced with the kind of responsibility she usually avoids, Wendy
must decide if she has a big enough heart to do what's right, even when it's danger-
ous. Wendy is a well-conceived, unusual heroine; her equivocating (what she calls
"weaseling"), sarcasm, self-interest, and regret combine to make her recognizable
to anyone who has felt guilty about comfortable apathy, and readers will root for
her as she starts becoming the person she wants to be. A parallel plot about her
relationship with her grandmother, who has Alzheimer's, connects on an emo-
tional level and provides the impetus for Wendy's inner growth; this story line is
more successful than the elven rescue, which supplies more action than believabil-
ity. Wendy's humorous and realistic narration never falters, however, smoothing
over any awkward patches and winning readers from fantasy fans who want a safe
and heartwarming adventure. KH
VAN GENECHTEN, GUIDO 
The Cuddle Book; written and illus. by Guido Van
Genechten. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-06-075306-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
1-3 yrs
This easygoing Dutch import explains how various animal species engage in fond
parent-child embraces ("Turtles cuddle slowly... and elephants cuddle with their
trunks"), finishing with a human snuggle ("But the best cuddle of all... is Mommy's
cuddle!"). While poor old Daddy may legitimately object to his exclusion from
the cuddle equation, this is an otherwise tender and cheerfully affectionate work.
The text gains rhythm from the short lines and consistent structure, and there's
gentle humor in some of its characterizations: "Porcupines have to cuddle very
carefully!" Van Genechten's illustrations are deceptively simple: the smiling crea-
tures and thick black outlines are composed of thick paints in subtly varying shades
with newspaper underlay often providing an additional shadowy texture; pencil
scribbles and informal cut-paper elements add interest while keeping the energy
focused on the critters, not the craftsmanship. This is tailor-made for lapsitting,
and it may even entice bouncier youngsters to hold still long enough for a book 'n'
cuddle combination. DS
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
Bunny Mail; written and illus. by Rosemary Wells. 
Viking,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-670-03630-7 
$15.99 
R 
2-5 yrs
As Ruby plans for her Fourth of July party, Max makes plans of his own to get
Santa to bring him a flashy red Sand-Spitter motorcycle with Bigfoot tires. He
232 
* THE BULLETIN
decides to write Santa a letter, and neither Ruby's admonitions that nobody writes
Santa in the summer nor the small fact that he can't read or write deter him. An
affable and astute postman discerns that the mysterious tire-print letter Max pro-
duces should go to Grandma, who is equally adept at figuring out Max's code,
though she's not quite sure what kind of vehicle Max wants. A letter exchange
follows that refines Max's request with the addition of red paint and then sand,
and Grandma finally gets it when she adds these clues to a sighting of Wilma
Warthog tooling by on her red Sand-Spitter motorcycle with Bigfoot tires. She
puts in a quick call to the North Pole, and the myth that Santa is on vacation in the
summer is finally debunked when Max receives his package on July 4th, post-
marked from the North Pole. Wells' cheerfully chunky figures shine forth from
the glossy extra-thick paper for this toddler-friendly lift-the-flap book that allows
little viewers to view the correspondence for themselves. While it's unclear how
much time passes because the bunnies never change their outfits, the plot hits just
the right nerve for its target audience, with its blend of a tricky communication
problem, a naysaying big sister, and the affirmation of the belief that between
Santa and Grandma, all things are possible. KC
WILSON, JOHN 
The Flags of War. Kids Can, 2004 
166p
ISBN 1-55337-567-X 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Wilson starts off with a wallop at the 1746 battle of Culloden Moor in Scotland,
and ends with a bang at the battle of Shiloh in 1862. Sandwiched in between these
vividly realized war scenes is a slower moving account of three members of the
McGregor family-Walt, a fifteen-year-old Canadian farmer; Nate, his South
Carolina plantation cousin; and Sunday, a runaway slave and Nate's erstwhile friend.
A serious falling out between Walt and Nate's grandfathers over colonial slavery
estranged the two branches of McGregors, but that's soon to change in this heavily
coincidence-driven family drama. Sunday flees North, miraculously ends up on
Walt's doorstep, and later joins up with the Union Army. Walt is kidnapped by
the evil overseer cum bounty hunter cum Union "recruiter" who pursues Sunday
across the Canadian border. Nate becomes a runner for Rebel General Beauregard.
They all end up at Shiloh, where Sunday recognizes his old friend, the master's son
Nate, just as he's about to be killed by long-lost cousin Walt. Sunday saves the
day, and then, dramatically, "Arm in arm, the three soldiers headed along the
riverbank, away from the sound of the cannons." This sounds like a lot of action,
but long stretches are devoted to conversations about the complexity of viewpoints
on the coming hostilities and some underdeveloped subplots on Sunday's mute-
ness (he was mutilated by the overseer) and Walt's freethinking mother, who lives
on her own in Montreal. With the stockpile of Civil War and Underground
Railroad novels available, the main interest here is how narrowly Canada missed
joining the War on the side of the South. EB
WOOD, AUDREY 
Ten Little Fish; illus. by Bruce Wood. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-439-63569-1 
$15.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
"Ten Little Fish, swimming in a line./ One dives down, and now there are ... /
Nine Little Fish, swimming 'round a crate./ One goes in, and now there are .... "
You know the drill: there's going to be one fish left alone, right? Not this time-
One Little Fish meets the fish of his dreams and there's love among the anemones.
JANUARY 2005 
* 233
The inevitable result, of course, is ten more Little Fish. The rhyme is thoroughly
predictable, in the best sense, and the countdown mnemonic works as well as ever.
Bruce Wood creates a computer-generated undersea environment that will seem
familiar to children who keep up with the latest Disney and Pixar studio block-
busters. A rainbow spectrum of dayglo fish dart among pearly bubbles, looming
coral, and gently agitated tide pools in a sea of saturated color. Expect little fingers
to poke the pages, testing whether the depth is really an illusion. Then get ready to
read it and chant it again. EB
ZAUNDERS, Bo 
Gargoyles, Girders & Glass Houses: Magnificent Master Builders;
illus. by Roxie Munro. 
Dutton, 2004 
48p
ISBN 0-525-47284-3 
$17.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Seven entries scarcely constitute a skimpy appetizer, much less an architectural
feast, but Zaunders and Munro do try to whet middle graders' interest in a hand-
ful of architects and engineers from around the world and across the centuries.
They proceed in chronological order from Filippo Brunelleschi's dome on Santa
Maria del Fiore; through Ottoman Empire builder Sinan's mosques, Brazilian
Lisboa's sculpture and churches, Roebling's Brooklyn Bridge, Eiffel's Parisian tower,
Gaudf's sinuous structures in Barcelona; and finally wrap up with Van Alen's
Chrysler Building. Each gets a half-dozen pages, more or less, in which to cover
biography and important works, and uncaptioned line and watercolor paintings
stretch over, under, and beside the text. A four-page introduction expounds on
works that didn't make the final cut as entries and, in fact, the only "glass houses"
promised in the title-Philip Johnson's Connecticut home and I. M. Pei's pyra-
mid at the Louvre-are squeezed into the intro. A caisson rising from New York's
East River is the sole diagram that conveys any engineering information, and read-
ers who want to know the hows of construction won't find satisfaction here. For
a sassier, more engaging discussion, suggest Susan Goldman Rubin's There Goes
the Neighborhood: Ten Buildings People Loved to Hate (BCCB 9/01). EB
ZUSAK, MARKUS 
IAm the Messenger. Knopf, 2005 
[368p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93099-X 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83099-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 9-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 195, for review.
234 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 2004
The Blue Ribbon deliberations arrive each year like an old friend with a taste for
radical new haircuts-we know her basic nature, but she looks different every
time. 
This year fiction emphasized older works and occasioned much debate (it
should be a good year for dissents, which appear on our January website), the
nonfiction field narrowed somewhat after several years of abundance, and picture
books were an excellent source of early readers as well. Underneath those mutable
characteristics, however, is an old friend: a collection of books that moved and
delighted us and that should have something to offer to every young reader.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
FICTION:
Almond, David. The Fire-Eaters. Delacorte. Gr. 7-12 (May)
Boyce, Frank Cottrell. Millions. HarperCollins. Gr. 6-10 (July/August)
Finney, Patricia. I, Jack; illus. by Peter Bailey. HarperCollins. Gr. 4-7 (April)
Jinks, Catherine. Pagan in Exile; Pagan's Crusade; Pagan's Vows. Candlewick. Gr.
7-10 (February, November)
Lawrence, Iain. Bfor Buster. Delacorte. Gr. 6-10 (September)
Marchetta, Melina. Saving Francesca. Knopf. Gr. 7-12 (October)
McKay, Hilary. Indigo's Star. McElderry. Gr. 5-9 (September)
Oppel, Kenneth. Airborn. Eos/HarperCollins. Gr. 7-12 (July/August)
Reeve, Philip. MortalEngines. Eos/HarperCollins. Gr. 7-10 (March)
Saenz, Benjamin Alire. Sammy e&Juliana in Hollywood. Cinco Puntos. Gr. 9-12
(September)
NONFICTION:
Brown, Don. Odd Boy Out: Young Albert Einstein; written and illus. by Don
Brown. Houghton. 5-8 yrs (October)
Davies, Nicola. Poop: A Natural History of the Unmentionable; illus. by Neal
Layton. Candlewick. Gr. 3-5 (November)
Freedman, Russell. The Voice that Challenged a Nation: Marian Anderson and the
Struggle for Equal Rights. Clarion. Gr. 5-8 (July/August)
Greenberg, Jan. Andy Warhol Prince of Pop; by Jan Greenberg and Sandra Jor-
dan. Delacorte. Gr. 7-12 (December)
Harris, Robie H. Sweet Jasmine, Nice Jackson; illus. by Michael Emberley.
McElderry. 4-7 yrs (October)
Hawass, Zahi. Curse of the Pharaohs: My Adventures with Mummies. National
Geographic. Gr. 4-8 (July/August)
Jenkins, Steve. Actual Size; written and illus. by Steve Jenkins. Houghton, 2004.
Gr. 3-7 (May)
Morrison, Toni. Remember: The Journey to School Integration. Houghton. Gr. 2-
6 (July/August)
JANUARY 2005 * 235
PICTURE BOOKS:
Feiffer, Jules. The Daddy Mountain; written and illus. by Jules Feiffer. di Capua/
Hyperion. 2-4 yrs (May)
Fleischman, Paul. Sidewalk Circus; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. Candlewick. 4-9 yrs
(July/August)
Frank, John. The Toughest Cowboy, or How the Wild West Was Tamed; illus. by
Zachary Pullen. Simon. Gr. 3-5 (October)
Harrington, Janice N. Going North; illus. by Jerome Lagarrigue. Kroupa/Farrar.
5-8 yrs (November)
Henkes, Kevin. Kitten's FirstFullMoon; written and illus. by Kevin Henkes. Green-
willow. 2-5 yrs (March)
Johnston, Tony. The Worm Family; illus. by Stacy Innerst. Harcourt. 4-7 yrs
(September)
Kelly, John. The Mystery ofEatum Hall; written and illus. by John Kelly and
Cathy Tincknell. Candlewick. 6-9 yrs (October)
Oiler, Erika. The Cabbage Soup Solution; written and illus. by Erika Oiler. Dut-
ton. 5-8 yrs (February)
Pinkwater, Daniel. Bad Bears in the Big City: An Irving andMuktuk Story; illus. by
Jill Pinkwater. Houghton. Gr. 2-4 (March)
Turner, Pamela. Hachiko: The True Story ofa LoyalDog; illus. by Yan Nascimbene.
Houghton. Gr. 2-4 (June)
Willems, Mo. Knuffle Bunny; written and illus. by Mo Willems. Hyperion. 2-6
yrs (October)
,Oro=- A
236 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abandonment-fiction: Chipman
Achievements-stories: Keller
Adoption-stories: Joosse
ADVENTURE: Alexander;
Bateman; Cross; Dahlberg;
Holmes; Kerr; Paulsen; Smith;
Stone; Vande Velde
Africa-fiction: Ellis
African Americans: Bolden; Cooper;
McWhorter; Mitchell
African Americans-fiction:
McDonald
African Americans-stories:
McKissack; Stroud
AIDS-fiction: Ellis
Alaska-fiction: Morris
Animals: Gilders
Animals-fiction: Carman; Morris;
Smith
Archaeology-fiction: Alexander
Architecture: Arbogast; Zaunders
Art: Arbogast; Zaunders
Art and artists-fiction: Mills
Art and artists-stories: Dorros
ARTHURIAN LITERATURE:
Barron
Babies-stories: James
Basketball: Cooper
Bears-stories: Joosse
BIOGRAPHIES: Bolden; Cooper;
Marrin; Rappaport; Rumford;
Sommer
Biology: Gilders; Horowitz
Birds-fiction: Andersen
Birds-folklore: Norman
Books and reading-fiction:
Trumbore
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Smith
Building: Arbogast; Zaunders
Building-stories: Roth
Caves: Mitchell
China-fiction: Napoli
Civics: Bausum
Civil rights movement: McWhorter
Civil War-fiction: Wilson
Cliques-fiction: Mlynowski
Cold war-fiction: Dahlberg
Communism-fiction: Durbin
Construction-stories: Roth
COUNTING BOOKS: Wood
Cousins-fiction: Trumbore
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Alexander; Bateman; Holmes
Curses-fiction: Baker
Dating-fiction: Allen; Mills
Death and dying-fiction: Mazetti;
Morris
Depression, the-fiction: Haycak
Disabilities-fiction: Brugman
Dogs-fiction: Carmody
Dogs-poetry: Bartoletti
Ecology: Gilders
EPISTOLARY FICTION: Petersen
Ethics and values: Dorros; Durbin;
Martin; McDonald; McKee;
McWilliams; Rappaport; Stewart;
Zusak
Explorers and exploring: Mitchell
FABLES: McKee
Families-fiction: Cassidy; Chipman;
Ellis; Mason; Wilson
FANTASY: Baker; Barron; Carman;
Carmody; Cross; Kerr;
Mlynowski; Napoli; Paulsen;
JANUARY 2005 
* 237
Price; Smith; Stone; Taylor;
Trumbore; Vande Velde
Fathers-fiction: de Guzman
Fire-poetry: Singer
Fish-stories: Wood
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Andersen; Hayes; Napoli;
Norman; Stone
Friends-fiction: Mazetti;
McWilliams; Mlynowski;
Petersen; Zusak
Future-fiction: McNaughton
Gangs-fiction: Bateman
GHOST STORIES: Hayes
Gifts-stories: Keller; Wells
Grandfathers-fiction: Morris
Grandmothers-stories: Wells
HISTORICAL FICTION: Borden;
Chipman; Dahlberg; Durbin;
Farrell; Holmes; Martin; Wilson
History, European: Borden
History, U.S.: Bausum; Marrin;
McWhorter; Rubin; Schanzer;
Sommer
Horses-fiction: Holmes
Hugs-stories: Horning; Van
Genechten
HUMOR: Allen; Bateman;
Cheshire; de Guzman; Horowitz;
James; Kerr; Mason; Paulsen;
Stone
Identity-fiction: McNaughton
Immigration-fiction: Durbin
Insects-fiction: Horowitz
Islands-fiction: Haycak
Jews: Rubin
Labor movement-fiction: Farrell
LANGUAGE ARTS: Bartoletti;
Grandits; Rumford
Letters-stories: Wells
Lighthouses-fiction: Chipman
Literature, English: Sutherland
Love-fiction: Zusak
Love-stories: Van Genechten
Magic-fiction: Trumbore; Vande
Velde
Mexico-stories: Dorros
Mothers-fiction: Carmody; Cassidy;
Chipman; Martin; Napoli
Moving-fiction: de Guzman
Music and musicians: Rappaport
MYSTERIES: Carman; Zusak
Native Americans: Rumford
Nepal-fiction: Stewart
Nurses and nursing-fiction:
Brugman
Oppression-fiction: Durbin
Orphans-fiction: Barron
Pets-fiction: Horowitz
Pigs-stories: Horning
Plays-fiction: Sutherland
POETRY: Bartoletti; Grandits;
Singer
Popularity-fiction: Mlynowski
Presidents: Marrin; Sommer
Princesses-fiction: Baker
Prophecies-fiction: Taylor
Racism-fiction: McDonald
Reading aloud: Andersen; Bolden;
Mason; Norman; Singer
Reading, easy: Cobb; Horowitz;
Trumbore
Reading, reluctant: Arbogast;
Bateman; Bolden; Gilders;
Grandits; Paulsen
Relationships-fiction: Brugman;
Haycak
Revolutionary War: Schanzer
RHYMING STORIES: Wood
Romance-fiction: Cheshire; Price;
Sutherland
SCARY STORIES: Hayes;
McKissack
School-fiction: McDonald; Mills
Science: Cobb
SCIENCE FICTION:
McNaughton
Secrets-fiction: Petersen
Self-image-fiction: Vande Velde
Slavery: Mitchell
Slaves-stories: Stroud
Sports-stories: Keller
SPORTS STORIES: Bolden;
Cooper
Stepmothers-fiction: Mlynowski;
Napoli
Storytelling: Hayes; Norman
Storytime: Keller; McKissack; Roth;
Wood
Suicide-fiction: Mazetti
Summer-fiction: Trumbore
238 
* THE BULLETIN
Teen pregnancy-fiction:
McWilliams
Time travel-fiction: Paulsen; Price
TODDLER BOOKS: Van
Genechten; Wood
Underground Railroad-stories:
Stroud
Unions-fiction: Farrell
Volunteers-fiction: Mills
Voyages and travel-fiction: Carman;
Cassidy; Cross; Kerr; Stewart
War-fiction: Wilson
War-stories: McKee
Women's studies: Bausum
Work-fiction: Farrell
Work-stories: Roth
World cultures: Stewart
World War II: Borden
Writers and writing-fiction:
Petersen
Zoos: Gilders
Ia
BLACK HISTORY MONTH RESOURCES
ADVENTURES
OF HIGH JOHN
THE CONQUEROR
STEVE SANFIELD
Slavehero stories with
choracter-study benefit for
today's young readers
Multiple-Award-Winner
Learn more at
www.augusthouse.com
$11.95
ISBN -87483-433-3
Peruse 
our online 
catalog 
at
www.ougusthouse.com or call
toll-fee for a complete 
print 
catalog:
800-284-8784. August 
House
sponsors 
the National 
Storytelling
Conference 
and the National 
Storytelling
Festival. 
Visit 
www.storynet.org and
www.storytellng 
ter.Jet
HAWK
INS TO FLY
1Y 
NORFOLK
es about purpose,
ence, confidence,
Scourage
new storytelling CD by the
ree-time Emmy winner
earn more at
vww.augusthouse.com
$14.95
ISBN 0-87483-747-2
AR OUT LOUD
L. f
Sne 
poetry or
Paul Laurence Dunbar
AS PERFORMED BY
BOBBY NORFOLK
A new storytelling CD
Learn more at
www.augusthouse.com
$14.95
ISBN 087483-721-9
AFRICAN-AMERICAN
FOLKTALES FOR
YOUNG READERS
Winner of two awards
Learn more at
www.augusthouse.com
$11.95 paperback
ISBN 0-87483-309-4
AUGUST
HwjUSE
www. augusthouse. corn
BENEATH THE
BLAZING SUN
Stories from the African-American
Journey by REX ELLIS
Recommended reading,
Bladk Diaspora Magazine
Learn more at
www.ougusthouse.com
$14.95 paperback
ISBN 0-87483-488-0
THIRTY-THREE
MULTICULTURAL
TALES TO TELL
World folktales condensed for
children to read and tell
Recommnnded by
Kirkus Reviews
and Schol Lbrary Jourw
Learn more at
www.augusthouse.com
$15.00 paperback
ISBN 0-87483-266-7
EAST AFRICAN
FOLKTALES
DR. VINCENT MULI WA KITUKU
Recommended by
Multichwtral Review
Learn more at
www.augusthouse.com
$9.95 paperback
ISBN 0-87483-489-9
August House is the
Storytelling Source.
SPICY HOT COLORS
up 
"Rn^v 
nUU,
Iu ari i
LIBRARIANS, REVIEWI
AND KIDS AGREE
"Learning a foreign language
has never been so much fun as
in this bouncing introduction to
names of nine colors in Spanish
Snappy, image-filled verses brin
life some of the hues and tradit
of Latino Culture."
-School 
ibrary Journal
"This zingy color primer takes ii
inspiration from "the spicy hot (
[that] sizzle on a Saturday nigi
throughout Latin America."
D,,hl;bh l WI 
,,
-
I UUIIIU) 
fFtl y
"Spicy Indeed. This boldly designed book is
a welcome treat after the more sedate books
that introduce children to colors. A Brilliant
feast of color that will entice children as it
helps them learn a few Spanish words."
-Booklist
"Shahan's phrases encourage the reader's &
listener's paraticipation by snapping, whacking,
or tapping along... Barragn's work echo the
exhuberance of the verse."
-Kirkus 
Reviews
Sherry Shahan
Illustrated by Paula Barrogan
ISBN 
0-87483-741-3
$16.95
Sewn hardback binding
8.5"x 11"
24 pages; all full color
AUGUST
HOUSEo
www. augusthouse. corn
August House is the Storytelling Source.
AUGUST 
HOUSE 
/ P.O. BOX 
3223 / LITTLE 
ROCK, 
AR 72203 / 201 EAST 
MARKHAM 
72201 / 1-800-284-8784 / FAX 
501-372-5579
SToWanFhoa BMFmEAl C oCrYaE
Connectaig Children and Narrative
EoIrwD 
BE TS HEARtNZ,JANIcE M. DEL NcGRo,
CHRISTINEJENKNS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Aerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget
that children are not simply passive receptacles for
whatever treasure or trash the adult world throws at
them but are lively agents who are continually inter-
acting with their environment. Children actively cre-
ate meaning as readers, viewers, and listeners. The
39W Allerton Park Institute papers emphasize the criti-
cal need to connect children and narrative as a way to
affect their development as listeners, readers, view-
Number 39; 14 pages; 
ers, and evaluators of literature-and information in
paper; $21.95* 
all forms.
The Bulletin Storytelling Reviews Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotape
Enrri 
YDJANICE 
M. Da. NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSC
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin Storytelling Review con-
tains:
S162 alphabeticallyarranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
ormiauon ror eacn 
istrrDutor liste
at alows readers to search for tape by ISBN 
0-8784
^-. ...
,t, 
.
mars: 
rrr 
S 
*
F_ 
A I'll iki hic h-ofll thc
Glldilýilc Sclmol (d 
& 111hit-ImItioll ,ýcicllclt
Pilbllcmiolls oificc
L_ 
A
n
r. 
;~ 
r. 
r.
Univerity of Iinois Prem
1325 South Oak Street 
P
Champaign, IL 61820 
P
U.SA. 
P
ADDEss SERs'ME REQUBSTED
I
I
t
r·;
Ub-ab1UtU(;Uo 
lo ) 
:; 
:;1 -A
JOT,,
ý0)
ODICALS
MPAIGN, IL
;
_ 01#r 
^f^^'
y
.
You may now access The Buletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2003 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
1. Go to http://www.prairienet.orgccb/
2. 
When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and pass-
word. This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit
number but may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password In a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at http://www.lisuluc.edu/puboff/bccb
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uuc.edu.
