I L LINOI
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
S
_ _
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
I 
School Library Journal stars
Mississippi Mud
by Ann Turner
Full-color pictures by Robert J. Blake
"Turner offers a splendid tale of the pioneering spirit. Traveling
west from Kentucky to Oregon in the 1800s, three children keep
a journal of their thoughts, feelings, and events along the way.
These poetic passages captu the hardship, fears, joys, adventures,
and sorrows of that journey.... The vivid writing is ideal for
savoring at story hours."-Kirkus Reviews
"To describe this book simply as a collection of poetry would be an
injustice. This is historical fiction in the form of verse. The images
Turner creates are stunning. 
Blake's watercolor illustrations
elegantly capture the scenery in warm earth tones with a
delightful attention to detail. Some books are breathtaking in
every respect. This is one of them."-SLJ
Also by Ann Turner
SHAKER HEARTS
Full-color ictures
by Wendel Minor
Ages 6-9. $14.95TR (0-06-025369-X)
$4.89 LB (0-06-025370-3)
An I Can Read Book*
DUST FOR DINNER
Full-color pictures
by Robert Barrett
Ages 7-9. $14.95TR (0-06-023376-1)
$14.89 LB (0-06-023377-X)
$3.75 PB (0-06-444225-X)
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
October 1997
Vol.51 No. 2
A LOOK INSIDE
39 
THE BIG PICTURE
The Gardener by Sarah Stewart; illustrated by David Small
40 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
46 
* The Facts Speak for Themselves by Brock Cole
51 
* Julie's WolfPack by Jean Craighead George; illus. by Wendell Minor
54 
* The Day of the Dead by Tony Johnston; illus. by Jeanette Winter
69 
* Mailing May by Michael O. Tunnell; illus. by Ted Rand
70 
* Gladiator written and illus. by Richard Watkins
71 
* Bunny Money written and illus. by Rosemary Wells
74 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
75 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM))
CENTER STAFF
Shirley Chan
Jennifer Sherwood DeBaillie
Linda Fenster
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1997 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by David Small, from The Gardener ©1997 and used by permission of Farrar,
Straus & Giroux.
OCTOBER 1997 
* 39
THE BIG PICTURE
The Gardener
by Sarah Stewart; illus. by David Small
Lydia Grace Finch is a spindly young redhead with a knack for gardening and
letter-writing, both pivotal elements in this graceful retro tale set in the 1930s.
The illustrations have a documentary-like quality in their attention to narrative
details: in the opening spread on the front endpapers we find Lydia Grace in the
vegetable garden with Grandma, and then, camera-like, we follow them up the hill
to the house where two figures are obviously pondering a serious subject. The
stage is set for Lydia Grace's future, a future that unfolds in a series of letters
penned by the young woman. She writes, "Dear Uncle Jim, Grandma told us after
supper that you want me to come to the city and live with you until things get
better." The thing that needs to get better is the Depression, so until her father
finds a job Lydia Grace heads off to the city to work at the bakery owned by Uncle
Jim. Uncle Jim, her mama's brother, the uncle who never smiles. Ever.
Stewart's elegantly simple prose in Lydia Grace's letters exudes a sunny
optimism without ever forcing the reader into false sentimentality. Apt and un-
derstated little phrases capture the essence of the child's courage and triumph in a
difficult situation as she takes on the challenge of her dour uncle: "I wrote a long
poem for Uncle Jim. He didn't smile, but I think he liked it. He read it aloud,
then put it in his shirt pocket and patted it." After she discovers a secret place (a
garbage-strewn urban rooftop), her gardener's spirit is released: "I'm playing a
great trick on Uncle Jim. He sees me reading my mail, planting seeds in the
window boxes, going to school, doing my homework, sweeping the floor. But he
never sees me working in my secret place." Neither do we. "Love to all, Lydia
Grace. P. S.," she adds, "I'm planning on a big smile from Uncle Jim in the near
future"-and so are we.
Small's watercolor and pen art uses earthtoned backgrounds as a nostal-
gic showcase for the tiny splashes of pastels on the people and the flowers that are
the stars of this book. The illustrations warmly evvoke the ambience of the 1930s
from busy cityscapes to interior scenes (complete with FDR's picture on the wall
of the bakery). Lydia Grace's plight as she journeys by train from her country
home is visually poignant: her slightness is exaggerated as she stands alone in her
pale blue homemade frock against the towering charcoal caverns of the cathedral-
like city train station. Small sets the spirited carrot-topped heroine against the
background in each spread like a tiny little gem-and that is just what she is.
This isn't merely a very pretty picture book. This is a stellar tribute to the spirit
of a young girl who meets obstacles head on and celebrates her gifts within the
boundaries of her small world.
40 
* THE BULLETIN
July 4, 1936
Dearest Mama, Papa, and Grandma,
I am bursting with happiness! The
entire city seems so beautiful, especially
this morning.
The secret place is ready for Uncle
Jim. At noon, the store will close for the
holiday and then we'll bring him up to
the roof.
I've tried to remember everything
you ever taught me about beauty.
Love to all,
Lydia Grace
P.S. I can already imagine Uncle Jim's smile.
We finally see her secret garden, her goodbye gift to her taciturn uncle.
She has transformed that city rooftop into a floral extravaganza with a riot of blos-
soms exploding like fireworks on the Fourth ofJuly. Still no smile. But grab your
hankies, because the final page packs an emotional wallop as Uncle Jim lovingly
hugs his little niece in her familiar pale blue dress on her departure for home. A
few expert strokes of Small's pen give Uncle Jim's face a scowling tenderness as he
bids farewell to the little girl who made his solitary world bloom. We don't need
to see him smile. (Imprint information appears on p. 68.)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADA, ALMA FLOR, ad. 
The Lizard and the Sun: A Folktale in English and Spanish!
La lagarita y el sol: cuento tradicional en ingles y espaniol; tr. by Rosalma Zubizarreta;
illus. by Felipe Divalos. 
Doubleday, 1997 
4 0p
ISBN 0-385-32121-X 
$16.95 
R 
4-7yrs
Once, in ancient Mexico, the sun disappeared. For days the anxious people wait
for the sun to return, but it does not. When lizard discovers a rock glowing with
an inner light, she tells the emperor, and they awaken the sleeping sun; it returns
to the sky, shedding light and warmth on all the earth. Ada retells this traditional
tale with graceful language and readaloud rhythms, juxtaposing images of the te-
nacious, questing lizard against the darkness of jungle, marketplace, and palace.
Davalos' paintings are rich with color and expression as the bright green lizard
traverses the torchlit night in balanced compositions that spring to bright life with
the discovery of the brilliant, sleeping sun. The bilingual book has English text on
the left-hand page and Spanish text on the right. An author's note states that Ada
remembers this story from a fragment in an old reading textbook, and it gives
some cultural context although no specific written source. JMD
OCTOBER 1997 
* 41
ALTER, JUDY 
Beauty Pageants: Tiaras, Roses, and Runways. 
Watts,
1997 
64p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-531-20253-4 
$21.00 
R Gr. 4-8
For all the girls who sashay down living room runways and practice tearful bou-
quet acceptances in front of the mirror comes this commendably evenhanded ac-
count of "the pageant, self-enhancement, and talent industry." Alter traces its
history from the first Miss America contest in 1921, when local laws against bare
arms and legs were "relaxed just a bit for this contest," through the plethora of
current iterations (Miss USA, Miss Universe, etc.). Although much of the text
focuses on the Miss America contest with its hierarchical system of local, state, and
national competitions, Miss World, Grandma Bathing Beauty, Miss Posture Queen,
and Miss Beautiful Legs also get their moment in the spotlight. Critics of the
industry receive a fair hearing, and the absurdities, scandals, and pressures en-
demic to these pageants come through loud and clear. Still, Alter consistently
demonstrates understanding and respect for the appeal the contests have for com-
petitors and the firm foothold they have established in America's imagination.
Plenty of glamor shots of historic and modern vintage mingle with cameos of a
bed-jacketed and rhinestone tiara'd queen eating grapefruit and smiling for the
press and images of protesters carrying signs that read "Can Make-up Cover the
Wounds Of Our Oppression?" A glossary, index, and list of recommended read-
ings are included. EB
ANDERSON, JANET S. 
Sunflower Sal; illus. by Elizabeth Johns. 
Whitman,
1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-7662-X $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
"Sal was a big girl. She was bigger than Gran. She was biggerthan Ma. She wasn't
as big as Pa yet, but she was getting there." Sal is advised by Pa to "think big" and
"mostly she liked being big," except when it came to quilting like her Gran, then
she really is "too big and clumsy." Coupled with a lean, well-crafted text, oil
paintings in sunny golds and browns predominate in scenes of prairie wholesome-
ness including billowy handmade quilts, lush green fields, and a close, countrified
family (with wonderfully placid faces) living in a bygone era. In this understated
spin on being true to yourself, it eventually becomes obvious that Sal's talent is
gardening, not sewing. Her pa introduces Sal to the wonder of sunflowers and,
after some misplaced plantings, we finally celebrate Sal's surprise (as viewed by her
family from the peak of Bare Hill). There her handiwork is triumphantly revealed
in a simple yet dazzling climax: "Patches of farmland were outlined now by threads
of gold and tawny brown and coppery green. The land itself had been stitched
together with sunflowers." Listeners will root for Sal, appreciate her supportive
family, and thrill at her sunflower "quilt." Better have some sunflower seeds on
hand for the would-be Sals in your audience. PM
ANDREAE, GILES 
Rumble in the Jungle; illus. by David Wojtowycz. 
Little Tiger,
1997 
26p
ISBN 1-888444-08-8 
$14.95 
R 3-6 yrs
From its zebra-striped endpapers to its goofily grinning fauna, this picture book is
a storytime all by itself. Andreae's simple, humorous rhymes about elephants ("It's
great to be an elephant/ All big and fat and round,/ And wander through the
42 
* 
THE BULLETIN
jungle/ Just elephing around"), snakes ("The boa constrictor's a slippery snake/
Who squashes then swallows his prey./ He knows that it's not very friendly or
kind,/ But they do taste much nicer that way"), and others are unpretentious and
amusing. Wojtowycz's illustrations have the same kind of appeal: brilliant blue
sky, verdant green foliage, and a grinning variety of animals peeking from trees and
bushes combine in balanced compositions large enough for group viewing. Each
object in the acrylic illustrations is surrounded by a thin halo of white that adds to
the airy brightness of the palette. While the rhymes may be more silly than origi-
nal, and the illustrations have a deliberate coloring-book naivete, they are still go-
ing to get some giggles from young listeners. Combine these jungle jingles with
some creative dramatics, and turn your storytime into one wild place. JMD
ARNOLD, TEDD 
Parts; written and illus. by Tedd Arnold. 
Dial, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2041-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-2040-8 
$14.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Our distraught young narrator tells with horror of his gradual physical dissolution;
he's sure that the hair in his comb, his belly-button lint, and his peeling skin mean
that "the glue that holds our parts together/ isn't holding me!" His panic leads him
to masking-tape himself together until his bemused parents impart some basic
truths about growth. The ballad-meter verse bounds along, touching on authentic
childish alarm at bodily changes while exploring bodily grossnesses with gusto ("A
chunk of something gray and wet/ Fell right out of my nose"-but don't panic, it's
not from his brain after all). Arnold's hero is a big bloated head on spindly limbs
that extrude from his clothing; all of his energy goes into his huge reptilian eyes
(and that wide flat mouth has a faintly froggy air as well), which stare panicked at
every new development. Textured with frenetic scribbles rather than the more
orthodox hatching, the watercolor wash art sets our narrator in rooms filled with a
deeply interested collection of toys (the action hero and the dinosaur appear to be
the most affected by the drama) and helpful literature (AllAbout Gray Stuff seems
a useful title). This hovers attractively on the edge of disgusting, and kids will get
a kick out of the sum of these parts. DS
Avi 
What Do Fish Have to Do With Anything? and Other Stories; illus. by Tracy
Mitchell. 
Candlewick, 1997 
203p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7636-0329-5 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7636-0412-7 
$4.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
The seven stories here all seem to focus on kids in quandaries who are trying to find
a way out. In "The Goodness of Matt Kaizer," a troublemaking preacher's kid is
mistaken for an angel by a dying man; Gregory aims to become a "Teacher Tamer"
when Mrs. Wessex picks on him unjustly once too often; Eve is alarmed when her
beloved cats refuse to leave her alone after their death in "Pets." The stories are
direct and explanatory, without the vignettish subtleties that sometimes go over
the heads of younger readers, and the points will be clear even to the literarily
inexperienced. If anything, Avi errs a bit too much in the direction of clarity,
contriving his plot packages too tidily and writing with more smoothness than
excitement or energy. Kids with aims for loftier stuff than Paul Jennings (see
Unbearable, BCCB 7/95, and others) but not quite ready for Tim Wynne-Jones
(Some of the Kinder Planets, BCCB 5/95) will appreciate the approachable entries
here. A new-wavy black-and-white print decorates each story. DS
OCTOBER 1997 
* 43
BIAL, RAYMOND 
The Strength of These Arms: Life in the Slave Quarters; written
and illus. with photographs by Raymond Bial. 
Houghton, 1997 
4 0p
ISBN 0-395-77394-6 $15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Bial's newest photoessay depicts the heartbreaking plight of slaves living in the
pre-Civil War South. Simple, often poignant photographs make arresting con-
trasts between plantation ("the big house") sumptuousness and the poverty-stricken
barrenness of the slave quarters. Laced through the text are insightful references to
the African slaves' contribution to American culture including words (banjo, cola,
tote), food (gumbo, barbeque), folktales (Uncle Remus), music, religion, and crafts-
manship. Appalling details ("Nancy Williams described how her master 'picked
up a hand full of worms, he did, an' stuffed 'em inter my mouth; Lordy knows
how many of dem shiny things I done swallered, but I sho' picked 'em off [from
the tobacco plant] careful arter that'") drive the bleak realism of bondage home for
the reader. The forcefulness of this title, however, is often diluted with all-or-
nothing generalities ("no slaves were happy with their fate"), shallow conclusions,
("Children . . . led difficult lives, but there was little sibling rivalry"), and superfi-
cial photo captions ("Slaves worked hard to keep their cabins clean and tidy").
Allowing the carefully researched sources and stark photographs to speak for them-
selves would have more effectively served to enlighten young history buffs about
one of the most despicable practices in American history, but this is a solid place to
start. Further reading is appended. PM
BLAKE, ROBERT J. 
Akiak: A Talefrom the Iditarod; written and illus. by Robert J.
Blake. 
Philomel, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22798-9 
$15.95 
R 5-8yrs
Akiak is a musher's lead dog embarking on her seventh Iditarod. On Day Four, a
minor foot injury means she's out of the game and that her musher will continue
without her, but she bolts away from the helicopter that's to fly her out and takes
off after her team. Akiak follows the trail through the various checkpoints, evad-
ing capture and becoming a celebrity ("A crowd lined the trail to watch her run
through the town"), getting meals from scraps left out for her by people along the
way. Finally on Day Ten, she catches up with musher Mick and the rest of the
team, and though rules prevent her from going back into harness, she points them
down the right trail and joins them in their victorious finish. The pre-title movie-
style opening is mannered and unnecessary, providing an obstacle to reading aloud,
but the story is stirring and involving and the anthropomorphization minimal.
The excitement of the venture for both dogs and humans is evident, and the casual
implications about equality (both Akiak and Mick the musher are female) un-
forced. Blake's oils are snow-blown and vivid, with varying perspectives but an
emphasis on dog-level views; the faces are stiffer than even frigid weather could
justify, but the sweeping vistas and the play of light and shadow are impressive.
An endpaper map depicts Iditarod routes and makes it easy to follow Akiak's jour-
ney; an author's note gives a little more background about the race and the rel-
evant details. DS
BOOTH, DAVID 
The DustBowl; illus. by Karen Reczuch. 
Kids Can, 1997 
32p
ISBN 1-55074-295-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Matthew wonders how long his family can hold onto their farm during the current
dry spell; his grandfather assures him, "As long as it takes.... It's not as bad as the
44 
* THE BULLETIN
last drought" and reminisces about how he and his wife weathered the "Big Dry"
of the 1930s, when their prosperous wheat farm on the Canadian plains literally
turned to dust. It is easy to forget that the dust storms of Steinbeckian lore en-
croached into Mexico and Canada, leaving those nations with their own tales to
tell. Apart from the Union Jack flying on the schoolhouse flagpole, however, this
fictionalized account could have taken place anywhere the "black blizzard" blew.
No particulars are offered on how Grandpa survived through the better part of
that decade as other farmers abandoned their land, and no explicit connection is
made between farming practice and topsoil depletion. Reczuch's grainy graphite
and watercolor illustrations capture the eerie aridity of the wind-scoured land-
scape, while romanticizing the multigenerational farm family and its unflagging
faith in the coming rains. EB
BROWN, DON 
Alice Ramsey's Grand Adventure; written and illus. by Don
Brown. 
Houghton, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-70127-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Brown, author of Ruth Law Thrills a Nation (BCCB 12/93), once again offers
young readers a true-life adventure with a little-known heroine. In this case, Alice
Ramsey "wanted to be the first woman to drive across America," and after spend-
ing June 9 to August 7, 1909-a total of 59 days-driving from New York City to
San Francisco, that's who she became. Obstacles such as rain, mud, swollen and
bridgeless rivers, huge potholes, mechanical problems, hailstorms, and roads that
really weren't couldn't keep our heroine from achieving in her Maxwell touring
car what most Indy 500 drivers would find unimaginable. When crossing the
Platte River on a mile long railroad bridge, "she drove carefully and kept mov-
ing-if she didn't, the Maxwell's tires would become trapped between the railroad
ties." Yikes. The rigors of her journey are captured in one evocative watercolor
scene after the next: the grassy expanse of lonely, sweeping Nebraska prairie; the
cold blue depths of a desert night with just the wispiest bit of white from the
headlamps to light the way; the deep greens of the Sierra Nevada pines as the
Maxwell struggles up the heights. Excellent pacing, splendid paintings, and a
"will-she-make-it?" plot add up to Triple-A Motor Club perfection that's well-
suited for kids not up to speed for Patricia Rusch Hyatt's Coast to Coast with Alice
(BCCB 9/95), for older readers on the same topic. Team this with Burleigh's
Flight (BCCB 11/91) for a storytime of inspiring travel milestones. PM
BUFFIE, MARGARET 
The Dark Garden. Kids Can, 1997 
237p
ISBN 1-55074-288-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Thea has lost her memory after a bike accident, and her return home is traumatic:
her busy parents have clearly been passing parental duties for the two younger girls
onto Thea, and they're not happy about taking up the load themselves. Thea is
further confused by whispers of memory that seem to come from someone else's
life, and she gradually realizes that she's haunted by the shade ofSusannah, a young
woman who lived in her house seventy years ago, and who wants Thea to find out
why her lover deserted her. The divisive effect of being caught between two worlds
is creepily conveyed, and Thea's reasons for dissatisfaction with her family life are
justified, if overdrawn. The plotting gets overcomplicated and nebulous, how-
ever, with a psychic boy-next-door, an unoriginal fate for Susannah (she's acciden-
OCTOBER 1997 
* 45
tally killed by her jilted fianc6), and an identity-switch device. This isn't up to the
standard of Barbara Michaels' Ammie, Come Home, which is a classic on the same
themes, but readers fond of ghosts and feeling overburdened by their everyday
duties will appreciate Thea's struggle with both. DS
CADNUM, MICHAEL 
The Lost and Found House; illus. by Steve Johnson and Lou
Fancher. 
Viking, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-670-84884-0 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
4-8 yrs
There are no hearty, sensitive moving men and chipper, consoling parents in this
picture book about moving to a new home. Cadnum recognizes that pulling up
roots is a bittersweet experience for the whole family: "Mom and I check the
empty rooms to see the things which are not there. .. . Here is where the roller
skates tumbled downstairs all by themselves and left a trail of dents in the steps."
Dad chatters nervously and pointlessly; the young narrator cannot get to sleep in
the motel; come morning, Mom can't eat. Upon arrival at the new house, though,
things are inexorably dragged back to normalcy: "Mom and Dad are holding up
the picture of the red horses and saying it can't go here and it can't go there,"
neighbor children whisk a Frisbee across the lawn, and the narrator knows that his
aquarium will soon be bubbling again. Johnson and Fancher's densely brushed
acrylic paintings, variously angled against the white background like snapshots in
an album, employ the same meticulous attention to each spare detail as Cadnum's
text-an egg-encrusted fork and a toy truck on the table top at the diner; the
corner of an opened packing box framed by the window. The subdued palette of
the early scenes of leaving and traveling brightens into sunnier shades as the un-
packing commences, and the bright orange Frisbee fairly glows with promise of
better times ahead. EB
CHANG, MARGARET, ad. 
The Beggar's Magic: A Chinese Tale; ad. by Margaret
and Raymond Chang; illus. by David Johnson. 
McElderry, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81340-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When a beggar priest arrives in the village, young Fu Nan befriends him, as do
most of his neighbors. Only the greedy Farmer Wu will not share with the holy
man, and he learns a lesson about the importance of a generous spirit from the
wise beggar priest. Based on an ancient Chinese folktale, this story of magic,
generosity and community has a slow-paced, wordy text accompanied by deli-
cately drafted illustrations. From the first revelation of the old man's unusual
powers (he brings a painted sparrow to life and sets it free) to the final showdown
with Farmer Wu over a wagonload of overpriced pears, the lengthy tale has a
gentle momentum that is supported by Johnson's elegantly rendered, sandalwood-
shaded paintings. This may work as a long readaloud or as a readalone for those
beginning readers wary of longer, unillustrated chapter books. A detailed source
note is provided. JMD
COCHRAN, THOMAS 
Roughnecks. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1997 
24 8p
ISBN 0-15-201433-0 
$15.00 
R Gr. 7-12
The last time Travis Cody played against rival football hero Jericho Grimes, he
choked on the final play. Now the two teams and the two players are headed for a
46 
* 
THE BULLETIN
rematch, and this time it's for the Louisiana State High School Football Champi-
onship. In Cody's hometown of Oil Camp, football is all, and on the day of the
game he is subject to everyone's advice, encouragement, and expectations. This is
his second chance, and the message is clear-don't blow it. Cody painstakingly
narrates the events of game day, ending with the first play of the big game, with
thoughtful precision and an informed voice. His impressions of his peers, his
adult friends, and his own potential comprise the body of his story as he endeavors
to get psyched up for the game but not psyched out by the fact that he knows
Grimes is a better-in fact stellar-player. Cochran plays with time, flashing
from remembered incidents to the present, giving context for Cody's current state
of mind. Much of the action is internal, and the prose occasionally bogs down in
the details, but Cody is a complex, admirable character. This is an involving study
of a young athlete reacting to intense pressure with extreme grace. JMD
COHEN, CARON LEE 
Crookjaw; illus. by Linda Bronson. 
Holt, 1997 
26p
ISBN 0-8050-5300-X 
$15.95 
R 
4-8 yrs
A colonial whaler from Nantucket who caught his first whale with his teething
ring, and whose portrait replaced Noah's in the Seafarers' Hall of Fame, Ichabod
Paddock seems to have met his match with the seething, spitting, jumping, smash-
ing behemoth Crookjaw. When he's late returning home on the Blubber Boiler,
his faithful wife Smilinda rows out to see what's amiss and spots "two feet on their
way into a whale's mouth. Those feet were wearing the very boots she'd given
Ichabod on their wedding day." Knowing a spell when she sees one, Smilinda
rows home, molds her grandma's silver egg cups into a harpoon, and rearms her
"half-chewed, half-dead, and all wet" husband. He spears the whale but drops the
harpoon rope in flabbergasted amazement as driftwood and a red shoe float out of
the monster's jaws, a sure sign that the witch who had possessed Crookjaw is now
harmless flotsam. Bronson chronicles Ichabod's travail with the whale in a gallery
of deep jewel-toned sea blue and green oil paintings, with curly-tipped waves that
thrash and roll and undulate, threatening to slide the elongated characters right off
the deck. This version of the Crookjaw legend (no source notes are offered) packs
more fun than fear, and if the roiling illustrations provoke mild mal de mer, the
view over the rails is well worth it. EB
COLE, BROCK 
The Facts Speakfor Themselves. 
Front Street, 1997 
[18 6p]
ISBN 01-886910-14-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 10-12
Thirteen-year-old Linda has taken responsibility for everything her remarkably
self-absorbed, neglectful mother refuses to handle, including family finances, her
younger brothers, and her mother's elderly lover after his stroke. When her mother
moves in with Frank Perry (a decent but not particularly bright man) and gets a
job with a real-estate broker, Linda encounters yet another adult eager to exploit
her-her mother's boss, Mr. Green. Cole's thought-provoking work opens with
Linda in a police station after witnessing the murder of Green by Perry, who had
discovered the sexual relationship between Linda and Green. The novel takes the
form of Linda's "preliminary report" on herself, undertaken with the approval of
her social worker. The dialogue appears without quotation marks, giving a sort of
"he said-she said" informality to this fast-moving, ultimately horrifying story. It is
not Linda's rape, Green's murder, and the subsequent suicide of Frank Perry that
OCTOBER 1997 
* 
47
are the most terrifying things about Linda's life-it is the fact that she sees nothing
unusual about these events. Her sojourn with the Catholic nuns after the murder/
suicide is one of the most peaceful experiences of her youth, and her simple appre-
ciation for living in an orderly, nonabusive environment is heartbreaking. Her
final words reveal an almost fatalistic pragmatism: "I want to go home. I under-
stand very clearly that it was a mistake to get mixed up with Mr. Green and I won't
do anything like that again. I'm ready to work hard in school. I understand the
dangers of unprotected sex. I will say no to drugs. If there is some other require-
ment, tell me what it is." Cole has created a character with a chillingly distinct
voice and placed her in the midst of some of society's most serious issues: the
exploitation of children by adults, of the defenseless by the powerful, of the igno-
rant by the knowledgeable. A complex character of great emotional subtlety, Linda
is caught up in the uncontrollable facts of her life, powerless yet capable, battered
yet loving, and disturbingly unforgettable. JMD
COONEY, CAROLINE B. 
The Terrorist. Scholastic, 1997 
[208p]
ISBN 0-590-22853-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 6-9
The Williams family is enjoying their life abroad in London until son Billy is
blown up by a bomb. Sixteen-year-old Laura cannot come to terms with her
brother's death, and her desire to hunt down the terrorist who killed him leads her
to see everyone as a suspect; she's also conflicted when a beleaguered classmate at
her international school asks for her help-and Billy's passport. This is a challeng-
ing and topical subject, but the book fails to rise to it. Cooney's clipped para-
graphs are choppy rather than tense, and her efforts to convey the extremes of
emotion end up awkwardly operatic (Laura cries, "I want to be the one instead. I
want the package in my hands. I want it to blow my ribs apart and paste my brains
on the wall and spray my blood on the baby carriage!"). Nor is the story of Laura's
search for Billy's killer credibly devised, seeming to lead to its dramatic conclusion
merely for drama's sake. There are much better Cooneys on contemporary issues
(Driver's Ed, BCCB 9/94, for one); stick to those. DS
CORPI, LUCHA 
Where Fireflies Dance/Ahi donde bailan las lucidrnagas; illus. by
Mira Reisberg. 
Children's Book Press, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-89239-145-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In English and Spanish, Corpi gives readers a biographical story of her early life in
the Mexican town of Jiltipan. Opening with the investigation of the supposedly
haunted house of town revolutionary Juan Sebastian by Corpi and her older brother,
the story segues into the two siblings listening to the new jukebox outside the
cantina, listening to their grandmother tell stories ofJuan Sebastian and his search
for his destiny, and listening to their father sing them songs in the evenings. Al-
though the characters' faces are somewhat poorly articulated, Reisberg's framed
and bordered acrylic paintings are naively composed and vividly colored, with a
fanciful design and an unblended palette. This sentimental family story has some
elements, both textual and visual, that young readers will find involving. It may
require the intervention of an adult who can provide a context for Corpi's memo-
ries, but the opening scenes in the haunted house may be just enough to draw in
young readers. JMD
48 
* THE BULLETIN
COURSEN, VALERIE 
Mordant's Wish; written and illus. by Valerie Coursen. 
Holt,
1997 
[3 6p]
ISBN 0-8050-4374-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Mordant is a mole who wants a friend, so he wishes for one by blowing on a whole
bunch of dandelions, setting in motion a chain of events that results in the fulfill-
ment of his wish. From Calum, bike riding through a storm of feathery white
dandelion seeds, to the barber who gives a customer a very unusual haircut, to the
little girl who finds hidden messages in grocery lists, to the turtle who finally makes
it across a busy road, Coursen's amiable tale unfolds gently and sweetly. The
watercolor illustrations have a muted, old-fashioned feel reminiscent of Adrienne
Adams with their pure clean colors and use of generous amounts of white space.
This benevolent tale of a questing turtle and a wishing mole will emotionally en-
gage young listeners as they become involved in the chance meetings that ulti-
mately unite mole and turtle. The final illustrative vignette of Mordant and the
turtle shaking hands against a swirl of dandelion seeds is understated and touch-
ing. JMD
COWAN, CATHERINE 
My Life with the Wave; tr. and ad. from a story by Octavio
Paz; illus. by Mark Buehner. 
Lothrop, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12661-8 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12660-X 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Based on a story by Octavio Paz, this picture book has an odd plot indeed: a boy
bonds with a wave at the beach and takes it-actually, her, according to the book-
home as a liquid pet, until the onset of winter storms makes her unruly and re-
quires her return to the sea. What makes this personification successful where so
many others fail is its bold straightforwardness: the wave is treated with a certain
poetic realism instead of whimsy. Though the language sometimes gets a bit ba-
roque for the intended audience ("To touch her then was like touching a piece of
night tattooed with fire"), the conceptual play will engage them ("If I caught and
hugged her, she would rise up tall like a liquid tree, then burst into a shower and
bathe me in her foam"), and there's some matter-of-fact humor ("My parents say
good riddance to bad waves and I am never to bring home another"). Buehner's
art is not in punning watercolor but rather in acrylic and oil; the illustrations have
a hyperrealistic sheen and solidity that allow for exaggeration (the bug-eyed cat in
particular) without floating off into frothy fancy. If you're looking for an offbeat
pet story, catch this wave. DS
DAVIES, NICOLA 
Big Blue Whale; illus. by Nick Maland. 
Candlewick,
1997 
30p
ISBN 1-56402-895-X 
$15.99 
R* 
5-8 yrs
In fluid, descriptive prose Davies discusses the life cycle of the biggest creature on
earth, the blue whale, beginning with a fascinating physical description that com-
pares the whale and its attributes to items common to young children's experience:
"Reach out and touch the blue whale's skin. It's springy and smooth like a hard-
boiled egg, and it's slippery as wet soap." Davies follows the blue whale on its
travels through the sea, explaining what it eats, how it migrates, how mothers care
for their young, and how blue whales communicate across great distances. As in
this same publisher's Read and Wonder series (see Wallace's Think ofan Eele BCCB
OCTOBER 1997 
* 
49
5/93), a primary text forms the main narrative, giving basic information, and a
secondary text (bold, in smaller typeface, and curving about the illustrations) pro-
vides additional explanation. Maland's ink and watercolor art is delightfully in-
volving, his compositions and delicate precision providing a sense of size and
perspective that is both informative and visually pleasing. The combination of
Davies' nearly poetic prose and Maland's graceful illustrations will give this title a
permanent place on science and readaloud shelves. The concluding image of the
blue whale, small in a large ocean lit by a full moon, combines with the poetic text
for a most satisfying ending as the blue whale calls to its far-flung brethren: "Who
knows what they say. 'Here I am!' would be enough... because in the vastness of
the green seas, even a blue whale is small-and hard to find." JMD
DOUCET, SHARON ARMS, ad. 
Why Lapin's Ears Are Long and Other Tales from the
Louisiana Bayou; illus. by David Catrow. 
Orchard, 1997 
58p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33041-9 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30041-2 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Three tales of the Cajun trickster Compere Lapin are presented in this elaborately
illustrated picture book. Doucet's lengthy retellings explain why Compare Lapin's
ears are long, why his tale is short, and how he won the hand of the lovely Ma'amselle
Bijou Deer in marriage through his usual chicanery. The text includes some French
and Cajun terms (defined in a glossary with a pronunciation guide) and some
remarkable turns of phrase that fall trippingly from the tongue, like "Now Lapin
was clever and cunning, and so crafty he could trick the stripes off a skunk. But
what he wasn't was big, and he wasn't strong. So he wasn't happy." Catrow's
illustrations contain his trademark wit, and his interpretation of each animal per-
sonality is a winning combination of sly hilarity and inside jokes. From the rivetingly
scary wildcat to the goofily hopping-into-the-sunset rabbit, from the grotesque
enormity of crocodile to the limpid eyes of Ma'amselle Bijou, Catrow captures
character through caricature in watercolor and inks as Lapin and his cohorts go on
their merry ways. A brief introduction gives some background on the origin and
cultural context of the tales, including similarities to that other American trickster,
Br'er Rabbit. JMD
DOUGAS, KIRK 
The Broken Mirror: A Novella; illus. by Jenny Vasilyev. 
Simon,
1997 
[96p]
ISBN 0-689-81493-3 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Moishe is ten years old when his family flees from Munich to a country farm in a
futile attempt to escape the Nazis. Betrayed by a farm employee, the whole family
is captured and transported to an unnamed concentration camp; at the end of the
war, Moishe is the only one of his family left alive. He claims to be Danny, a
Gypsy, not Moishe, a Jew, and he is sent to a Catholic orphanage in the United
States. After his only friend is adopted, Moishe/Danny runs away, stumbles upon
a synagogue on the Sabbath, and, in an emotional conclusion, is taken in by the
rabbi and returned to his faith. The title comes from Andersen's "The Snow
Queen" (one of Moishe's favorite stories) and refers to the mirror of Satan, which,
broken into billions of pieces, enters people's hearts and turns them to ice. In a
big-screen heart-wrencher of a final scene, Moishe tells his friend Roy "that he had
once lived in a country where many, many pieces of Satan's mirror had fallen ....
50 
* 
THE BULLETIN
He even suspected that maybe a very tiny piece had turned his heart to ice, just as
had happened to Kay. But the candles of the Sabbath had burned so brightly that
they had melted the ice. And, like Kay and Gerda, he and Roy would live happily
ever after." Moishe's story reads like a movie script, which is not necessarily a bad
thing. The novel is ferociously plot-driven, events following each other with great
rapidity and leaving logic and credulity shattered in their wake. There is still in-
herent drama in Moishe's story, and Douglas manages to stay true to the emo,-
tional core of his main character, giving the reader a view of historical occurrences
through the eyes of a former innocent. This may be the book to hand those reluc-
tant readers in search of some hi-lo historical fiction. JMD
EDUAR, GILLES 
Jooka Saves the Day; written and illus. by Gilles Eduar tr. by
Dominic Barth. 
Orchard, 1997 
33p
ISBN 0-531-30036-6 
$15.95 
R 
4-7yrs
Jooka-zay-kajoo thinks he's found kindred spirits the day he floats down the Zimbu
River ("deep in the Chapichapi rain forest"), bumps his head on a bridge piling,
and is immediately befriended by "fellow" crocodiles. The slightly self-conscious
Jooka keeps his wings handily hidden beneath his striped shirt for a month, but a
fire-spewing sneeze tips off his new playmates that he's surely no crocodile: "Flames
shoot from his mouth and two small, pointy wings pop from beneath his shirt.
The frightened crocodiles panic and throw themselves into the river." A wise old
pelican, gray-haired and bespectacled, clues Jooka in on his true dragon identity
and teaches him to develop and control his gifts; when Jooka rediscovers the croco-
diles, stranded in trees where they have fled from marauding hunters, he employs
his new-found talents to set everything right. This French import shares the un-
derstated humor and slightly formal tone of de Brunhoffs Babar series, and the
crocodiles' mythical terrain is as convincingly realized as the regal pachyderm's
Land of the Elephants. The lush, stylized rain forest (in which Gauguin might
have felt at home), rendered in primary and secondary colors tempered with gray,
bespeaks mysteries even beyond talking crocodiles and amiable dragons and hints
at adventures still to come. EB
ERNST, LISA CAMPBELL 
Bubba and Trixie; written and illus. by Lisa Campbell
Ernst. 
Simon, 1997 
35p
ISBN 0-689-81357-0 
$16.00 
M 
4-7 yrs
Bubba is a timid caterpillar ("He had never set even one of his sixteen feet off the
parsley plant where he was born") and Trixie an ebullient ladybug. Trixie encour-
ages Bubba to explore the wonders of the garden, and they frolic through the sum-
mer until Bubba discovers with alarm that his fate is to change. Next spring proves,
however, that even with his new butterfly accoutrements he's still Bubba, and his
wings enable him to share the wonders of flight with Trixie, who cannot fly due to
a crimped wing. Sentimental and heavy-handed, this shows little sign of the breezi-
ness of Ernst's other, more lively work. The lesson is laudable, but the talky text,
contrived devices (the differently abled ladybug in particular), and corny dialogue
("I wish I could touch the stars," Trixie whispers every night) weigh it down. The
pastel and ink illustrations have an energetically cartoonish appeal, however, and
the changing landscape is attractive if sometimes overcrowded. Parable-hungry
grownups will adore it, but kids will prefer the art to the story. DS
OCTOBER 1997 
* 
51
GEORGE, 
JEAN 
CRAIGHEAD 
Julie's Wolf Pack; illus. 
by Wendell
Minor. 
HarperCollins, 1997 
192p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027407-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027406-9 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Now there's a third in Julie's lupine saga (see Julie ofthe Wolves, BCCB 3/73, and
Julie, 10/94), this one focusing primarily on the wolf pack led by Kapu, son of
Amaroq, hero of Julie of the Wolves. Kapu's leadership is not as absolute as his
father's, and he must constantly fight off challenges from a new member of the
pack, and the appearance of rabies in the territory means that his leadership is all
that stands between the pack and destruction. When he is trapped for study by
humans, his daughter Sweet Fur Amy struggles to keep a fragmenting pack safe.
George's third volume in this trilogy is a different kind of book: this is a capable
and enjoyable, if slightly romanticized, animal story, not the transcendent per-
sonal and cultural exploration of the first volume. The story is a bit episodic, but
it keeps the characters of the multitude of wolves fairly clear, so resorting to the
lupine cast listing in the front isn't as necessary as one might fear. Though Julie
appears occasionally, what's really absorbing here are the pack dramas and adven-
tures, and kids will relish slipping into the four-footed world. Densely crosshatched
pencil drawings only occasionally succeed in capturing the wolves' appeal. DS
GREENE, RHONDA GOWLER 
Barnyard Song; illus. by Robert Bender. 
Atheneum,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80758-9 
$13.00 
R 
2-5 yrs
The animals in the barnyard make their usual noisy music together, "singing all
their usual notes in their usual voices, in their usual throats," when a cold-carrying
bee sneezes, and all the music stops. The crew comes down with a bad case of
barnyard flu, and it takes kettles of the farmer's savory soup before they get their
voices back and can resume their typical cacophony. If you are looking for a noisy,
participatory book for story and laptimes, this is the book for you. Greene's rhym-
ing, mewing, cockadoodledooing text rollicks along with animal sounds that just
beg for a group voice. Bender's medium-animator's paint on acetate backed
with black paper-has a transparent quality that makes the colors positively glow.
His farmyard animals have a ragtag, scalawag attitude, and they are physically
expressive with white teeth, shiny eyes, and an awkwardly creative disposition of
limbs that lends visual humor to the tale. The compositions are balanced even
though the perspective is often unusual or skewed. Use this one the next time you
want to hear "ACHOO!" echoed in chorus (along with the usual storytime mews,
moos, and quacks). JMD
GREENLAW, M. JEAN 
Welcome to the Stock Show. 
Lodestar, 1997 
[48p] 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-525-67525-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Greenlaw chronicles the work of preparing and exhibiting animals for a stock show,
following a 4-H member who shows goats, a boy in the Future Farmers of America
who's preparing his dairy heifer, and a Texas girl active in both organizations whose
passion is rabbits. The book provides absorbing details about show practices and
conventions ("It is typical to see winning ribbons sticking out of a back pocket. It
52 
* THE BULLETIN
is a cool way to show what you have won") and emphasizes the responsibility and
commitment of the young exhibitors and their families (at the state fair, one fam-
ily "moves into an extra pen next to their goats, and they spend two nights in
sleeping bags in the cold"). Some of the explanations will be insufficient for non-
agricultural readers, however (what is "dairy character" and how do you'ank goats
on it? If dairy heifers are sold when they become cows, does that mean that other
heifers or steers and bulls get kept till they're a ripe old age? Are the rabbits used
for meat or fur or are they all pets?), and sometimes the organization leaps around
confusingly. The photographs have some engaging views of curious goats and
cuddly bunnies, but they're often impaired by graininess or shadow. It's still hard
to beat the animal/kid pairing as a topic, however, and this is an area that many
young readers won't know about and will enjoy encountering. A glossary anda list
of sources for further information (most fairly technical) are included. DS
GUIBERSON, BRENDA Z. 
Teddy Roosevelt's Elk; illus. by Patrick O'Brien. 
Holt,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-4296-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
An opening spread finds Teddy Roosevelt surveying "elk and buffalo grazing as far
as the eye can see" on the plains of the Dakota Territory in 1884; the closing
spread pictures him riding through the rain and mud, observing that "hunters,
loggers, and settlers have altered the landscape forever," and remarks that he will
become a politician and "work to preserve the American wilderness." So much for
T.R. and the strenuous life-the balance of the picture book is set "faraway from
the plains ... in the Olympic Mountains to the northwest" and follows a year in
the life of an elk calf, its mother, and a bull elk. Details of the elks' physiology,
habitat, and social organization are presented in an intimate yet unsentimentalized
narrative that acknowledges that challenges for supremacy over a family group or
even death by starvation may be the price the calf will eventually pay for his hand-
some set of adult antlers. O'Brien's oil paintings feature somewhat stubby fauna
in bland, diorama-style poses, which do little to convey relative size of the animals.
A concluding note explains that Roosevelt Elk were named in honor of the man
who would become the "conservationist president," but listeners will probably
remain in a fog as to what the guy in the safari suit has to do with the elk in this
particular story. EB
HAMPTON, WILBORN 
Kennedy Assassinated! The World Mourns: A Reporter's
Story. 
Candlewick, 1997 
[96p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-56402-811-9 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 5-10
"Standing by the news desk . .
mostly trying to stay out of the way," rookie
reporter Bill Hampton just happened to pick up the phone at the Dallas office of
United Press International on November 22, 1963 ("Three shots were fired at the
motorcade!"). Instantly hurled into the mad scramble for information about
Kennedy's assassination, he found that his physical stamina and knowledge of the
area placed him among the leaders of the pack of newshounds that converged on
Parkland Hospital and Dallas police headquarters. Hampton reconstructs unfold-
ing events through the eyes of frenetic reporters who literally wrestle for phone
rights on the floor of the motorcade phone car, tie up hospital phone lines with
incoming calls, and out-guess, out-think, and out-run competitors for a scoop.
OCTOBER 1997 
* 53
Journalistic flair and raw, edge-of-the-seat urgency set this account apart from
standard works on the assassination; even history-shy readers will find the pages fly
by as they observe how the tragedy that ends a president's life ironically launches
the author's career. Crisp, spacious design, cunning chapter breaks, and intelli-
gently selected stock photos are added attractions. This title should be a list topper
not only for Kennedy aficionados, but also for aspiring journalists and young
technophiles pondering the Dark Age of telecommunications, just a short genera-
tion ago. EB
HEARNE, BETSY 
Seven Brave Women; illus. by Bethanne Andersen. 
Greenwillow,
1997 2 4p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14503-5 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14502-7 
$15.00 
5-9 yrs
[Books written by Bulletin staff are given a descriptive annotation rather than a
review and code rating.] In this picture book divided into eight brief chapters, a
young girl narrates the history of seven generations of brave women in her family,
ending with her resolve to make history in her own way. JMD
HOBERMAN, MARY ANN 
One of Each; illus. by Marjorie Priceman. 
Little,
1997 32p
ISBN 0-316-36731-1 
$15.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
Big yellow terrier Oliver Tolliver is blissfully content with his perfect home, in
which he has amassed exactly one of everything that could further his comfort: "It
all seemed so fine, every one-of-each thing,/ That he felt just as happy and proud
as a king." Dressed to the nines, he walks the neighborhood in search of someone
to whom he can display his domestic masterpiece and meets the alluring tabby
Peggoty Small, who proves polite but unimpressed: "A guest in your one-of-each
house does not fit./ It's made for one person and you, sir, are it!" After a little soul-
searching and a trip to the store, Oliver's house is refitted for company, and he and
Peggoty take tea together ("Oliver knew two was better than one!/ Jolly and friendly,
more cheerful, more fun!"); soon he's playing generous host to the neighborhood
animals. Although the verse is a tad overdrawn, it skips right along with Seussian
surefootedness, and the "happiness is sharing" message is patent but not preachy.
Released from real-world constraints, Priceman's whimsy flourishes in riotous color
and pattern schemes (Tolliver's hot pink cupboard against green flowered wallpa-
per and striped wainscot, dapper duds and dresses for our two stars) and a perfunc-
tory nod to perspective. Run this by the preschool or primary students when it's
time to lay down the classroom laws re: sharing and caring. EB
HOLEMAN, LINDA 
Saying Good-Bye. 
Lester/Stoddart Kids, 1997 
16 9p
ISBN 1-895555-47-7 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
There are ten stories here, examining issues of family, self-definition, perception,
and personal honor. In "Sweet Bird of Youth," the young narrator comes to a
realization about his cousin's vulnerability; "Toxic Love" depicts a girl passion-
ately interested in-and totally mistaken about-her teacher's romantic life; in
"Shasta," a popular girl realizes her self-absorption has led to a friend's victimiza-
tion; and there's "Something Fishy" when a girl pretends she's related to a celeb-
rity-and gets caught. The stories are sometimes a little predictable, a little easy,
54 
* 
THE BULLETIN
and Holeman's not quite the wordsmith that Tim Wynne-Jones (Some ofthe Kinder
Planets, BCCB 5/95) is, but the best stories here make a virtue of directness and
will reassure young readers by providing a clear point. Holeman focuses on emo-
tions and situations (desire for approval from peers, resentment of parents, and
sometimes vice versa) highly relevant to kids' daily lives, which gives these stories a
different kind of effectiveness than their more sophisticated brethren. DS
ISAACS, ANNE 
Treehouse Tales; illus. by Lloyd Bloom. 
Dutton, 1997 
85p
ISBN 0-525-45611-2 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Three siblings use their treehouse as homebase for both imaginative play and
thoughtful refuge in this three-story confection set in Pennsylvania farm country
in the late 1800s. The first story, "The Dragon's Tooth," features the oldest sib-
ling, Tom, who dreams of the glories of war and uses the treehouse to spy on the
enemy. He is impatient with his young brother Natty's fear of the dragon in the
treehouse until he sees the smoke for himself. "Treehouse Fever" concentrates on
middle sister Emily, who chafes against the restraints of being a girl and is exasper-
ated by her mother's continued treatment of her as an invalid after a childhood
illness long overcome. But Emily is proven hardy when she stays home from the
fair with a fever and makes a wild horseback ride to save the local farms from an
itinerant band of thieves. Natty, the youngest, is disturbed by his father's plans for
his future in "That Story about the Cherry Tree," because he wants to be presi-
dent, maybe. Natty makes his wishes known to his understanding father in a way
that will elicit groans and chuckles from both readers and listeners. The short-
story format lends itself to reading aloud, and Isaacs displays a smooth ease of
language that makes this a good transitional book for those fourth- or fifth-graders
not quite sure of chapter books. Lloyd Bloom's full-page, black-and-white illus-
trations are scattered generously throughout, and they have a warmth and vivid-
ness that is sure to draw even reluctant readers. JMD
JOHNSTON, TONY 
Day of the Dead; illus. by Jeanette Winter. 
Harcourt,
1997 
50p
ISBN 0-15-222863-2 
$14.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
In a clear, concise narrative Johnston relates the customs of the Mexican Day of
the Dead, following the eager children of one family as they impatiently ready
themselves for the festivities, baking, cooking, and decorating in honor of their
dearly departed. Finally, it is time. "The family gathers all the things they have
made for this day. And they go out into the night. Families from all the houses
come carrying all the things they have made. Carrying marigolds bright as suns.
And candles like stars." Johnston's poetic text is beautifully supported by Winters'
acrylic paintings, which show the holiday activities in a bright, vibrant palette in
shades of purple, pink, and teal. Each glowing single-page painting is set on a
black background and framed with design elements picked up from the main illus-
tration. The two double-page spreads bleed to the edges and have no text: one
depicts the parade of families entering the graveyard gate accompanied by mari-
gold-carrying angels with purple wings; the other shows the graveyard scene itself,
wherein the'families set candles and marigolds on the graves of their loved ones
prior to picnicking on pan de muertos (bread of the dead) and calaveras de azzcar
(sugar skulls). This is an easy introduction to the joy of this holiday on which
families remember their beloved ancestors with song, dance, and celebration. JMD
OCTOBER 1997 * 55
KAMIDA, VICKI 
NightMare. Random House, 1997 
192p 
(Random House
Riders)
ISBN 0-679-88628-1 
$15.00 
M 
Gr. 4-7
Horse-crazy Janet doesn't have the funds that her stable buddies have, so she's
making do with school horses and paying for lessons with stable work while the
other girls train on horses of their own for the upcoming show. One night she
dreams of riding away on a beautiful white mare; the dream is so vivid and specific
she goes in search of the mysterious horse and succeeds in finding her up in the
depopulated arroyo, whereupon she befriends the mare's owners (a brother and
sister working the ranch of their dead parents) and starts to train Storm, as Janet
names her, for the show. While horse-crazy girls are generally popular with their
reading sisters, the equestrian material here is awkwardly written and laced with
errors, and the training descriptions tend to drag on. More importantly, the su-
pernatural elements are almost totally devoid of atmosphere, and the book is clut-
tered with other plot particulars (Janet's relationship with her grandfather, her
falling out with a friend) that reduce the impact of the main story; Janet herself is
insufficiently engaging to overcome these flaws. Determined fans of fantasy equi-
tation may enjoy following the book through its paces, but this doesn't have the
kick that a story about riding a beautiful ghost horse really ought to. DS
KELLERHALS-STEWART, 
HEATHER 
My Brother's Train; illus. by Paul
Zwolak. 
Groundwood, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-88899-282-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 7-10yrs
In this journey somewhere between reality and dreams, a young girl and her older
brother embark on a train trek across North America. Set in an unidentified time
(the cover flap says that it represents the trains of the 1930s) and a vague locale,
this transcontinental train travels "the height of land where the rivers flow to a
different sea," encountering wilderness, a phantom trainman, a white horse for
good luck, spiraling tunnels, and finally, Great-Aunt Muriel's oceanside cottage.
Acrylic paintings smudgily render this dreamy drama in a deeply saturated palette
with a surreal quality that serves to extend the fantastical elements of the text. One
double-page spread featuring the train's tiny passing reflection in the eyes of an
enormous bear, who gazes out from the darkness, is quite haunting. What nearly
derails this potentially engaging story is an often stodgy and unimaginative text, as
when the phantom trainman lifts the little girl in his giant hand to the already
moving train and sings, "Never fear, the trainman is here." Kids will also probably
wonder why "It's easy to go, but harder to come back" and be confused about what
is real here and what isn't. Though presumably the author researched some of the
myths and realities of train lore for this story, no notes are appended. When the
call comes for "all aboard" better choices might be Bodkin's The Banshee Train
(BCCB 4/95) or Paraskevas' Cecil Bunions and the Midnight Train (12/96). PM
KOOHARIAN, DAVID 
Sammy's Story; written and illus. by David Kooharian. 
DK
Ink, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2466-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
NR 
5-8 yrs
Little Sammy has been very sick, but this night, after he goes to sleep, three strange
men enter his bedroom and invite him to join them on their mission. Since he
56 
* THE BULLETIN
can't walk, they take him on a sled to the general, who sends Sammy off on a quest
to retrieve the general's beloved stuffed animal, Dewdrop, from the clutches of the
evil Zargon. With the aid of the general's dog, Fenris, Sammy retrieves the Eeyore-
like little toy and faces down the Zargon. After sending Dewdrop home via Fenris,
Sammy encounters another passing stranger, Ed, who comes to take him to a place
of peace and wellness, and, after waking up briefly to say goodbye to his parents,
Sammy departs this world for the place of peace. The storyline is a mass of confu-
sion, strange choices, and curdled blend of symbolism and realism: why do we
never return to the general to see Dewdrop's restoration? Allegorically speaking,
who are all these people? What does the first part of the book have to do with the
second, and could Sammy have made it to Ed and the place of peace without
fighting the Zargon? The graphic-novel format has some nice texturing, but the
faces are awkward and lifeless and Sammy is a sentimentalized figure. Though
some adults may find the oblique approach to mortality and the afterlife comfort-
ing, it's hard to imagine any situation in which this would be useful or rewarding
for a child audience, who would be better served by a less cluttered and opaque
theology/philosophy. A child's death is indeed a sad and perplexing thing, but this
unsuccessful fable will only baffle kids more. DS
KUDLER, DAVID, ad. 
The Seven Gods ofLuck; illus. by Linda Finch. 
Houghton,
1997 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-395-78830-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Kenji and Sachiko are undeterred by their mother's announcement that there will
be no celebration this New Year: "To pay off our debts, I had to use all the money
we had." The enterprising siblings head to town to sell the hairpins and chopsticks
they have painted, but the most they can accomplish is an indifferent trade with a
maker of bamboo hats. Returning home, they put the hats (well, six hats and one
kerchief) on the heads of the seven statues of the Gods of Good Luck "to keep
them warm and dry." The statues come alive at the pealing of the festival bell and,
grateful for the children's kindness, they provide the poor family with a New Year's
Day surprise feast. The children's repartee is tinged with an unfolkloric sassiness
("'I bet [the chopsticks] make more money than your hairpins.' 'Bet not!'"). Finch's
figures grin cloyingly through good news and bad, and the statues' too-too-cute,
doll-like pudginess trivializes their role as divinities. This may, however, fit the bill
for preschool teachers looking for a new way to ring in the new year. Source notes
only describe the story as "an adaptation of a traditional Japanese folktale." EB
LAYTON, GEORGE 
The Swap. 
Putnam, 1997 
[192p]
ISBN 0-399-23148-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Grammar school in the north of England means tough new challenges for a boy in
the 1950s, and our narrator encounters quite a few of them in this series of linked
stories. The nameless protagonist achieves undeserved success in an art contest,
struggles with his conscience when a new Jewish student is tormented by the school
bully, and has his world turned upside down in a brief student exchange that sends
him to London. Layton's got the feel of the milieu down pat: boys resent bullies
but fear to stand up to them, teachers are simultaneously distant aliens and figures
of fun, and families are embarrassing and intrusive yet ultimately ignorant of their
sons' social world. The book balances uneasily between being a collection of sto-
OCTOBER 1997 
* 
57
ries and a novel-the pieces rarely have independent impact but the absence of
cohesion and overall momentum keeps it from working well as a novel, making
the narrative merely episodic. While the expressive style and local details help
create atmosphere, the regional specificity may be difficult for American readers
unfamiliar with the conventions. The underlying emotions, however, will be un-
derstandable to kids everywhere. DS
LYONS, MARY E. 
Catching the Fire: Philip Simmons, Blacksmith; illus. with pho-
tographs by Mannie Garcia. 
Houghton, 1997 
48p
ISBN 0-395-72033-8 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-6
Mary Lyons has chronicled the achievements of quite a few African-American art-
ists now (see her Stitching Stars, BCCB 12/93, and Deep Blues, 12/94, etc.), but
their works aren't as likely to be enduring as this artist's. Philip Simmons was
fascinated with ironwork from early youth and began by assisting a master crafts-
man, eventually becoming his partner in the Charleston, South Carolina business.
He found his metier in the 1930s, when he started repairing the wrought-iron
gates in the community and began turning them into works of fascinating and
magnificent sculpture; in the 1970s, he encountered an academic who helped docu-
ment and bring the work to wider recognition, including a Heritage Fellowship
and display of one of his gates at the Smithsonian. Lyons recounts Simmons' life
in the narrative form of fiction, complete with dialogue and exclamations, which is
a somewhat misleading and diminishing approach but gives the chronicle a story-
telling flavor. Simmons himself, especially in the later chapters drawing on recent
interviews, exudes generosity and modesty, and the gates (writhing snakes, a rising
star, a placid fish) are simply stunning. This will be useful not only as an introduc-
tion to a gifted and professional craftsman, but also a reminder of how unexpected
things can become art when executed with artistry. Two pages of extremely de-
tailed and wide-ranging source notes are included. DS
McCULLY, EMILY ARNOLD 
Popcorn at the Palace; written and illus. by Emily Arnold
McCully. 
Harcourt, 1997 
40p
ISBN 0-15-277699-0 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Nineteenth-century Illinois farmer Olmsted Ferris fairly bursts with clever agri-
cultural ideas, but his conservative neighbors wag their heads in disapproval and
his produce-mustard and canary seed-lacks a market. An English journalist
passing through the region remarks on some unfamiliar corn, and Olmsted's daugh-
ter Maisie explains to him the wonders of popcorn. Convincing her father they
should promote popcorn overseas, Maisie accompanies Olmsted to London, where
they demonstrate the "corn that turns to snow" at entertainment parlors. News of
the novelty reaches Prince Albert, and soon a lady-in-waiting is prepping them for
a private showing. The royals are delighted, the prince orders several barrels, the
queen presents Maisie with a French wax doll, but as McCully observes, "Popcorn
became a favorite snack of millions, but it never caught on in England." An author's
note attests that Olmsted and his commissioned demonstration are factual, as is
the wax doll that became a Ferris family heirloom. Maisie herself is another mat-
ter, though, as no doubt is her improbable shipboard encounter with Charles
Dickens. Still, Olmsted's bumbling stab at court propriety, the Brits' astonish-
ment at the exploding vegetable, and the showers of popcorn in parlor and palace
are engagingly portrayed in McCully's watercolor spreads, and it's hard to go wrong
with so tasty a topic. EB
58 
* THE BULLETIN
MCKINLEY, ROBIN 
Rose Daughter. Greenwillow, 1997 
306p
ISBN 0-688-15439-5 
$16.00 
R Gr. 7-12
Almost twenty years after McKinley won an enthusiastic following for her first
novel, Beauty (BCCB 12/78), she has rewritten "Beauty and the Beast" again, to
very different effect. Although the style is reminiscently dramatic and the cast
functionally similar, the characterization is more elaborate, the narrative denser,
the plot more intricate, and the rose and dream motifs more deeply pronounced.
An increased emphasis on the merchant's downfall and move to the country with
his three daughters establishes a stronger sense of place. Replacing the first-person
with a third-person narrative lessens the immediacy but allows the author a broader
range, and this more extensive telling will attract an older audience for whom
personal dynamics provide suspense at a slower pace. Since both of Beauty's sisters
are still archetypally good (Lionheart and Jeweltongue have replaced Grace and
Hope), tension depends throughout the longer book on the development of the
relationship between Beauty and the Beast, who maintains his charismatic form in
a satisfying postmodern twist to the fairy tale ending. Overall, the fantasy world
here is imagined and articulated along the lines of the author's adult novel Deer-
skin, though Rose Daughter is inherently lighter in subject and texture. Any col-
lection serving a junior-high and high-school population will benefit from including
both the original Beauty and its revision: they are two different books with in-
tense romantic appeal for different stages of reader. BH
MCMAHON, PATRICIA 
Six Words, Many Turtles, and Three Days in Hong Kong;
illus. with photographs by Susan G. Drinker. 
Houghton, 1997 
57p
ISBN 0-395-68621-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In this timely photoessay, we follow a young resident of Hong Kong, eight-year-
old Tsz Yan, through a three-day whirlwind of school, homework, playmates, and
family outings. The title is taken from a visit to a turtle pond and from her English
lesson: "Tsz Yan writes the words she must learn this weekend. HAPPY, HUNGRY,
FRIEND, SCARED, FAMILY, NOISY." These words appear throughout the text until they
culminate on the last page ("her new words sing, sing, sing through her mind"),
seeming a little forced and redundant by that time. There is only a scant treatment
of Hong Kong's return to China ("The grown-ups around Tsz Yan have been
discussing this for a long time. Tsz Yan and her friends think about it, too, but not
as much as the grown-ups do"), which may satisfy younger readers while leaving
older ones more speculative. The abundance and diversity of the color photo-
graphs (especially stunning are the endpaper images of Hong Kong harbor) season
the text with plenty of cultural verve and will probably keep young readers looking
long after the text has been abandoned. A brief pronunciation guide and a map
open this accessible guide to the sights, sounds, tastes, and feelings of a young
resident of Hong Kong who wonders as do we: "Will Hong Kong still be itself
when it becomes part of something so big?" We'll see. PM
McMILLAN, BRUCE 
My Horse of the North; written and illus. with photographs
by Bruce McMillan. 
Scholastic, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-97205-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
McMillan, author of Nights of the Pufflings (BCCB 3/95), returns to Iceland, here
describing the preparations for and execution of the rkttir, the sheep roundup at
OCTOBER 1997 
* 
59
the end of the summer. Young Margret and her friends Kristin and Axel ride
through the summer, practicing their herding and getting more adept at maneu-
vering their Icelandic Horses through staid cows and skittish geese, until finally it's
time for rettir and the kids and their mounts prove their mettle. This is a bucolic
and enjoyable idea, but the text is stodgy, with Icelandic phrases interpolated with
painful deliberateness. The book also seems completely ignorant of the Icelandic
Horse's most famous characteristic, its unique gait called the tilt, which makes this
akin to a book about Dalmatians that seems unaware of their spots. McMillan's
photographs compensate for a lot, however: the green and volcanic vistas provide
dramatic backdrops for the sturdy kids and their stocky rides (officially called horses,
but pony-sized and as desirable as ponies); alert readers will wonder where the
mentioned neighbors are at the rettir (we never see anybody but the three kids),
but the exotic variety of sheep and the pleasures of the wide-open spaces will enter-
tain nonetheless. As well as being generally attractive to the pony crowd, this
would make a terrific contrast to books about contemporary ranching in the Ameri-
can West, such as Joan Anderson's Cowboys (BCCB 6/96). Notes on the photog-
raphy, Icelandic horses, and the rettir are included. DS
MCNAUGHTON, 
COLIN 
Oops!; 
written 
and 
illus. 
by 
Colin
McNaughton. 
Harcourt, 1997 
30p
ISBN 0-15-201588-4 
$14.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
"It was the same old story," the text begins, but it's selling itself short-it's actually
a variant on two of them, "Little Red Riding Hood" and "The Three Little Pigs."
The hungry wolf slavering around is familiar, of course, but this time it's Preston
the pig who sets off for Granny's house, and it's Preston telling the real Granny
what big eyes, ears, and teeth she has that finally reminds the wolf of his role in the
proceedings. The wiseacre narration is reminiscent of smart cartoons, and listen-
ers will appreciate the humor of the wolfs repeated attempts to figure out what
story he's in and the relentless fairy-tale momentum that brings him to his fate.
Watercolor and colored pencil art show a pop-eyed, top-hatted wolf boinging
around the pages in pursuit of the goodhearted but clumsy Preston Pig; between
the running, the chaos, and the elaborate villainy, the atmosphere is strongly and
happily Mack Sennett (there's even a banana-peel gag on the cover and in the
book). It's cheeky, unsubtle, and often groaningly (yet enjoyably) obvious, and
youngsters will wolf it down. DS
MARTIN, NORA 
The Eagle's Shadow. 
Scholastic, 1997 
[176p]
ISBN 0-590-36087-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Clearie's emotionally distant father has taken a job in Japan at the close of World
War II and has shipped his twelve-year-old daughter off to her Tlingit maternal
grandmother in Alaska. Although Grandma Martha offers a cordial welcome,
Clearie's visit is off to a shaky start when Aunt Ivy promptly informs her niece that
Dora (Clearie's deceased mother, who was long estranged from her own family)
"was always angry. Angry and hateful." Teetering on the margin of her family due
to her mother's dark past, and on the margin of village society due to her Irish
paternal ancestry, Clearie is determined to sulk through her temporary exile. How-
ever, under the patient tutelage of her relatives and the more flattering attentions
of an older boy, Mark, she begins to reclaim her Tlingit heritage and to under-
stand that the alcoholism that afflicted her mother is, in fact, a bane that stub-
60 
* THE BULLETIN
bornly persists within the village. Unvarnished by either pity or pedantry, the
themes of Tlingit isolation, substance abuse, ethnic discrimination, and cultural
rigidity supply a rich texture for this coming-of-age tale. EB
MATHIS, SHARON BELL 
Running Girl: The Diary of Ebonee Rose; written and
illus. by Sharon Bell Mathis. 
Browndeer/Harcourt, 1997 
60p
ISBN 0-15-200674-5 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Ebonee Rose is a captain of her school track team and has been chosen as anchor in
the relay at the All-City track meet. Using the framework of E.R.'s diary (named
"Dee" after Florence Griffith Joyner's nickname), Mathis imparts a wealth of in-
formation about the African and African-American women track stars that Ebonee
Rose idolizes. Interspersed with the story of Ebonee Rose's family, her relation-
ship with her coach, her growing friendship with the motherless Queenie, and her
focus and anxiety about the track meet are brief bios of and inspirational quota-
tions from the athletes. The sound bites about these athletes and the story of
E.R.'s devotion to her sport are both worthy subjects, but they never quite mesh.
The biographical information is often intrusive and pedagogical, giving the al-
ready wordy text a message-driven flavor that is distracting and unsatisfying. The
book is illustrated with color photographs of the women track stars mentioned,
and the large text blocks are broken up by poems about the athletes and their
talents. The design is oddly ungraceful, with pages of dense type suddenly light-
ened by photos, quotations, and lines of yellow stars. This title may leave readers
wishing for two books: one that focuses on the enthusiastic Ebonee Rose, and
another that concentrates on the athletes she admires so passionately. JMD
MAYNARD, MEREDY 
Blue True Dream ofSky. 
Polestar/Orca, 1997 
131p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-896095-23-2 
$7.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Nickie lives in logging country, and her family has little sympathy for "tree huggers,"
as her father refers to the opposition. Nickie herself is more ambivalent, especially
when plans are made to cut trees on an island holding great sentimental impor-
tance to her. Feeling that two of the strong trees on the island represent her and
her brother Calvin, who is currently comatose in the hospital, she begins to think
it's time to take a stand on the matter. This is a relatively balanced look at the
logging issue, and the author carefully depicts the extremism and the integrity on
both sides as well as Nickie's torn loyalties. There's way too much going on,
however, with a love interest for Nickie from among the environmentalists and the
interspersed dreams of Calvin, not to mention Nickie' albinism, so that much of
the book's impact is lost through diffusion. It's no Twilight in Grace Falls (BCCB
6/97) or even California Blue (4/94), but its immediacy may engage some young
readers. DS
MAZER, HARRY, comp. and ed. 
Twelve Shots: Outstanding Short Stories about
Guns. Delacorte, 1997 
229p
ISBN 0-385-32238-0 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Mazer has invited a dozen writers, most of them familiar to young-adult readers,
to contribute new tales dealing with "not the politics of the gun, not the heated
arguments or the polemics, but the way guns are present in people's lives." Mazer
makes no real attempt to disguise his own views on gun control in his introduc-
tion, his appended list of organizations dedicated to controlling handgun violence,
OCTOBER 1997 
* 61
or his short story about a young man tragically eager to take up arms in World
War II, but the broadly defined scope of the collection allows other viewpoints
and voices to enter the debate as well. In Nancy Werlin's "War Game," neighbor-
hood kids armed with super-soakers gang up on a nerdy outcast; his only friend's
refusal to defend him may, however, be his key to street sense and fortitude. "God's
Plan for Wolfie and X-Ray," by David Rice, describes how an armed robbery,
attempted and bungled by a pair of cocky punks, actually shocks them straight.
Destruction clearly outweighs redemption in the bulk of these stories, though,
with manipulative power, paranoia, or profound despair generally behind the trig-
ger. Perhaps most chilling is Rita Williams-Garcia's concluding entry in which no
gun appears at all: children inured to violence recreate the all-too-familiar roles of
shooter, victims, and coroner in a grisly playground game of"Chalkman." Read a
pair of stories to a junior-high or high-school class, and let the debates begin. EB
MAZER, NORMA Fox 
When She Was Good. Levine/Scholastic, 1997 
[2 40p]
ISBN 0-590-13506-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Em Thurkill doesn't have much of a life: her mother died long ago, and her
abusive father has since married a woman who dislikes her new husband's daugh-
ters. More than that, Em is in thrall to her sister Pamela, whose rages, anti-social
behavior, and bullying have alienated her from everyone else in the world. When
Em is fourteen, she and Pamela leave home and share an apartment, and Em be-
comes the main victim of Pamela's abuse for four years until Pamela dies suddenly
and Em is left to find her way utterly alone in the world. This is an unusual and
ambitious book, employing Em's restricted point of view to describe her desperate
searches for affection in the form of sexual availability in her early teens and her
current obsession with a woman in her apartment building. The shifting chro-
nologies (the book starts with the aftermath of Pamela's death and interweaves
past recollections with present descriptions) may confuse a few readers, the narra-
tion bogs down a bit at times, and events occasionally seem more plot-necessary
than realistic, but Em's plight and her total absence of options (after Pamela's
death, she discovers that even her father has moved on without telling her) are
poignant and believable. Unlike many books on the subject, this conveys both the
emotional poverty such daily abuse incurs and the victim's need for some sort of
interior solution or healing in addition to the cessation of abuse. Kids intrigued by
the psychodrama of earlier Mazer works such as Out of Control (BCCB 4/93) will
find this absorbing. DS
MELMED, LAURA KRAUSS 
Little Oh; illus. by Jim LaMarche. 
Lothrop, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14209-5 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14208-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"Tell me the story of Little Oh!" begs the boy to his mother at Number One Pink
Petal Lane, and she does. In this original folk tale (set in Japan), detailed acrylic
and colored pencil illustrations dazzle the eye as the story unfolds about a little
origami paper girl in a pink kimono who springs to life one morning and adopts
her astonished maker as her mother. On being taken to the market with her
mother, Little Oh is admonished, "Now climb into my basket and hide under the
cloth. And don't peek out, or you might fall from the basket." In a predictable
moment, Little Oh disregards her mother's direction, and a sinister black dog spies
the delicate doll. After a series of close calls, she is eventually rescued by a benevo-
62 
* THE BULLETIN
lent crane, who returns her to the wrong house where she languishes on a doorstep
like a pathetic little valentine, which indeed she turns out to be. The residents of
the home, a man and his son, find Little Oh and deliver her to her mother. Little
Oh instantly becomes a real girl through a flash of ambiguous magic and they all
live happily-ever-after-ish as one big happy family. The handsome, light-flecked
pictures with the mother's wonderfully expressive face and the delicate winsome-
ness of the tiny Little Oh give the appearance of an elegant page-turner, but the
story never quite lives up to the pictures' promise. This is a lovely-to-look-at
confection, but its shallow, saccharine plot may be too sweet even for junior pal-
ates. PM
MILLER, DOROTHY 
Home Wars. Atheneum, 1997 
171p
ISBN 0-689-81411-9 
$16.00 
M 
Gr. 4-7
Halley's Dad comes home with four antique rifles, intending to teach her half-
brothers to shoot but inadvertently unleashing trouble-and launching a contrived
and often downright nasty domestic drama. Mom rages, "I'll not have them here.
I'll throw them in the creek!"; Dad petulantly defends his paternal turf ("If you
destroy them, I'll never forgive you. My feelings have to count, too"); the boys
threaten to shoot Halley's cat, Bentley; Halley threatens to destroy the boys' pic-
ture of their biological mother if they do. When Bentley is found dead in the yard,
Halley retaliates against her siblings, who are promptly whisked away by the mother
who abandoned them years ago, and her parents hover on the brink of divorce. All
too easily, however, the boys return (having decided they like their stepmother just
fine after all), Halley sees a counselor, and Mom and Dad receive spiritual advice
from their minister and their deacon. Finally, they all bring Christmas dinner to
the dingy antique store where Halley's best friend Kirk lives with his severely de-
formed grandfather Edgar, who has heretofore zealously guarded their mysterious
past. Mom simply asks, "Who are you, Edgar? Trust us with that. Let us know,"
and Edgar promptly regales them with a life story full of melodrama sufficient to
fuel a soap opera for a season. This maudlin conclusion further sinks the ludicrous
and overladen plot, and this is at best a shallow, simplistic depiction of complex
family dynamics. EB
MILLER, VIRGINIA 
Be Gentle!; written and illus. by Virginia Miller. 
Candlewick,
1997 
26p
ISBN 0-7636-0251-5 
$15.99 
R 2-4 yrs
In this pair's fourth outing, George (the big bear) gives Bartholomew (the small
bear) a little black kitten ("'she's yours to look after,' he said. 'I'll help, but be
gentle because she's only little'"). Predictably, Ba cannot resist his toddler urges,
and in between tiny spurts of gentleness the kitten is squashed, swung dangerously
high on the tree swing, given a harrowing ride in a wagon, and squirted with the
garden hose. To George's reminders about the need for gentle treatment, Ba al-
ways replies with a "Nah!" After a loud scare from Bartholomew's drum frightens
the kitten into hiding, a repentant Bartholomew decides to go to his secret place
and finds . . . the kitten, of course ("Bartholomew was very, very gentle, and the
little black kitten purred"). Simply drawn shapes in soft pencil and pantone mark-
ers, mostly tinted in subtle tones of orange, gold, and brown, render the cuddly
characters and props with an appropriately gentle touch. This should provide a
brief but satisfying lapsit for some young gentleperson-to-be. PM
OCTOBER 1997 
* 63
MIRANDA, ANNE 
Glad Monster, Sad Monster: A Book about Feelings; illus. by Ed
Emberley. 
Little, 1997 
17p
ISBN 0-316-57395-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
This bears a distinct visual resemblance to Emberley's Go Away, Big Green Mon-
ster! (BCCB 3/93), but scrutiny reveals that it's a rather different enterprise. Each
spread features a different-colored monster performing various activities that fill
him/her with a particular emotion ("The yellow monster says, 'Opening birthday
presents, playing ball, slurping ice cream, and dancing with my friend make me
glad!'"), then invites the young viewer to share the monster's face and contemplate
its feelings ("Try on the yellow monster mask. What makes you glad?"). Not all of
the emotions are well-conveyed ("glad" and "loving" aren't well-differentiated,
"worrying" seems a euphemism for "scaring," and feeling "scary" is an odd entry),
and the ending is rather abrupt. Glossy black pages on thick cardstock fold out on
the recto to include die-cut monster masks (the removal of which pages from the
book is inevitable); the monsters cavorting across the pages are inclined to be over-
busy conglomerations of a multitude of shapes and colors. Kids will enjoy playing
with the masks and a reader-aloud could build a lapsit game around the concept,
but most of the audience will feel longing for the big green one that went away.
DS
MORA, PAT 
Tomds and the Library Lady; illus. by Raul Col6n. 
Knopf,
1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90401-8 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80401-3 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Tomas and his family are migrant farm workers who travel to Iowa in the summer
to work in the fields. While there, Papa Grande, the family storyteller, encourages
Tomis to go to the library in search of more stories: "You are big enough to go by
yourself. Then you can teach us new stories." The benevolent, if caricatured,
library lady (note the peter-pan collar and the glasses slipping down her nose)
supplies Tomais with a place of retreat as well as two books checked out in her
name. Soon Tomais' relationship with the library lady expands to include cool
drinks, readalouds, special books, and Spanish lessons. Col6n's expressive
illustrations done in scratchboard overwashed in sunlit rainbow colors impart a
richness and texture that is not quite expressed in the more pedestrian text, although
the pathos of migrant life is striking. What packs a powerful punch is the fact that
this story is inspired by the real life story of Tomds Rivera who eventually became
the chancellor of the University of California at Riverside (according to the appended
note), so we see that Tomis' departure in August with "a shiny new book, a present
from the library lady" was just the beginning. This is a warm and attractive tribute
to the power of libraries and librarians, but it may be a bit too stodgy to evoke a
response in young readers. PM
MUNSCH, ROBERT 
Alligator Baby; illus. by Michael Martchenko. 
Cartwheel/
Scholastic, 1997 
[30p]
ISBN 0-590-21101-3 
$10.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
Munsch applies his somewhat twisted humor to the never-ending, ever-new tale of
the arrival of a new baby. Kristen's parents get lost on the way to the hospital and
wind up at the zoo instead. They come home with a new baby--but it's not a
64 
* THE BULLETIN
people baby, it's an alligator baby, and the deadpan, somewhat exasperated older
sister, Kristen, informs her dithering parents of this fact. Subsequent trips by said
parents to the zoo result in additional errors involving a baby seal and a baby
gorilla, until finally the extended joke comes full circle when the capable Kristen
goes to the zoo to fetch her baby brother. Munsch's text has the punch of comic-
book dialogue with a plethora of exclamation-pointed phrases from the befuddled
parents. Martchenko's characters, both animal and human, have perky personali-
ties, and the compositions contain enough visual humor to keep preschoolers and
primary graders giggling as the alligator baby grins happily at a cluster of appre-
hensive goldfish, the baby seal takes a bubble bath, and the gorilla baby swings
gleefully from the hallway chandelier. Kristen is the hero, though, as she peddles
furiously home, barefoot, with her grinning baby brother in the basket of her
bicycle and a flashlight taped to the top of her helmet. This is predictable but it's
still lots of fun, and even kids without new siblings will chortle happily at the
hapless parents and their obviously more intelligent offspring. JMD r
NOVAC, ANA 
The Beautiful Days ofMy Youth: My Six Months in Auschwitz and
Plaszow; tr. from the French by George L. Newman. 
Holt, 1997 
31 4p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-5018-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 8-12
Into the ever-burgeoning genre of Holocaust literature comes Novac's entry, adapted
from a journal she kept secretly while interned in German concentration camps
during World War II. Novac's memoir is notable on several counts, the foremost
being her wry, ironic point of view. Ana, a talented, passionate, fifteen-year-old,
fixes an unclouded eye on the Nazis and their camps, giving this title an unusual
edge. She is driven to write and driven to live, and nothing, not even the Nazis,
can stop her; with adolescent single-mindedness, she writes on scraps of paper
begged and stolen and hides the scraps in her shoes. She says of her journal, "I
hope that these notes will be part of the evidence, on the day of reckoning! But
even if I knew that I was to be my only reader, I would still write! I would take the
same trouble to find the right word, the strongest word." The horrors of concen-
tration camp living are here-the random shootings, perverse punishments, capri-
cious executions-horrors overcome by Novac's gut instinct for survival and
creation. The immediacy of Novac's language and the clarity of her vision are
exhilarating as she calls on her creative impulses to will herself to live. An intro-
duction places the journal in the context of Novac's life. A glossary, notes, and an
index are included. JMD
NYE, NAOMI SHIHAB 
Lullaby Raft; illus. byVivienne Flesher. 
Simon, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-9-521-7 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Noted poet Nye here translates into picture-book form the lyrics to a song she
performs in schools. In seven verses, the young narrator describes how her mama
sings her to sleep, how her chicken settles down, her turtle folds up, the moon
floats away, the bunny curls up, the lizard quiets down, and the speaker plans a
"lullaby raft" to get to the other side of night. There's some lovely imagery here,
and the softening nighttime mood is evocatively conveyed. The concepts get aw-
fully ethereal for the age group, however, and the text's gentle patterning isn't
sufficient to support the winding narrative. The illustrations, glowing pastel on
dark paper, have a dreamy flow reminiscent of Judy Pedersen, but the soft textur-
OCTOBER 1997 
* 65
ing and full-bleed color give them a distinctive mood. Young listeners fond of
gentle fancy may enjoy floating along to sleep with the story. The final page
includes musical notation (complete with chording) and lyrics for all verses. DS
PORTE, BARBARA ANN 
Harry's Pony; illus. by Yossi Abolafia. 
Greenwillow,
1997 
56p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14826-3 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14825-5 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 1-3
"I, Harry, am the owner of a pony. I won it in a contest," the book begins, and
that's pretty much the situation. As Harry's father points out, however, their
neighborhood isn't zoned for ponies, so Harry racks his brain for ways to make
pony possession possible. Ultimately, however, he opts for a different solution-
donation of his equine to a handicapped riding facility, where the little guy will be
really useful and where he'll be sure to have a good home. While the winning of a
contest is fantasy indeed, the genuine burdens of responsibility are clearly explained;
it's also nice to see an entry-level introduction to altruism phrased in terms kids
will understand (though they'll secretly be convinced they could have managed to
hang onto the pony). Abolafia's line-and-wash art is its usual cheerful self, and the
pony, particularly in fantasy scenes of its possible existence, is an engaging but
robust presence (young readers will also want to try out the flip-book image of a
pony that appears in the page corners). This is a good choice for young readers
looking for a pony story with a difference. DS
PRINGLE, LAURENCE 
Naming the Cat; illus. by Katherine Potter. 
Walker,
1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8622-7 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8621-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
In this light but engaging tale, a family takes in a stray cat and then cannot agree
on a name for him. The feline-a black cat with white belly, chin, feet, and tail
tip-certainly inspires many monikers (like Panda, Vanilla Fudge, and Nimbus)
but none really suits him. It is only after several close calls and near misses that the
cat is appropriately named Lucky. Potter's richly hued pastels on colored paper
are stylistically naive and appealing, as the furry little protagonist struts and preens
his way through Pringle's simple family story. The narrator, a grade-schooler of
indeterminate gender, relates the sequence of events with the grave detachment
necessary for such an important family decision. The story goes on a bit too long,
and the artwork has a sameness that ultimately tips into the bland. This is, how-
ever, certain to have listeners bursting to tell the stories of how they named their
own family pets, so get out the library's (stuffed) menagerie and have a naming
contest of your own. JMD
RAEL, ELSA OKON 
When Zaydeh Danced on Eldridge Street; illus. by Marjorie
Priceman. 
Simon, 1997 
[34p]
ISBN 0-689-80451-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Zeesie (of What Zeesie Saw on Delancey Street, BCCB 12/96) broadens her cultural
milieu when she stays with grandparents while her mother gives birth to her sec-
ond child. Dour Zaydeh Avram is an odd match for kindly Bubbeh Ruchel, and
even his own daughter seems cowed by him, but Zeesie timidly accepts his invita-
66 
* THE BULLETIN
tion to accompany him to celebrate Simchas Torah at the Eldridge Street Syna-
gogue. Zeesie's never been to a shul or service like this, with jeweled light splash-
ing through the stained glass, a table full of sweets ("Come! Take! Eat!"), noisy,
frolicking children, and best of all an invitation to join the old men on the bimah
and inspect the scroll closely. Zaydeh fairly explodes when Zeesie innocently in-
quires, "What is Torah? ... I know it's important, but why?" but it's an explosion
of pride, as she's the first and only grandchild to be touched with awe for the
sacred writings. Then "Zaydeh kissed the top of her head. 'That's what I think is
Torah. A kiss from God to the Jewish people to show His love.'" Listeners who
accompanied Zeesie to Delancey Street will recognize Priceman's familiar gouache
streetscapes, with the earth and gray of brick house-fronts in daylight transmuted
to rich, twilight blues come evening, a vibrant community of neighbors who race
and dance against the subtly textured backgrounds at every chance they get, and
luscious dessert recipes on the end papers. Although this outing focuses on a
specific Jewish rite, its themes of religious awakening and family love transcend
denominational affiliations. A glossary of terms is included. EB
RASCHKA, CHRIS 
Mysterious Thelonious; written and illus. by Chris
Raschka. 
Orchard, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33057-5 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30057-9 
$13.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The late Thelonious Monk's musical shell-game "Misterioso," with its brevity and
playfulness, is an ideal vehicle for introducing young listeners to jazz. Opening
bars define the theme with painstaking precision; the chord progression then dis-
appears and reemerges with near-magical sleight-of-hand as it passes among piano,
vibes, and bass. Raschka matches the piece with an equally playful graphic experi-
ment, assigning colors to the chromatic scale and loosely reproducing an excerpt
from the score: "If the music of Mr. Monk were to sit for a portrait, it might look
something like this." A brooding watercolor Monk, with signature dark glasses
and slouch cap, strides across the staff, putting blocks of notes and text in place.
("He played not one wrong note. ... He played the mu- sic of free- dom.") So
what's wrong? Not to belabor the obvious, but there's no music here-the sense
and purpose of the temporal art simply slips through the bristles of the artist's
brush and vanishes in silence. Young children to whom this visual 6tude is pre-
sumably addressed know no more about Monk and his music than they did at the
start, nor are they offered any hints on how to explore his music further on their
own. This is Fantasia without the soundtrack, and kids who get antsy during the
abstractions of the Bach Toccata and Fugue in D Minor will find Raschka's cere-
bral construct-however crafty-even less satisfying. EB
RINALDI, ANN 
An Acquaintance with Darkness. Gulliver/Harcourt,
1997 
294p 
(Great Episodes)
ISBN 0-15-201294-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
As if Abraham Lincoln's assassination doesn't provide enough drama on its own,
Rinaldi grafts onto it the story of fourteen-year-old orphan Emily Pigbush (fic-
tional), who happens to be a close friend to the Surratt family (historic, two of
whom were implicated in the assassination), niece of eminent physician and pro-
fessor, Valentine Bransby (fictional), and witness to the exploits of a band ofresur-
rectionists (quasi-historic). Rinaldi weaves together some deliciously macabre
OCTOBER 1997 
* 67
elements of gothic potboilers-an orphan sent to live with a charming uncle her
mother distrusted; said uncle, who may or may not be a grave robber; his hand-
some medical student, who may or may not be his nefarious assistant; a locked
laboratory; a demented woman confined to an upstairs room; a friend's family
living in the shadow of the gallows. It could all be a lot of chilling fun were it not
for the persistent reminder that Lincoln's murder was an all-too-real national trag-
edy, the Surratt mother actually did hang, and nineteenth-century medicine often
advanced through the services of grave robbers. As always, Rinaldi has done her
homework, and she meticulously limns the borders of reality and fantasy in a con-
cluding note accompanied by a bibliography. EB
SOMTOW, S. P. 
The Vampire's Beautiful Daughter; illus. by Gary
Lippincott. 
Preiss/Atheneum, 1997 
116p
ISBN 0-689-31968-1 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Johnny figures he's got more identity troubles than anybody, what with his Lakota
grandfather, his long-gone father, his Jewish mother, his half-Swedish half-sister,
and his complicated family's recent move from a strapped life in South Dakota to
glitzy suburban Encino, California. Then he meets Rebecca Teppish, whose fa-
ther is a vampire, and whose approaching sixteenth birthday is a watershed mo-
ment, where she must either become a vampire or abjure her father's kind forever
and live a mortal life. Drawn to each other, Johnny and Rebecca must face their
own demons (in addition to some ill-mannered vampires jealous of Johnny's ap-
peal for Rebecca) and decide who they really want to be-even if it means their
eternal separation. This doesn't have the style, impact, or tonal control of recent
vampirish tour de forces (Vande Velde's Companions of the Night, BCCB 7/95, is
most thematically similar); the book's glibness clashes with the metaphysical ques-
tioning, and the vampirical rules seem random and inconsistent. The combina-
tion of Lakota spirituality and Eastern European mythology is intriguing, however,
and the picture ofJohnny and Rebecca racing through the nights on the edge of all
kinds of danger is a glamorous and enticing one indeed. The depths here are
mostly illusory, but many young readers won't mind. Black-and-white illustra-
tions lack sufficient grandeur to support their fantastical conceits. DS
SPINELLI, JERRY 
Wringer. Cotler/HarperCollins, 1997 
[2 4 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024914-5 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024913-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
Pigeon Day is a ritual in Palmer's home town. It's the day 5,000 pigeons are
released in the park, only to be shot down by sharpshooters who have paid for the
privilege. "Wringers" are the boys, ten years old and older, who retrieve the dead
and dying birds, wringing the necks of the ones who are unlucky enough to still be
alive. Palmer doesn't want to be a wringer, but his tenth birthday is approaching,
and so is Pigeon Day. He is confused and anxious. His three buddies look for-
ward to the day they will finally become wringers, and the four of them observe a
number of other adolescent rites of passage (including tormenting Palmer's used-
to-be-friend, Dorothy) while waiting for the big day. Palmer's father has a sharp-
shooting medal for downing the most number of pigeons in a previous year, and
Palmer is convinced he will be a sorry excuse for a son if he doesn't participate. To
complicate his life further, Palmer acquires a pet pigeon he names Nipper, and his
68 
* THE BULLETIN
life becomes a series of races and chases as he desperately tries to keep his parents,
his buddies, and the town from discovering his secret life. Spinelli has a knack for
characterization that serves him well in this oddly frightening, creepily believable
novel. Palmer and his buddies are not so much friends as they are a pack, their
actions always executed within the safety of the group. When Palmer rejects the
pack, they turn on him with ferocity, and it is only his rekindled relationship with
Dorothy and his finally confiding in his parents that gives him the strength to seek
out Nipper in the midst of sharpshooters and wringers. Though fast-moving, the
plot does not skirt Palmer's inner life as it moves inexorably to its conclusion.
JMD
STEWART, SARAH 
The Gardener; illus. by David Small. 
Farrar, 1997 
34p
ISBN 0-374-32517-0 
$15.00 
R* 
6-10yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 39, for review.
TREMBATH, DON 
A Fly Named Alfred. Orca, 1997 
138p
Papered. ISBN 1-55143-083-5 
$6.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Harper is pretty happy with his successful and pseudonymous column, "A Fly on
the Wall," appearing in the school newspaper; at least he's happy until one of the
individuals skewered in his writing gets her boyfriend to threaten to beat up her
classmate, Tommy, who threatens to beat up Harper unless Harper can find out
who the mysterious author is. Harper goes to great lengths to avoid both telling
and getting beaten up, but he finds the situation is more complicated than he had
envisioned when he winds up in the odd position of joining his prospective batterer's
counseling session to "clear up the ignorance I have towards him." Trembath
keeps the tone at a low-key bemused goofiness, which allows for the absurdities of
plot aspects such as the counseling sessions without glossing over serious under-
currents about family and interpersonal dynamics. Though a sequel to The Tues-
day Cafe, this stands perfectly well on its own, with the friendship between Harper
and his writing colleague Billy effective in its eccentric warmth. Readers who want
something a bit heftier than Gordon Korman will appreciate Harper's travails. DS
TUDOR, TASHA 
The Great Corgiville Kidnapping; written and illus. by Tasha
Tudor. 
Little, 1997 
[41p]
ISBN 0-316-85583-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Caleb Corgi, dog detective, is aware that extravagant feasting will be the order of
the day when town raccoons welcome distinguished guest Zebulon Raccoon, "inven-
tor of numberless brilliant trash can openers." Shopkeepers attest to a rise in the
sale of cookbooks, herbs, and stuffing, books on hot air ballooning, and Knock-
'Em-Stiff flea powder, which leads Caleb to believe that a plot is afoot to capture
Babe, the world's largest rooster, and turn him into the banquet's main course.
With the aid of college chum Charley Crow, Caleb snatches Babe from the masked
(and ringtailed) culprits in a daring aerial rescue. Corgiville and its surrounding
environs spring to life in lavishly detailed watercolors, from graffiti and mess in the
boggarts' hovel to erudite quotes from Emerson and Thoreau on the town monu-
ment. Listeners who prefer their picture books spare and speedy would doubt-
lessly appreciate more aggressive editing, but those who savor Tudor's sophisticated
prose ("It was all too obvious that the wily raccoons were up to some deviltry and
OCTOBER 1997 
* 
69
that he, Caleb, must make an effort to circumvent their evil designs") will settle in
for this exhaustively developed tale. EB
TUNNELL, MICHAEL O. Mailing May; illus. by Ted Rand. 
Tambourine/Mor-
row, 1997 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12879-3 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12878-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
The U.S. Postal Service is just not what it used to be. Back in 1914 you could
actually mail something cheaply and it would get there-in one piece and on
time-even if that something was a five-year-old girl. In this fictionalized version
of a true story, little May has a hankering to visit Grandma Mary, but since it costs
a day's wages to take the train, one dollar and fifty-five cents to be exact, a visit just
doesn't seem possible. Luckily for May, her Ma's cousin, Leonard, works for the
post office ("Well, the rule book says nothing about children, but it is permissible
to mail baby chicks"). May becomes the "biggest baby chick on record!", and
before she knows what's happening, "Mr. Perkins had glued fifty-three cents worth
of stamps on the back of my coat." Rand gets the early century, small-town-Idaho
look just right in the nostalgic watercolors, and a doe-eyed May gazing up at the
incredulous red-headed postmaster is worth the price of a dozen postage stamps.
The paintings fill most of the double-page spreads, sharing space with the text and
overlaid with smaller, sepia-toned, faux photographic art. May tells the story of
her bygone journey with homespun perfection, so stamp this one "First Class" and
make a special delivery to a storytime in your area. An author's note giving more
details about the true story is appended. PM
TURNER, ANN 
Finding Walter. 
Harcourt, 1997 
161p
ISBN 0-15-200212-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
When the family shifts to their grandmother's house for a year, Emily and Rose are
intrigued to discover a dollhouse complete with doll family. The doll family, in its
turn, is happy to be rescued from insect-ridden oblivion and rejoices in its return
to normal life. Except for one thing: the youngest boy, Walter, is missing, and the
dolls are determined to find him (aided only by their weak telepathic glimpses of
his situation) and restore him to the fold. Unfortunately the book is quite talky
and the small episodes don't contribute to any sense of momentum. It's also hard
to write of animated toys without being cloying, and Turner doesn't avoid that
pitfall--doll William's search for a heart and Violet's longing for love are treated
with generic sweetness, which is unrelieved by the shallow characterizations of
Emily (nice sister) and Rose (troubled sister). The eternal mystery of dolls' lives
retains its essential appeal, however, and the intricacies of the relationship between
the doll family and the humans is engagingly explored. This isn't up to the stan-
dard of Sylvia Waugh's The Mennyms series (BCCB 5/94, etc.), but young doll
devotees may relish it nonetheless. DS
WALDMAN, NEIL, ad. 
The Two Brothers: A Legend ofJerusalem; ad. and illus. by
Neil Waldman. 
Atheneum, 1997 
34p
ISBN 0-689-31936-3 
$17.00 
R 4-6 yrs
Although veteran librarians may still have in their collections--or at least in their
memories-Florence Freedman's brilliant and moving variant of this Jewish folk-
70 
* THE BULLETIN
tale (Brothers: A Hebrew Legend, BCCB 12/85), it is alas out of print, and Waldman's
retelling, accompanied by soft acrylic paintings, is aimed at a younger audience.
With doll-like figures and modulated hues, he depicts two loving brothers, each of
whom believes the other needs a greater portion of their mutual harvest. After the
first brother moves sheaves of wheat to the other's field under cover of darkness,
the second moves them back, and both are puzzled to see on the next day that they
still have equal shares. Finally, they bump into each other, realize what has hap-
pened, and embrace, whereupon King Solomon, who has watched the entire sce-
nario unfold, has a heavenly vision inspiring him to build a temple on that very
spot in celebration of brotherly love. There's no conflict or villain here, but the
comedy of errors will hold kids' attention and maybe even ease some post-squabble
sibling tension, while the art moves even as it soothes. BH
WALSH, MELANIE 
Do Monkeys Tweet?; written and illus. by Melanie
Walsh. 
Houghton, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-85081-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-4 yrs
This is a toddler storytime boon, complete with easily viewed illustrations and a
simple text that will give young attendees a great feeling of accomplishment.
Double-page spreads with brightly colored backgrounds and single, simple ani-
mals have lots of visual appeal: the first spread, showing a gray horse (with a bone
in its mouth!) on a pink background, asks, "Do horses bark?" It is followed by the
answer, "No, dogs do," as a brown dog on a salmon background proceeds to "Woof.
Woof!" Each silly question involving animal sounds is followed by the easy an-
swer-"Do baby lambs go buzz? ... Do camels cheep?"-until the last question
("Do owls go hoot in the middle of the night?") can finally be answered with a
resounding yes. JMD
WATKINS, 
RICHARD 
Gladiator; written 
and 
illus. 
by 
Richard
Watkins. 
Houghton, 1997 
[87p]
ISBN 0-395-82656-X 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Clad in arcane armor and wielding shield and blade or net and trident, the Roman
gladiator of movie matinee tradition cuts a romantic, heroic figure; Watkins, how-
ever, tempers the warrior's glamorous image in this lively and informative study of
the gladiatorial games and the countless thousands of men (and women) whose
probable death in the arena was the popular spectator sport for all levels of Roman
society. Watkins traces the history of the games from their origin in funeral rites
to their demise under the edicts of Christian emperors in the fourth and early fifth
centuries, examining the technical and psychological training required to turn slaves
and captives into proud and loyal combatants and the curious combination of
adoration and disdain bestowed on "star" performers by a blood-lusting public.
"A Day at the Games," a recreation of a typical display (based on historical ac-
counts), should leave the most jaded reader bug-eyed with its extravagant pomp
and cruelty. Profuse black-and-white drawings boast a certain action-cartoon ap-
peal-lots of muscle and drama-without sacrificing accuracy and clarity of de-
tail. Some may argue with Watkins's closing contention, "There is really only one
major difference between our modern sports and the games of the ancient gladia-
OCTOBER 1997 
* 71
tors: today's spectators no longer demand the blood of the participants," but this
well-crafted account, complete with bibliography, glossary, and index, earns a
thumbs up. EB
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
Bunny Money; written and illus. by Rosemary Wells. 
Dial,
1997 
26 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2147-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-2146-3 
$14.99 
R 
4-8 yrs
In this fifteenth Max and Ruby episode, the pursuit of a birthday present for
Grandma becomes a lesson in personal finance. Somehow we know that the pleased
look on Ruby's face as she proudly displays her red wallet stuffed with bunny bills
is only a temporary rapture. Bunny money "is running through our fingers, Max,"
bemoans Ruby as bus fare, vampire teeth with oozing cherry syrup, laundromat
costs to clean Max's clothes after he tries out the oozing vampire teeth, and lunch
("Money down the drain, Max," says Ruby. "Hungry!" says Max) leave the pair
with just enough bunny cash to buy musical bluebird earrings (and a set of non-
oozing vampire teeth) for Grandma. The combination of gentle comedy, shrink-
ing assets, and those expressive bunny eyes commends this story to old and new
Max and Ruby fans. A "Making Money!" page appends the story with directions
on how to photocopy the bunny money on the endpapers, which features bunny
versions of Fred Astaire, Eleanor Roosevelt, and Julia Child (to name a few). Kids
will be richer for this one. PM
WOOD, AUDREY 
Birdsong; illus. by Robert Florczak. 
Harcourt, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-200014-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Fourteen double-page spreads each describe and depict a regional scene with local
birds calling ("CHICK-A-DEE-DEE-DEE-friendly chickadees flutter down to eat wal-
nuts from their hands") and kids rambling through ("Jason's neighborhood friends
meet in their tree house hideaway"). The legend on the back cover places the
scenes in their appropriate state (the black-capped chickadee is flying through Ten-
nessee) and provides a key to the state flower employed in the borders of each
spread (entwining irises surround the image of Jason's tree house). The birdcalls
are surprisingly well conveyed by the print approximations, and the glimpses into
various local habitats effectively blend light and foliage with the impression of
sound. The book is trying to do too many things, however, and ends up
underserving all of them as a result. The intricate flower borders visually clash
with and distract from the main scenes and have little to do with the ornithological
aspect, and the human figures are often stiffly posed; the relegation of the key to
the back cover makes things unnecessarily complicated. Ignore the flowers and
use this as a start on bird ID or, for more lively use, on birdcalls. DS
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
The House You Pass on the Way. 
Delacorte,
1997 
[128p]
ISBN 0-385-32189-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Staggerlee's family is pretty much on its own, since her African-American father's
relatives all cut the family offwhen he married Staggerlee's mother (a white woman),
72 
* THE BULLETIN
and the community is similarly suspicious of the family. Stag is therefore quite
excited when her cousin Trout visits, thinking that perhaps this will help her get a
better idea of her place in the world. She and Trout find common ground in their
family concern and in their questions about their sexuality, since both girls are
drawn to female friends and contemplate the possibility that they might be gay.
The book is sympathetic and lyrically written, and Staggerlee's search for self will
resonate with many young readers. The exploration of sexual identity is unforced
and open-minded, with both the possibility oflongterm orientation and youthful
questioning acknowledged. Most of the action here is internal, and the narrative
feels like a series of vignettes, so it's a particularly good fit for short-story fans. DS
WRIGHT, BETTY REN 
Too Many Secrets. 
Scholastic, 1997 
[128p]
ISBN 0-590-25235-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Chad Weldon (who first appeared in The Ghost Comes Calling, BCCB 3/94) scoops
up about the only job a nine-year-old can get-pet sitting for Miss Beane's tem-
peramental dog Benson while she recovers in the hospital from a broken leg. Some-
one is rooting through Miss Beane's empty house in her absence, though, and
Chad's bossy friend Jeannie convinces him they should hide out and nab the rob-
ber, who must be after the owner's rumored treasure. While Chad wrongly sus-
pects a neighbor's smart-mouthed nephew and Jeannie mistrusts an older,
home-schooled boy, the pair also erroneously suspects Chad's widowed father of
romancing an actress in his local drama group. Even the most naive readers will
realize that lurking behind a chair whenever you can sneak away from your parents
for a couple of hours is no way to catch a crook, and that bagging a burglar in a
burlap sack is wildly improbable at best. Add in the double disappointment of a
bad guy whose identity could not be deduced from the clues and a treasure that
consists of antique teddy bears, and you're left with plenty of secrets but not enough
suspense. EB
ZARIN, CYNTHIA 
Rose and Sebastian; illus. by Sarah Durham. 
Houghton,
1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-75920-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
Everyone who has ever lived in an apartment knows about noise, especially from
upstairs. In this take on facing your fears, Rose, a young resident of New York
City, lives with her mother in an apartment with a very noisy neighbor above them
("Nothing makes more noise than Sebastian"). Rose, a quiet child, is "scared"
when she hears boisterous boyhood bursting above her ("ZOW WHEE ZOW
WHEE ZOW WHEE"). Finally, however, and at Rose's request, her mother
arranges a playtime between Rose and Sebastian with kid-pleasing results: ("'ZOW
WHEE ZOW WHEE ZOW WHEE,' yelled Rose the minute she got home").
Two-dimensional cartoonish shapes and perspectives executed in muted gouache
and black ink energize the story's comic potential. Observant kids will enjoy spot-
ting Rose's green turtle on almost every page as they appreciate this story of lost
fears and found friendship. For a lively readaloud, try some audience participation
("WOOOO 
OO WOO"). PM
OCTOBER 1997 
* 
73
ZIEFERT, HARRIET, ad. 
Sleepy-O!; illus. by Laura Rader. 
Houghton, 1997 
[26p]
ISBN 0-395-87369-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-5 yrs
In this folksy, musical frolic based on a song by Jean Ritchie, a sleepless baby-o
"waahs" though she is changed, rocked, tickled, wrapped up, even shipped off to
Grandma's house ("Put her in the wagon, take her for a walk./ Plant her in the
garden like an old cornstalk!"). But Grandma and then Grandpa don't have the
knack either, and while the whole family jigs their high-spirited do-si-dos ("Dance
her east, dance her west./ Give her to the one who loves her best!") sister comes up
with the cure ("Sister says quiet; sister says shush! / Baby will sleep if you all hush")
and sure enough, baby sleeps. Cartoonish watercolor-and-pen illustrations feature
an energetic rural family where even the farm animals look disgusted with the
wailing child. The family's faces (even that of the family dog) reveal a comic range
of emotion that anyone who has ever dealt with a disconsolate infant will recog-
nize. The musical score is included, so learn the tune, let the kids make up their
own verses, and have a toe-stomping, knee-slapping time. Why should music
teachers have all the fun? PM
74 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Doll, Beth and Carol. Bibliotherapy with Young People: Librarians and Mental
Health Professionals Working Together. Libraries Unlimited, 1'997. 124p. Paper
ed. ISBN 1-56308-407-4. $23.00.
"Bibliotherapy" is a term that gets flung around a lot these days, and one some-
times gets the impression that books are flung at kids with about as much preci-
sion. The Dolls aim to demystify the process, summarizing the research on the
topic and making a point of explaining to professionals on both sides of the aisle
how the other one sees the matter and how to work together. The text makes a
useful distinction between developmental bibliotherapy, using literature to help
with "normal ongoing life tasks," and clinical bibliotherapy, using books to aid
"persons severely troubled with emotional or behavioral problems," and it concen-
trates primarily on the former. As the book acknowledges, there's a fair amount of
what you'll already know, but there are also concrete suggestions for approaches,
safeguards, and possible uses (as well as warnings about pitfalls) that will help put
specifics to the more generalized concepts. It's rather a pity that the benefits are
essentially taken as axiomatic, so there's no inclusion of any data demonstrating
measurable advantage to kids of such an undertaking. An index and appendices
containing annotated lists of further resources and subjects in a sample program
are included. DS
Hotze, Sally Holmes. Seventh Book ofJunior Authors and Illustrators. H.W. Wil-
son, 1996. 371p. illus. with photographs. ISBN 0-8242-0873-0. $50.00
This new addition to the series offers introductions to 235 new authors and illus-
trators ranging from Jon Agee to Harriet Ziefert, including such neoluminaries as
David Diaz, Lane Smith, and Rachel Vail. Many entries include autobiographical
sketches, which make the volume inviting for browsers as well as a source for infor-
mation. A cumulative index for the series is included. DS
Sutherland, Zena. Children & Books. 9th ed. Longman/Addison-Wesley, 1997.
720p. illus. with photographs. ISBN 0-673-99733-2. $55.95.
One of this venerable textbook's strengths is its currency; revisions always add
recent texts and update contents to focus on newer concerns and issues while main-
taining a solid overall exploration of the genre. This edition continues that tradi-
tion, adding new "Viewpoint" quotes from contemporary authors, inserting a
multitude of new color and black-and-white illustrations, and including a new
section, "Areas and Issues," consisting of essays on computer use, censorship, awards,
and other relevant topics. As usual, the plethora of bibliographies, appendices (the
pronunciation guide is a particularly rare advantage), and indices make this a use-
ful reference work that will keep it on students' shelves long after the end of the
semester. DS
OCTOBER 1997 
* 75
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Blake
African-Americans: Lyons
African-Americans-fiction:
Mathis; Woodson
Agriculture: Greenlaw
Alaska-stories: Blake
Alcoholism-fiction: Martin
American Indians-fiction: Martin;
Somtow
Animals-stories: Ada; Doucet;
Greene; Munsch; Walsh
Animals: Guiberson
Arctic-fiction: George
Art and artists: Lyons
Babies-stories: Munsch; Ziefert
Bears-stories: Miller, V.
Beauty pageants: Alter
BEDTIME STORIES: Nye
BIOGRAPHIES: Brown; Corpi;
Lyons; Novac
Birds: Wood
Birthdays-stories: Wells
Botany: Wood
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Isaacs;
Maynard; Miller, D.
Brothers and sisters-stories: Corpi;
Kellerhals-Stewart; Munsch;
Wells
Brothers-stories: Waldman
Bullies-fiction: Layton
Cars-stories: Brown
Cats-stories: Miller, V.; Pringle
Child abuse-fiction: Cole; Mazer,
N.
China-folklore: Chang
City life-stories: Zarin
Contests-stories: Porte
Cousins-fiction: Woodson
Crime and criminals-fiction: Cole;
Cooney
Crocodiles-stories: Eduar
Death and dying-stories:
Kooharian
Depression, the-stories: Stewart
Dogs-stories: Blake; Hoberman
Dolls-fiction: Turner
Dragons-stories: Eduar
Droughts-stories: Booth
Ecology: Guiberson; Maynard
Ethics and values: Chang; Ernst;
Hoberman; Rael
Fairs: Greenlaw
FANTASY: McKinley; Melmed;
Somtow
Farms-stories: Booth; Greene
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Maynard; Somtow
Fathers and sons-fiction: Spinelli
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Ada; Chang;
Cohen; Doucet; Kudler;
McKinley; McNaughton;
Waldman
Food and eating-stories: McCully
Football-fiction: Cochran
Friends-stories: Coursen; Zarin
Friends-fiction: Holeman
Gardening-stories: Anderson;
Stewart
GHOST STORIES: Buffie;
Kamida
Gladiators: Watkins
Grandfathers-stories: Rael
76 
* THE BULLETIN
Grandmothers-fiction: Martin
Guns-fiction: Mazer, H.; Miller,
D.
Health: Arnold
HISTORICAL FICTION: Isaacs;
Layton; McCully; Rinaldi
History, classical: Watkins
History, U. S.: Bial; Hampton
Holidays: Johnston
Holocaust-fiction: Douglas
Holocaust: Novac
Homosexuality-fiction: Woodson
Hong Kong: McMahon
Horses-fiction: Kamida; Porte
Horses: McMillan
Iceland: McMillan
Insects-stories: Ernst
Japan-folklore: Kudler
Jews and Judaism-stories: Rael
Jews-folklore: Waldman
Journalism-fiction: Trembath
Journalism: Hampton
Kidnapping-stories: Tudor
Latinos-stories: Mora
Letters-stories: Stewart
Libraries-stories: Mora
Logging-fiction: Maynard
LOVE STORIES: McKinley
LULLABIES: Nye
Mail-stories: Tunnell
Marine life: Davies
Mexico-folklore: Ada
Mexico: Johnston
Migrant workers-stories: Mora
Money-stories: Wells
Monsters-stories: Miranda
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Melmed
Moving-stories: Cadnum
Music: Raschka
MYSTERIES: Cooney; Wright
Names-stories: Pringle
Pets-stories: Cowan; Miller, V.;
Porte; Pringle
Pigeons-fiction: Spinelli
Pigs-stories: McNaughton
POETRY-animals: Andreae
Rabbits-stories: Doucet
Rainforests-stories: Eduar
Rape-fiction: Cole
Reading, easy: Porte
Reading, family: Hearne
Reading, reluctant: Alter; Douglas
RHYMING STORIES: Arnold; Greene;
Nye; Ziefert
School-fiction: Layton; Trembath
SHORT STORIES: Avi; Holeman;
Mazer, H.; Isaacs
Sisters-fiction: Mazer, N.; Turner
Sisters-stories: Ziefert
Slavery: Bial
SPORTS STORIES: Cochran; Mathis
Stepfamilies-fiction: Miller, D.
Storytelling: Ada; Cohen; Doucet; Kudler
Storytime: Andreae; Coursen; Greene;
Hearne; McNaughton; Miller, V.;
Walsh; Zarin; Ziefert
Suspense-fiction: Cooney
Terrorism-fiction: Cooney
Trains-stories: Kellerhals-Stewart; Tunnell
Uncles-stories: Stewart
Vampires-fiction: Somtow
Vocational guidance: Hampton
Voyages and travel: Brown
Voyages and travel-stories: Kellerhals-
Stewart; Tunnell
Waves-stories: Cowan
Weather-stories: Booth
Whales-stories: Cohen
Whales: Davies
Wolves-fiction: George
Wolves-stories: McNaughton
Women's studies: Alter; Hearne
World cultures: McMahon
World War II-fiction: Douglas
World War II: Novac
4
r
" 76Aý
rvý: 
CILWWO 
"Im
Creator of the Caldecott Honor-winning books
"More More More," Said the Baby and A Chair for My Mother
*"Simple and lovely.. This book is as warm as a blanket
wrapped around you with a hug, just when you need it."
-School Librorylournal (starred review)
"A very lucky song for readers.... Lively and
spontaneous as a child's perfect day... Lucky Evie -- what she
wants, she gets. When she wants to fly a kite, the wind takes it.
When she wants supper, her grandma has it ready, and when she
wants a song, her father sings it:'-Kirkus Reviews
Ages 3 up. 24 pp. TR $15.00/0-688-14459-4: LE $14-93/0-688-14460-8
GREENWILLOW BOOKS A divimon of William Morrow e, Co, In(
1 350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 1001 Q - Imp ýIwww.wdhammoirow rorn
Teaching 8
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
TeachtdlAmy
Every issue of Teaching K-8
provides informative articles on
the cutting edge of education.
'r•, 
• 
r 
• • 
• 
I o
ou ll also inn 
misignttui
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
Don't miss out on this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
TeachingK8
ix 54808, Boulder, CO 80322-4808
-8793
On. e year
(8 issues)
S sofl ,y
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
I 
I
v
BEST FRIENDS THINK ALIKE
by Lynn Reiser
* "Pre-schoolers should appreciate this
acknowledgment of their rituals of negotiation-how to
share without giving an inch." -The Horn Book (starred review)
"Ingenious design...Cheerful and very effective."
-ALA Booklist
"Will win readers... It's not hard to imagine
children acting this out."-Kirkus Reviews
Ages 4 up. 32 pages TR $i6.oo/o-688-i51i99-X LE $15.93/o-688-15z200oo-7
GICREENWILLOW BOOKS A division of William Morrow 6 Co., Inc.
Ino Avenue of the Americas. New York. NY oo1001' 
htto://www.williammorrow.com
t for newly
dent readers
"Kids will enjoy...the
relaxed approach to writing
about what you really feel'"
-ALA 
Booklist
"Anyone who has been the
new kid will understand
exactly how orah feels'"
-Kirkus Reviews
Ages 7 up. 64 pp.
RTE $15.00
0-688-14879-4
"A charming step-up
reader."-School Library journal
"Angela's honesty...
will win readers over, and
there's always some goofy
complication...to ensure
laughs:"-ALA Booklist
Ages 7 up
RTE $15.0
0-688-149
SInc.
York, NY 10019 * http://www.williammorrow.com
--
Animals for All Ages!
THE BIG BOOK OF ANIMALS
"This large, appealing book includes extremely
brief descriptions of more than 300 familiar
and little known animals...the familiar DK
style should be appealing to browsers.
-Booklist
Full-color photographs.
ISBN: 0-7894-1485-6 * $14.95 * Grades PreK-2
POWERFUL BEASTS OF THE WILD
WEIRD CREATURES OF THE WILD
by Theresa Greenaway
"...includes brief descriptions of the
characteristics, size, habits, and homes
of a wide assortment of familiar and
little-known creatures.. .complemented
by a combination of...full-color photo-
graphs and small cartoon illustrations."
-Booklist
ISBN: 0-7894-1509-7 (Powerful Beasts of the ¥
ISBN: 0-7894-1510-0 (Weird Creatures of the
$9.95 each * Grades 1-3
THE SNAKE BOOK
by Mary Ling
"Eleven substantially oversized double-spreads and
one surprise four-page fold-out offer astonishing
portraits of individual snakes....you won't even
have to booktalk it, just open up the foldout and
wait for the gasps."
-The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
ISBN: 0-7894-1526-7 * $12.95 * Grades 3-7
DK Publishing, Inc., 95 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Available from your regular supplier, or call 1-888-DIAL-DKP
VAT 
lcBOKF
j
II,
CHItIRN 1I1
by LAURA NUMEROFF
Full-color pictures by SHARLEEN COLLICOTT
"Numeroff sends up the Big Bad Wolf story genre with this tale of
an old wolf, new in the neighborhood, who is done in by a trio of
contentedly incompetent hens: Their burned cookies, obsessive
knitting, and off-key singing send him packing 'to live with
his mother in Atlantic City.'" -Kirkus Reviews
"The amusing story comes brilliantly alive in Collicott's pictures.
With a deadly eye for detail, she offers artwork that is pretty darn
adorable. A snappy story in every way." -Booklist
'A winner that is sure to please at story time." -School Library Journal
Ages 3-7. $14.95 TR (0-06-026679-1) $14.89 LB (0-06-026680-5)
A Laura Geringer Book
Also by Laura Numeroff
IF YOU GIVE A MOUSE A COOKIE 
IF YOU GIVE A MOOSE A MUFFIN
Full-color pictures by Felicia Bond 
Full-color pictures by Felicia Bond
Ages 3-7. $14.95 TR (0-06-024586-7) 
Ages 3-7. $14.95 TR (0-06-024405-4)
$14.89 LB (0-06-024587-5) 
$14.89 LB (0-06-024406-2)
Big Book: $19.95 (0-06-443409-5) 
Big Book: $19.95 (0-06-443366-8)
Mini book & doll: $16.95 (0-694-00416-2) 
A Laura Geringer Book
Mini book & cassette: $10.95 (0-694-00630-0)
+ "As a handmade wooden bird
is passed down through
several generations, each
female relative endows
it with a memory that adds
to the family history....
Soman's sensitive
illustrations
reflect the intimacy
created by the
memory of
ancestral
struggles and
accomplishments."
-KIRKUS 
REVIEWS,
pointer review*
Ages 4-8
0-395-72037-0
$15.95
TriUDDYP1
4
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETUR 
POSTAGE GURANTEED
00089036(199710)51:2;1-ill
0008-9036(199710)51:2*; 1-0
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
invites you to visit our newly expanded home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edulpuboff/bccb
New features include:
SBulletin Stars-what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles (this month:
Four-Hankie Reads)
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1996
* the Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Newcomer to Watch-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more... updated monthly!
I,~ILI~;
·~ 
:·I·
ire 
···
"i~
iii·u ~ 
sr
i4":~r
js rl r~j~ 
r~·
-i. 
4p~i~.~ ~8~ 
"i%?q~
I.·il
r
IIII
;_i
