T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
November 2011
Vol. 65   No. 3
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please direct inquiries and orders to the ChLA: 
www.childlitassn.org.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
November 2011
Vol. 65 No. 3
131  the BIg PICture
 
 The No. 1 Car Spotter  by Atinuke; illus. by Warwick Johnson Cadwell
132  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
132 •  Mouse & Lion  by Aesop; ad. by Rand Burkert; illus. by Nancy Ekholm 
Burkert
137 • Spunky Tells All  by Ann Cameron; illus. by Lauren Castillo
159 • Never Forgotten  by Patricia McKissack; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon
160 •  Heart and Soul: The Story of America and African Americans  written and 
illus. by Kadir Nelson
169 • Swirl by Swirl: Spirals in Nature  by Joyce Sidman; illus. by Beth Krommes
182  Professional ConneCtions
183  subjeCt and use index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Claire Gross, Reviewer (CG)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $93.00; combined print & electronic $130.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $16.50 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $12.00. Single copy rate: $10.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2011 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from The No. 1 Car Spotter ©2011 by Warwick Johnson Cadwell and used by permis-
sion of Kane Miller Books.
novemBer 2011 • 131
the BIg PICture
The No. 1 Car Spotter
by Atinuke 
illustrated by Warwick Johnson Cadwell
Nigerian-born author Atinuke, author of a series of books about Anna Hibiscus, 
returns to the topic of life in a small African village in this irresistible outing with 
a new protagonist. Our hero, Oluwalase Babatunde Benson, is known to one and 
all as No. 1 because he is “the No. 1 car spotter in the village, maybe in the world!” 
Four chapters, each with a self-contained plot, chronicle No. 1’s adventures as he 
uses his automotive knowledge to solve the problem of the village’s broken cart, 
goes to market with his family, helps out his friend at his mother’s food stand, 
and contributes to the effort to get his ailing grandmother to a doctor in the city. 
Atinuke has a Beverly Cleary–esque gift for depicting daily-life details 
with both humor and authenticity. No. 1’s narration is absolutely awash in lik-
ability, with a boy’s-eye view of lively village life (when his best friend, Coca-Cola, 
obediently leaps into action at his mother’s commands, No. 1 reports, “As I was 
an able-bodied boy in the vicinity of a shouting mama I started to run around as 
well”) that’s as relatable as it is funny. Plotting is solid in its own right, whether in 
the comedy of No. 1’s panic at having to buy mysterious grown-lady stuff from 
a market stall or the gentle emotional dilemma of his wanting to help his friend 
but not be identified merely as his sidekick; particularly touching is the guilt he 
feels when he thinks his family has misused the gift of a village visitor. Beyond all 
that, however, is the author’s exuberant style, which makes No. 1’s joyous voice 
into one that could turn a walk to the corner into a high-spirited adventure, and 
which gives the dialogue of family and village the pacing and rhythm of a musical 
as everybody in the crowd weighs in on everything. 
Even readers half a world away will feel instantly at home in No. 1’s vil-
lage, and they’ll relate to universal dynamics such as the authority of grandparents 
and loyalty to friends. Yet the picture is also rich with details of the area: the goods 
the village brings to market (“our palm oil and our yams, our onions, our tomatoes 
and our chili peppers, our baskets and our dried fish . . .”), the enticement of car-
spotting in a place where cars are pretty rare, and the difference between the towns, 
where they have “tap water, electricity, and television,” and the village, “where we 
only talk about such things.” Nor is this simply a bland travel-brochure portrait: 
there’s matter-of-fact acknowledgment that the men have all gone to the city to 
make money, which they send back to their families, and that the money needed 
for a doctor is more than the village can generally manage.
Mostly, though, it’s the story of one effervescent kid and his friends and 
family, a group whose exploits are ripe for reading aloud or alone. Black-and-white 
132 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
illustrations fill the pages, occupying roughly half of most spreads, making the book 
even more accessible, and accentuating the inviting energy. The narrow slashes of 
linework and stylized faces have a distant kinship to Gregory Christie, while the art’s 
comic flair recalls the work of Ramona illustrator Alan Tiegreen. Ramona herself 
would certainly find a kindred spirit in No. 1, and her fans—and any kid looking 
for a flavorful series of adventures worth the effort even for novice readers—will 
take No. 1 to their hearts. (See p. 134 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
abela, deborah The Ghosts of Gribblesea Pier. Farrar, 2011 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-374-36239-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
The Bonhoffen family, who have happily run the combination of amusement park 
and circus that is Gribblesea Pier for years, find their livelihood threatened when 
villainous developer Lucien B. Crook and his crony the mayor seek to evict them 
and tear down the increasingly dilapidated pier. Then twelve-year-old Aurelie 
Bonhoffen learns a family secret: at their deaths, the Bonhoffens have the option 
of returning to life if they choose, albeit a life with some ghostly attributes, and 
her two favorite uncles did in fact make this choice after a car accident initially 
claimed their lives years ago. With the assistance of new friend Rufus (the mayor’s 
son) Aurelie develops a plan to save the pier, but Crook grows increasingly more 
determined. Will the Bonhoffens prevail? With a little supernatural help, they just 
might. This Australian import, set in England, offers lovers of light supernatural fare 
a quickly paced, skillfully plotted yarn, and while the characterization isn’t always 
deep, the charm and verve of Aurelie, Rufus, and (especially) Aurelie’s uncles will 
easily smooth over any shortcomings. Like Rufus, tween readers will also easily 
relate to the bullying Aurelie takes at school for being different (hard to avoid in 
the line of work her family is in), while they will be bolstered by her resilience and 
by her pride in her unique skills and her eccentric but loving family. Young fans of 
Eva Ibbotson will take to this like a ghost to a haunted house.  JH
aesoP Mouse & Lion; ad. by Rand Burkert; illus. by Nancy Ekholm Burkert. di 
Capua/Scholastic, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-10147-9 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
We all know the story: little mouse mollifies offended lion by promising to return 
novemBer 2011 • 133
a kindness and surprises the heck out of the big cat by actually managing to follow 
through. This time it’s noted illustrator Nancy Ekholm Burkert who tackles the tale, 
with text adapted by her son Rand, who has also adapted Aesop into song form. In 
the wake of Pinkney’s Caldecott-winning The Lion and the Mouse (BCCB 11/09), 
this is a tough tale to impress anew with, but Burkert’s illustrations take a very dif-
ferent approach. There are echoes of old-school natural history art in the intricate 
hatching of her colored pencilwork, which picks out every strand of fur on lion 
and mouse and shades the boulders, foliage, and tree bark into touchable texture. 
Airy cream backgrounds, with occasional distant horizon lines floating through 
the spreads, emphasize the big-sky flavor of the region (identified in a note as the 
hills on the border between Namibia and Botswana) and also lead up to a dramatic 
contrast with the closing spread, wherein a newly aware lion celebrates the small 
things. Though there are a couple of missteps (the mouse, for instance, isn’t actu-
ally depicted scampering over the lion, as the text states, in the initial encounter), 
the overall approach is coolly elegant, a contrast to Pinkney’s vividness; as a result, 
this is more suitable for a slightly older audience than that volume, especially ar-
tistic kids who will pore over the subtleties of layout and the imaginatively varied 
compositions. There’s a pleasing immediacy to the text, which emphasizes dialogue 
and detail, that makes it particularly suitable for a readaloud, and it’s a ready-made 
partner to Pinkney’s version for a compare-and-contrast exercise.  DS
agee, jon My Rhinoceros; written and illus. by Jon Agee. di Capua/Scholastic, 
2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-29441-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
“When I bought my rhinoceros,” the narrator says, “I didn’t really know what I 
was getting into.” (And how many of us would?) Our young protagonist is disap-
pointed with his buddy’s general inactivity; his pet doesn’t even engage in the two 
activities that, according to a rhinoceros expert, the animals are known for: popping 
balloons and poking holes in kites. That changes one day when, on the way home 
from the park, boy and beast happen on some fleeing criminals, one floating away 
in a balloon and the other soaring away in a kite . . . Agee returns to his slightly 
worried deadpan style, creating a world where having a rhinoceros is normal but 
not entirely satisfying. The plot is also, unfortunately, not entirely satisfying, with 
too much relying on the ending that’s quickly undercut with a seeming twist that 
doesn’t actually twist. The art is Agee’s familiar big, soft, flat shapes with fluid thick 
lines against pale tints of color. The rhinoceros himself is stolid yet expressive, 
contentedly watching the boy fling himself into a frenzy trying to elicit a game of 
fetch but sternly leaping to deliver justice to the robbers. This isn’t as successful as 
Broach’s strange pet tale When Dinosaurs Came with Everything (BCCB 10/07), 
but those who might want to go beyond that to another amiably weird place may 
want to join the boy and his rhino.  DS
amir Zahra’s Paradise: illus. by Khalil. First Second/Roaring Brook, 2011  
272p
ISBN 978-1-59643-642-8 $19.99   
R Gr. 10 up
On June 16, 2009, Mehdi, a fictional nineteen-year-old protester, joins the rally 
in Tehran against the contested election of Iran’s President Ahmadinejad. He 
134 • The BulleTin
doesn’t return home. As his mother, Zahra, and older brother, narrator and blog-
ger Hassan, scour the hospitals, morgues, administrative offices, and courts, they 
quickly learn that there’s nothing particularly special about another protester gone 
missing, and that a corrupt hierarchy stands between them and the truth about 
Mehdi’s disappearance. The author and illustrator of this graphic novel, who chose 
to remain anonymous for political reasons, lead readers on a heartbreaking tour of 
a city paralyzed by fear, traffic, and red tape. Individual citizens, clerics, and bu-
reaucrats, impelled by good will or a well-placed bribe, contribute hints and leads 
that help Hassan connect Mehdi’s fate with a parcel of land in the city’s largest 
cemetery—Zahra’s Paradise—that has been hastily and clandestinely purchased by 
the government as a dumping ground for disappeared dissenters. This ambitious 
work succeeds as both taut mystery and blistering political screed. Comparisons with 
Maus are inevitable and apt, as Khalil’s black-and-white artwork is at once candid 
and controlled in its treatment of brutality and devastating in its satirical depiction 
of the theocracy. Copious end matter ranging from glossary and background on 
the 2009 elections to statistics on executions and a list of over 16,000 names of the 
disappeared (in very, very fine print) help Western readers to interpret the events 
from the creators’ vantage point.  EB 
atinuke The No. 1 Car Spotter; illus. by Warwick Johnson Cadwell. Kane 
Miller, 2011 112p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-61067-051-7 $5.99   
R* Gr. 2-4
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 131, for review.
avi City of Orphans; illus. by Greg Ruth. Jackson/Atheneum, 2011 350p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-7102-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-8260-9 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 5-8
The Geless family, Danish immigrants in 1893 New York, needs every penny the 
parents and older children can make to keep their heads financially above water. 
Thirteen-year-old Maks Geless may feel Poverty breathing down his neck, but when 
he’s shaken down for his newsboy pennies by the Plug Ugly gang, he understands 
what true destitution looks like. He invites Willa, the ferocious street girl who 
champions him, home for a meal, only to walk into a family crisis: his older sister 
Emma has been accused of stealing a gold watch from a room at the Waldorf Hotel, 
where she’s a chambermaid. Now the family is short a vital income, Emma needs 
money for food in prison and for a lawyer, and the Plug Uglies are still threaten-
ing Maks. Inspired by the sensational detective stories that a boarder in the Geless 
household reads aloud each evening, Maks and Willa seek the services of crotchety, 
consumptive Bartleby Donck, a private investigator who pulls in a favor to get Maks 
a job at the Waldorf and then directs the children’s sleuthing activities. Although 
the matter of the purloined watch is set up as a mystery, there’s little tension or 
intrigue in the search for clues, and the villain’s identity comes freighted with more 
pathos than surprise. Tenement life among the working poor is of more interest, 
and readers who expect a work of historical fiction are likely to be better satisfied 
than those who seek a crime thriller. A brief list of materials for further reading 
and viewing, including several titles written for children (though not identified as 
such), is appended.  EB
novemBer 2011 • 135
baer, marianna Frost. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2011 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-06-179949-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
All Leena wants from her senior year at boarding school is to get through it with 
a minimum of drama and anxiety. Emotionally untethered from her amiable but 
clueless divorced parents, she regards Barcroft Academy as home and her friends 
Vivian and Abby as her family. They snag Frost House, a cozy little Victorian 
normally reserved for boys, for their dorm, but find their plans disrupted when 
the dean adds Celeste, a troubled classmate with a broken leg, to their haven. 
Caught in the middle as peacemaker between her friends and Celeste, Leena finds 
her anxiety skyrocketing. She spends more and more time hiding in the only place 
she’s able to feel calm, the closet—a closet Celeste swears smells like dead things. 
Inside, Leena’s self-calming internal dialogues begin to take on a sinister cast, 
prodding her into increasing isolation and mistrust of others; meanwhile, cruel 
accidents mysteriously plague Celeste. Baer deftly plays the gray areas between 
psychological and supernatural thriller, using the girls’ suspicions of one another 
and the mental instability of the two main players (Celeste’s father has just been 
institutionalized for schizophrenia, and she’s terrified of a similar diagnosis if she 
admits to believing the house is haunted, while Leena pops anti-anxiety meds well 
beyond what she was prescribed) to leave the true cause of their parallel downward 
spirals suggestively inconclusive without sacrificing any shivers. The atmosphere 
here is eerily quiet, all creepy details that ramp up the tension without ever releas-
ing it in a big standoff; the house, if it is indeed haunted, is all about psychological 
terror and subtle manipulation. Give this inexorable thriller to fans of Griffin’s 
Tighter (BCCB 5/11).  CG
barrett, traCy Dark of the Moon. Harcourt, 2011 [310p]
ISBN 978-0-547-58132-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 8-10
Ariadne isn’t sure she is ready to open her soul up to being possessed and become 
the Goddess, but her mother’s untimely death means that the position must be 
filled. On the other hand, Theseus, prince of Athens, is quite clear on the fact that 
he is unwilling to play his seemingly destined part as temporary lover and even-
tual sacrifice, and he would like to save Ariadne and her “monstrous” and isolated 
older brother, Asterion, as well. Unfortunately, in a world tightly bound in ritual, 
superstition, and the utter dominance of men (except for the Goddess), two teens 
who glimpse an alternative way of living are unlikely to get far. Indeed, their own 
survival comes at a heavy cost, and both emerge deeply impacted by secrets that 
they wish they didn’t know and choices (like their decision to kill Asterion swiftly 
rather than leaving him to be tortured slowly) that they will never escape. Bar-
rett adds significant drama and elegance to this classic Greek myth, judiciously 
weaving in modern adolescent behaviors while carefully following the traditional 
interpretation. Ariadne, secluded, achingly naïve and vulnerable, and shaky in her 
own faith, is perceptively drawn, and the rather less-developed Theseus (who seems 
to operate primarily on a blend of bravado and cunning) is important as a foil for 
her, yet another obstacle she must understand, overcome, or integrate into her life. 
While an author’s note or list of suggested readings would have been helpful for 
Greek-myth newbies, readers should have little trouble recognizing this as having 
136 • The BulleTin
the elements of a mythological tale, and the memorable names should quickly lead 
them back to the original stories.  AS
biggs, brian Everything Goes: On Land; written and illus. by Brian Biggs. Balzer 
+ Bray/HarperCollins, 2011 50p
ISBN 978-0-06-195809-0 $14.99   
R Gr. 1-4
First, the short description of the opening title in Biggs’ new Everything Goes 
series: a little boy and his dad leave their quiet suburban home and step into their 
sedan for a trip into the city. Creeping through the insanely congested streets, the 
father and son converse about the types of vehicles; they pick Mom up at the train 
station and drive home. Now, what the fun is all about: Biggs cleverly directs the 
zany cartoon traffic so that each spread features a particular type of vehicle—e.g., 
truck, motorcycle, train, RV—in an eye-boggling array of iterations. Several models 
get a double-page spread cutaway-diagram treatment, with important parts (brake 
lever, gas tank, exhaust pipe) and goofy extras (nice socks, Miss Kitty) duly labeled. 
Numbers from one to one hundred are hidden within the deliciously jammed 
compositions; also a multitude of birds sporting hats are hidden, Waldo-style, in 
plain view. If this level of intricacy in the artwork isn’t sufficient, viewers can try to 
correlate ads with businesses throughout the book or carefully inspect motorists 
and pedestrians for visual gags: the panicky White Rabbit rushing for the subway, 
the health-food vendor with no business, the tentacled alien on the trolley. Still 
not enough? How about a double foldout of about a half-mile of cityscape? Once 
you embark on this wild interactive journey, don’t expect to get home for quite a 
while.  EB 
brezenoff, steve Brooklyn, Burning. Carolrhoda Lab, 2011 198p
ISBN 978-0-7613-7526-5 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 9-12
After Kid’s gender and sexual orientation ambiguity prove too much for his/her 
father to accept, the fifteen-year-old lives on the streets in Brooklyn, finding friend-
ship and solace amid a group of older people who frequent a friendly neighborhood 
bar. There Kid meets and falls in love with Felix, even though friends warn Kid 
that Felix is a junkie. The summer after Felix dies of an overdose, Kid is still reeling 
with grief when Scout appears with a guitar, and the two become attached and fall 
in love; meanwhile, police question Kid about burning down a warehouse where 
Felix and Kid were known to stay. Scout, like Kid, is never assigned a gender, and 
the majority of the book consists of them moving around Brooklyn and seducing 
each other with their music while trying to convince Fish, the owner of the bar, 
to let them stay in the basement. Though stylish in its sadness, the the book is too 
thin in its plot to bear the weight of the characters’ emotional intensities; Scout’s 
backstory is never revealed, and the repetitiveness of the couple’s days and nights 
bogs down any forward movement. The mystery of the fire, however, as well as 
the tightly drawn setting in real New York City neighborhoods, may prove enough 
for readers already intrigued by the authorial decision to keep the gender of the 
characters in flux, a device that works flawlessly through the use of Kid’s first-person 
narration and the carefully drawn responses of other characters. With its develop-
ment of a supportive ersatz family and its happy-as-it’s-going-to-get ending, this 
will appeal to readers who enjoyed David Levithan’s Love Is the Higher Law (BCCB 
BCCB 10/09).  KC  
novemBer 2011 • 137
buzzeo, toni Lighthouse Christmas; illus. by Nancy Carpenter. Dial, 
2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3053-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Find a picture book with a lighthouse setting and chances are you’ll also find a 
plucky little girl who keeps the light burning and saves the storm-tossed sailors. 
Buzzeo’s Christmas offering puts a bit of holiday tinsel on the tried-and-true tale. 
It’s the first Christmas for Frances and her brother, Peter, since their mother died 
and their father took a transfer from his mainland lighthouse to one on an island 
in Penobscot Bay. A run of bad weather has prevented the supply ship from reach-
ing Ledge Light, and as their household supplies dwindle, Peter is so desperate 
for a real celebration with all the customary rituals that Papa agrees the children 
should go to their aunt on the mainland while he stays and tends to business. The 
weather worsens, though, and on Christmas Eve Papa must rely on Frances to 
tend the light while he puts out in his dory to rescue a fisherman. As the children 
try to make the best of their ruined holiday to cheer Papa and their guest, a small 
plane flies low over Ledge Light and drops a bundle of supplies with a note reading 
“Seasons Greetings from The Flying Santa.” An appended note apprises readers 
that the Flying Santa Service is a real organization, founded by a lone floatplane 
pilot in 1929 and expanded over the years to serve Coast Guard families through 
the present day. The telling is smooth and engaging, and Carpenter’s mixed-media 
pictures set the appropriate mood—warm and hospitable inside the lighthouse, 
dark and tempestuous outside—so even children who are yet unfamiliar with the 
lighthouse-keeper’s-daughter trope will cheer the heroics right on cue. The brief 
appearance of the Flying Santa upstages the rescue somewhat, since listeners will 
wish they could follow the pilot as he makes his holiday rounds, but the appeal of 
a surprising yet old-fashioned Christmas on an isolated island will be enough to 
satisfy many holiday buffs.  EB
Cameron, ann Spunky Tells All; illus. by Lauren Castillo. Farrar, 2011 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-374-38000-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
We’ve heard from both Julian and Huey (The Stories Julian Tells, BCCB 1/82; The 
Stories Huey Tells, BCCB 12/95) in the Bates family, as well as their friend Gloria 
(Gloria’s Way, BCCB 2/00), but we haven’t heard from the Bates family pets—until 
now. Spunky is Huey’s beloved pooch, mostly happy with his domestic lot despite 
his humans’ tragic inability to speak Dog. It’s that language barrier that leads to a 
terrible misunderstanding: believing that Spunky needs animal company, the fam-
ily acquires a cat. Spunky, however, is incensed by vain, ditzy Fiona (who “smells 
of Foolish”) and wishes the house were rid of her—or does he? This is more an 
animal story than a genuine continuation of the adventures of Julian et al., but it’s 
no less solid for that. While there’s plenty of humor based on crossed dog-human 
understanding, this is really a character and relationship story, following Spunky as 
he gets used to what is basically an annoying new sister and as he demonstrates his 
importance to Huey in an ultimately deeply touching tribute to the dog-kid bond. 
The characterization of Fiona is masterful yet economic, neatly capturing the svelte, 
smug cluelessness that is par for the feline course while also making it understand-
able that Spunky (or “Dog,” as she airily calls him) eventually comes to love her. 
138 • The BulleTin
Chapters are neatly self-contained for reading aloud or alone, and the solid-lined 
monochromatic spot art, focused firmly on the critters and not the people, has the 
friendly openness of Spunky himself. Dog fans looking for something a little deeper 
than Nolan’s Down Girl and Sit (Smarter than Squirrels, BCCB 11/04) will delight 
in Spunky’s tail-wagging tale-telling, which could introduce a new generation of 
kids to the Bates family chronicles.  DS
Carman, PatriCk Floors.  Scholastic, 2011 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-545-25519-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
With suites such as The Pinball Machine and The Room of Rings and guests that 
include ducks as well as people, the Whippet Hotel is more like a funhouse than a 
four-star luxury resort—and that is just fine with Leo, the ten-year-old son of and 
assistant to the hotel’s resident maintenance man. Leo and his dad know almost 
as much about the hotel’s secret nooks and crannies as its owner and creator, the 
enigmatic, duck-loving Merganzer Whippet. Now, however, Mr. Whippet is miss-
ing, the hotel is on the fritz, and a mysterious Italian businessman has his sights 
on taking the Whippet down. After receiving a series of clues from Mr. Whippet 
himself, Leo realizes it is up to him—and a few of the hotel’s feathered guests—to 
prevent the demise of the grand hotel. Willy Wonka comes to the Ritz in this 
sometimes humorous but mostly predictable outing that has Leo undergoing a 
series of tests until he can rightly take his place as Merganzer’s successor. Familiar-
ity will be the key appeal here: the bad guys are instantly recognizable, the good 
guys are everyday folks with plenty of wit and determination, and hints laid out 
in the first few chapters will make the twist ending foreseeable even to the most 
inexperienced reader. Although this lacks the more subversive elements of Dahl’s 
classic, the Whippet has plenty of absurdity to spare, and kids with a penchant for 
the eccentric won’t mind wandering its rooms with Leo.  KQG 
Carson, rae The Girl of Fire and Thorns. Greenwillow, 2011 [432p]
ISBN 978-0-06-202648-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Princess Elisa of Orovalle is meant for great things—she must be, since she was born 
with a Godstone, “warm and alive but blue and faceted, hard as a diamond,” in 
her belly button. It chills to warn her of danger, and it warms when she prays, but 
it is not until her hasty, politically motivated marriage to hunky King Alessandro 
of neighboring Joya d’Arena that she begins to learn the true scope of her destiny. 
Suddenly, she’s swept up in an intertwined web of court intrigues, ethical rebel-
lions, religious sectarian differences, and a border war that has, unbeknownst to 
most, already begun. Elisa is a steely, quick-witted heroine, putting her theoretical 
knowledge of battle strategy and politics to practical use almost immediately, and 
responding with courage and integrity to an endless string of physical, moral, and 
spiritual challenges. In this way, the book recalls the heroine-centered adventures 
of Tamora Pierce and Kristin Cashore, and it is genuinely gratifying to watch Elisa 
harness her own talents and earn her place in the world. Unfortunately, her intense 
hatred of her own body—she is a “sausage” in the opening chapters, then rejoices 
when a kidnapping and desert march result in weight loss—and complete lack of 
self-worth due to that factor alone is myopic and seems to be tacked on to her 
novemBer 2011 • 139
character for the sole purpose of giving her vulnerability. In addition, the elision of 
magic and religion can be confusing, setting up contradictions in the world-building 
that have yet to be resolved. Nevertheless, the large cast of characters is well drawn, 
the romantic entanglements are unexpected, and the grand sweep of the plot will 
propel readers forward through this ambitious fantasy-adventure epic.  CG
CastelluCCi, CeCil First Day on Earth. Scholastic, 2011 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-545-06082-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-12
A gentle soul who helps out strangers in need and patiently cares for his alcoholic, 
depressed mother, Mal would love to leave this world, to be free and far away from 
human cruelty, and when the aliens—the ones who abducted him for three days 
when he was twelve—come back, that’s exactly what he’ll finally be able to do. 
His accidental attendance of an abductee support group in place of the Alateen 
meeting he usually attends puts him in contact with Hooper, whose strange, oth-
erworldly behavior is explained when he claims to be an alien himself. Castellucci 
plays powerfully with the ambiguity surrounding the truth of Hooper’s identity 
and Mal’s past experience in a way that recalls Fisher’s Corbenic (BCCB 11/06), 
and the balance of indicators for mental illness versus extraterrestrial event is expert 
and provocative. Mal’s base-level depression is so powerful that he seems unable to 
imagine an earthly cure (“If I could help [my mother] to understand . . . she would 
maybe laugh, and the brown dead plants in the garden that she has forgotten about 
would turn green again. . . . They must have a ray gun for that”), while Hooper lives 
isolated and detached from human experience, offering commentary on the world’s 
evils but nevertheless evincing a childlike joy in the acts of kindness he witnesses 
from Mal. The prose is spare but dense, lyrical and strongly emotive, and younger 
teens will find the story accessible and affecting even as older readers can revel in 
its emotional complexity and thematic sophistication. Mal’s innate warmth, along 
with the tenuous connections Hooper helps him build with a couple of peers, bring 
glimmers of light to what is overall a painfully sad (if ultimately hopeful) story of 
abandonment and disaffection. Ultimately, it hardly matters whether the aliens are 
real or metaphorical; it is Mal’s earthly journey that will grab readers’ hearts.  CG
Chabon, miChael The Astonishing Secret of Awesome Man; illus. by Jake Park-
er. HarperCollins, 2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-06-191462-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
With a “cape as red as a rocket, a mask as black as midnight, and a stylin’ A” on 
his chest, Awesome Man’s got the whole superhero thing goin’. And he’s not shy 
about bragging on his own accomplishments—flying into space and through time 
barriers, shooting positronic rays from his eyeballs, smashing things that need 
smashing, and bear-hugging supervillains into submission. The audience will catch 
on pretty quickly to the fact that Awesome Man is the alter ego of an ordinary kid 
with superhero aspirations, a big imagination, and a tendency to act out his bad-
guy-smashing dreams and end up in a time out in his bedroom. “All calmed down 
and positronic again,” he’s back in the Earth-saving business, and back in the good 
graces of his Mom, who appreciates his power grip of a hug and “says that it feels 
awesome.” There’s certainly strong kinship here with Max and his wild things; a 
140 • The BulleTin
fresh generation of picture-book fans may feel that capes and spandex are nattier 
than a wolf suit, and that tackling Professor Von Evil and his Antimatter Slimebot 
trumps Sendak’s wildest rumpus. But behind the iconic superhero and his charm-
ingly retro, digitally rendered nemeses lies the same cautionary tale of a fantasy 
carried a bit too far for parental approval and a mandatory cooling-off period to 
bring the little hyped-up force of nature back down to earth.  EB
Cottrell boyCe, frank  The Unforgotten Coat; illus. with photographs by Carl 
Hunter and Clare Heney. Candlewick, 2011 112p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5729-1 $15.99   
R Gr. 4-7
In the summer term just after Year Six, Julie’s Liverpool classroom warily welcomes 
two new boys, oddly dressed in long, fur-lined coats. The older boy, Chingis, is 
always on the verge of getting in trouble for his cheekiness, and he insists that his 
younger brother, Nergui, must not take off his hat lest he turn violent. As Julie 
later discovers, the real reason Nergui keeps his hat on is because he and his brother 
are afraid—they claim that Nergui is being chased by a demon and must therefore 
hide, but the truth is that the boys are in the country illegally, and by the end of 
Julie’s account they have been whisked away in the night by authorities. Formatted 
as a worn school composition book with typed print and pasted-in pictures, the 
story is told in retrospect by Julie, whom the boys chose to be their Good Guide, 
a tradition they bring with them from their native Mongolia. Upon returning 
to the school as an adult, she finds that Chingis’ coat is still there in the lost and 
found, and she recalls her experiences with the boys as they learned to adapt to 
their environs by adopting Liverpool accents, engaging in schoolkid commerce, 
and playing soccer while she endeavored to learn about Mongolia. In the pockets 
of the coat, she finds pictures that Chingis tells her he brought from home but are 
instead Polaroid snapshots of the landscapes around Liverpool, framed to mimic 
stretches of desert, wide-open steppes, and even the shadow of a demon. The tech-
nique of including the pictures with their ambiguous content artfully drives home 
the larger point that the world is both bigger and smaller than Julie knows, as the 
scenes they depict are as foreign to her as if they had been from Mongolia, even 
though they are relatively local. Her interactions with the boys are as funny as they 
are poignant, and they delicately bring to the fore the human costs for children of 
the political unrest and oppression that leads to emigration. Pair with Tan’s The 
Arrival (BCCB 1/08) for stimulating discussion.  KC 
CowCher, helen Desert Elephants; written and illus. by Helen Cowcher. Far-
rar, 2011 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-374-31774-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
Elephants aren’t usually associated with deserts, but Cowcher offers a chronicle of 
the little-known desert elephants of Mali, who live just south of the Sahara and 
who migrate over a 300-mile route to find water when the dry season hits. The 
book focuses not only on the elephants but also on the local peoples, the Dogon, 
Fulani, and Tuareg, who have lived alongside the elephants for centuries. The result 
is an impressionistic picture of a tough and challenging ecosystem whose challenges 
are shared by human and elephant (“Talla, like the elephants, got water from the 
small lake among the trees”), and where old traditions of coexistence blend ef-
novemBer 2011 • 141
fectively with modern details such as radio broadcasts and pro-conservation wall 
signage. Cowcher’s watercolors focus more on broad, painterly fields of color than 
on modeling, resulting in occasionally stiff draftsmanship and unusually smooth 
elephants but generally offering arresting landscapes that radiate the heat of the 
Sahel. The human scenes are actually more vivid than the elephantine, energized 
by the high-voltage patterns of people’s clothes. While some audience members 
will want to know more about this little-documented elephant population, this is 
a vibrant quick introduction to the human and animal milieu of the Sahel, and the 
focus on coexistence gives it a useful environmental implication and helps introduce 
the idea to kids a few years away from the Scientists in the Field series. The book 
closes with a factual Q&A about both elephants and people and offers pointers to a 
couple of informative websites; a map of the region appears on the endpapers.  DS
Crimi, Carolyn Rock ’n’ Roll Mole; illus. by Lynn Munsinger. Dial, 2011 32p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3166-0 $16.99   
R 5-7 yrs
Young Mole has all the prerequisites for a future of rock-and-roll stardom: mad 
guitar skills, cool leather jacket, hip shades, even groupie chicks (who are, naturally, 
real chicks). Mole’s stage fright, however, means that only his best friend, Pig, has 
actually heard him play. When Pig wants to put on a talent show (he’s an awesome 
dancer), Mole refuses to take part in the performance—until Pig’s iPod breaks 
before the show and he is stuck without music for his dance routine. To rescue his 
friend, Mole finally musters the courage to pick up that guitar and make it wail 
on stage. Although the plot and its resolution are as worn as an old 45, wannabe-
rocker Mole is a sympathetic character and the rock-and-roll language makes this 
amusing to read aloud: “He played and sang like the supersonic, groovelicious rock 
star that he was, while Pig shimmied and shook his bad pink self.” The groupie 
chicks (three little girl chicks who adoringly follow Mole around) and references to 
Mole’s idols (Mick Badger, Moo 2, and Goose Springsteen) also add humor to the 
text. Munsinger’s signature cute critters (rendered in watercolor, pen and ink, and 
colored pencil) are appealingly kidlike in their stature and dress, and the pudgy, 
pink-nosed Mole is particularly endearing, whether ducking his head shyly as the 
chicks swoon over him or pumping his pink-nailed fist on stage. It’s not often you 
find a book that will satisfy both young Guitar Hero fans with dreams of stardom 
and lovers of adorable animals who wear clothes—this one just might.  JH
Cumyn, alan Tilt. Groundwood, 2011 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-119-9 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-110-6 $12.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
“My family got hit by a crazy bomb five years ago, and nobody’s been anywhere 
near sane since,” says sixteen-year-old Stanley, who’s been the anchor for his wildly 
imaginative little sister and mercurial mother ever since his father detonated that 
bomb by leaving the family. All Stanley wants is to finally make the basketball team 
and maybe, maybe to go out with statuesque school newcomer Janine Igwash, 
but even those simple goals become complicated, the first by the fact that he’s 
got to fight for one of only two spots on the varsity team, the second by the fact 
that when Janine does ask him out, it starts to look like it’s a cover for her to date 
a girlfriend. On top of all that, it turns out his long-lost father has been found 
142 • The BulleTin
again—has, in fact, turned up at their house, son from his new marriage in tow, 
insisting he be allowed to stay. Cumyn writes with an artless, resilient quirkiness, 
a wry, plainspoken inventiveness that instantly animates scenes and characters. 
Stanley reeks of believable teen haplessness and anxiety—in fact, a large portion 
of his developing relationship with Janine consists of his interpreting her fear of 
rejection as indifference—but it’s believable that in his skewed household he’s the 
stable one. His confused but heartfelt romance with Janine (which demonstrates 
that to an uncertain teenager a girl’s bisexuality just means another class of people 
to be jealous of) is funny and touching and layered, and their mutual sexual initia-
tion is earthily credible. With its blend of humor, family drama, and relationship 
story, this will appeal to all those teens who are just trying to survive the madness 
of school and family, day by day.  DS
deas, mike Dalen & Gole: Scandal in Port Angus; written and illus. by Mike 
Deas. Orca, 2011 [126p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55469-800-4 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Comic-book aliens generally arrive from another galaxy, but our title heroes, 
fairly humanoid save for the eyestalks emerging from their scalps, come from the 
underground city of Budap, where they recently lost a jet race to Tunax Jr. and 
his mysteriously advanced technology. It turns out it wasn’t the machine itself but 
the fuel (made from liquified fish) that won the day, and when Dalen and Gole 
are suddenly propelled topside into the dying Pacific fishing village of Port Angus, 
they land squarely in a diabolical business plot. Dastardly fishermen will use the 
X150 Super-Suck to clear the sea of fish, which they will sell to Tunax Sr., who will 
convert it into fishy fuel and corner the energy market in Budap. Except, of course, 
that Dalen and Gole and their new Earthling friend Rachel uncover the plot and 
save the day. The full-color illustrations would be very much at home in Saturday 
morning cartoons, with goofy Everycreature protagonists and doofus-styled bad 
guys. Plotting is thin and dialogue passes from simple into simplistic. Still, kids just 
cutting their teeth on GNs will find this an amiable romp, and a bonus spread of 
the Budapian alphabet and its English equivalent will give code enthusiasts a new 
method of secure encryption for classroom note-passing.  EB
dunrea, olivier A Christmas Tree for Pyn; written and illus. by Olivier Dunrea.
Philomel, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24506-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
Oother is “a bearlike mountain man who did not soften for anyone. Not even 
Pyn.” Pyn is his tiny, plucky daughter, who desperately longs for a Christmas tree 
so that the pair can have a “real Christmas for the first time.” Gruff Oother (who 
insists that Pyn call him by his name instead of “Papa”) dismisses the idea, but 
Pyn is determined; when she sets out to cut one down herself, Oother changes his 
mind and helps her bring back a tree. Overjoyed, Pyn decorates it with natural 
objects she’s been collecting for just such a tree, and Oother surprises her with both 
a beautiful handmade bird for the tree’s top (“I made it for your mother”) and a 
directive to call him “Papa” from now on. Oother’s and Pyn’s relationship is an 
intriguing one: Pyn accepts Oother’s gruff ways with the easy cheer of a child who 
novemBer 2011 • 143
has never known anything different, while Oother bears the subtle marks of a man 
in grief. Their relationship and the unexplained absence of Pyn’s mother add a layer 
of emotional complexity that elevates this above a mere feel-good Christmas story. 
Dunrea’s crisp, spare illustrations (rendered in pencil and gouache on watercolor 
paper) possess a pleasingly cozy, vaguely Scandinavian sensibility, and the petite 
Pyn with her upright pigtails is appropriately dwarfed by the scale of everything 
around her, especially big, black-bearded Oother. Young viewers will also particularly 
enjoy searching for a tiny mouse that appears in nearly all of the domestic interior 
scenes. While this would make a lovely holiday readaloud for any family or group, 
it might be particularly appreciated by single dads and their kids.  JH 
edwardson, debby dahl My Name Is Not Easy. Cavendish, 2011 [248p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-5980-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6091-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Luke Aaluk and his younger brothers Bunna and Isaac are sent by their mother 
to Sacred Heart, a Catholic boarding school to the south of their Alaskan com-
munity, where Eskimo and Indian students are enculturated in white customs and 
values. Isaac, who is technically too young to be enrolled, is promptly sent off into 
foster care without the consent, or even notification, of their mother. Luke and 
Bunna make an attempt at escape, but they are tracked down by one of the more 
open-minded priests and convinced they should give the school another chance. 
The boys’ conflict with the white Catholic authorities is exacerbated by tensions 
within the school, pitting Indians against Eskimos and the few marginalized white 
children also in attendance. Moreover, Cold War pressures involve many of the 
Inupiaq students in a government testing program in which they ingest radioactive 
iodine to help researchers investigate how they withstand extreme cold. Eventually 
leaders of the school factions realize that bonding rather than fighting is in their best 
interest, and they take a bold stand against the school administration by tracking 
down Isaac and exposing the system of abducting indigenous children to be placed 
within white families. Edwardson, author of Blessing’s Bead (BCCB 2/10), returns 
to the complex world of Alaskan culture and history here with this dramatic story. 
Readers who associate draconian Indian schools with an earlier period may be 
surprised to see the system continuing here well into the 1960s. Middle-schoolers 
who are studying the African-American civil rights movement playing out in the 
Lower 48 will find compelling comparisons and contrasts in the struggles of Luke 
and his classmates to advance into the wider world while retaining their cultural 
identity.  EB
ellis, deborah No Ordinary Day. Groundwood, 2011 160p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-134-2 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-108-3 $12.95   
Ad Gr. 4-7
When Valli learns that she is not really related to the family that has raised her in 
the Indian coal mining village of Jharia, she suddenly feels the freedom to leave 
them behind; given that she was abused by her alcoholic “uncle” and given only 
scraps of food after the other children had finished eating, it is hardly an emotional 
departure. After a harrowing series of circumstances, she ends up living on the 
streets of Kolkata, begging for change from tourists, fishing for coins in riverbeds, 
144 • The BulleTin
and surviving. Dr. Indra takes an interest in Valli, noting the patches of white on 
her skin, and eventually convinces her to come to the hospital for an exam. There 
Valli discovers that she has leprosy, and though she initially flees, panicked by what 
seems like a horrible and unalterable fate, she finally returns to Dr. Indra for care 
and treatment. Ellis, best known for her Breadwinner trilogy, creates a remarkable 
narrative voice, both detached and immediate, and Valli’s vivid descriptions of 
the setting bring the rougher side of India into clear focus. What the story boasts 
in voice and description, however, it lacks in its plot, which feels very forced and 
purpose-driven; Ellis essentially uses the the story of a girl terrified of lepers yet 
stricken with leprosy as a vehicle for educating about leprosy and the many mis-
conceptions linked to it. Those willing to forgive the forced plot elements will 
appreciate Valli’s story of overcoming the odds, however, as they travel alongside 
her through Kolkata’s narrow streets and alleys. An author’s note about leprosy and 
a glossary are included.  HM     
ellsworth, loretta Unforgettable. Walker, 2011 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2305-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
There’s a lot that people at his new school don’t know about Baxter Green: for one 
thing, he’s there in the hopes of reconnecting with his kindergarten best friend, 
Halle; for another, he’s got a true photographic memory—and never forgets 
anything once he’s remembered it; finally, he’s got sixty-thousand-odd dollars in 
illicitly acquired cash hidden in his guitar case. As Baxter, hiding his abilities from 
his new classmates, grows closer to now-teenaged Halle without telling her about 
their long-ago history (which she’s forgotten), he’s haunted by another figure 
from his past: Dink, his mother’s former boyfriend, now released from prison and 
determined to recover the money he used Baxter’s ability to embezzle. Baxter’s 
unerasable memory is an unusual notion, and the book starts to take it in some 
interesting directions by noting that the eternal freshness of his memory can cause 
him considerable grief, and by exploring the fact that his memory is only as accurate 
as his perceptions—which are as skewed as anybody’s. There’s too much piled all 
together in the plot, though, with a story about Baxter, Halle, and their classmates 
protesting the local taconite mine and some meaningful exploration of The Great 
Gatsby further diffusing the already ambitious focus. The book also seems to want 
Baxter’s ability to be more stunning than it really is, with other kids responding to 
knowledge that’s merely normal or standard geeky as if it were supernatural; there 
is also no real acknowledgment of how little Baxter’s ability actually gets him in an 
age where computers level the memory playing field and it’s cogitation and synthesis 
that humans are expected to bring. Readers will nonetheless find the notion of an 
extra memory boost intriguing, and they’ll sympathize with Baxter’s attempts to 
gain acceptance on the terms he desires.  DS
ford, miChael The Poisoned House. Whitman, 2011 319p
ISBN 978-0-8075-6589-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 8-10
In this British import, Victorian-era improprieties lead to a haunting that shakes 
the foundations of a tightly controlled mansion. Abi, a fifteen-year-old scullery 
maid, finds her attempt to escape from under the rule of a cruel housekeeper just 
lands her back under even tighter watch, stuck in a home where her mother died, 
novemBer 2011 • 145
the master of the estate is going mad, and a ghost is causing endless havoc. It turns 
out that the ghost is Abi’s mother, who is trying to point out that her death was no 
accident and who seems determined to protect her daughter and avenge her own 
death—even if her ghostly actions keep getting Abi in trouble. This is a serviceable 
mystery, with a few red herrings sprinkled throughout and a dramatic reveal. How-
ever, more memorable here are the creepy, atmospheric setting (the lost potential 
of what this house could have been makes it particularly sad) and defiant though 
period-appropriate Abi, who clings to life and hope with an admirable determina-
tion. Readers who can’t bear any unfinished threads will appreciate the epilogue 
in the form of an obituary that traces Abi’s whole life from murderer-revealer to 
benefactor to her own death decades later.  AS
garvey, amy Cold Kiss. HarperTeen, 2011 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-06-199622-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Wren has powers—to move things, to heal things—that she can’t explain, mostly 
because her similarly gifted mother refuses, for reasons unknown, to acknowledge the 
family heritage. Now more than ever, Wren needs guidance. Danny, her boyfriend 
and first love, died in a car crash, and, wracked by grief, Wren brought him back 
to life . . . sort of. Though the tale wisely steers clear of full-out metaphor, it is self-
aware enough to construct some interesting parallels between Wren’s relationship 
with the new Danny—the Danny who is hyper-focused on her, who necessitates 
an extensive secrecy that isolates her from family and friends, who is increasingly 
difficult to control—and a real-world abusive relationship. Wren’s memories of the 
old Danny, the sweet, oddball boy who was her first love, give the book poignancy 
and a much-needed emotional grounding that anchors the supernatural angst that 
ensues. The plot explodes when Gabriel, a new guy in town with psychic abilities, 
uncovers her secret and puts her in touch with the information and people that 
can help her deal with it, becoming a confidant and crush in the process. As a love 
interest, he’s fairly bland and unrealistically intent on getting together with a girl 
who has some pretty glaring issues, but as a plot device, he works splendidly, forcing 
Wren to decompartmentalize her life and deal with Danny’s death all over again. 
The heart of the book lies in Wren’s halting, heart-wrenching attempts to connect 
with the remnants of “her” Danny in the increasingly inhuman creature she has 
wrought; her struggles to balance her responsibility to Danny with her fumbling 
efforts to rejoin the daylight world of friends and family will also resonate with 
readers. Fans of Shiver (BCCB 10/09) will appreciate the nuanced, more bitter than 
sweet portrayal of star-crossed supernatural love in this promising debut novel.  CG
george, jessiCa day Tuesdays at the Castle. Bloomsbury, 2011 [254p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-644-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6 
Castle Glower isn’t your typical drafty stone palace but rather a living, almost 
sentient edifice that seems to change weekly as it grows new rooms, remodels oth-
ers, and nixes entire wings. It also has a soft spot for those mere mortals it houses, 
and currently Princess Celie, the youngest daughter of King Glower the 79th, has 
captured its stony heart, chatting with it politely and attempting to make an atlas 
of its ever-changing halls with her colored pencils and journal. The castle’s affec-
146 • The BulleTin
tion comes in handy when Celie’s parents and older brother are reportedly killed 
in an ambush. and it’s left to Celie and her remaining elder siblings to fend off a 
takeover by a foreign prince while trying to determine exactly what befell the king 
and queen. There is a warmth here that is utterly irresistible, both in Celie as the 
plucky, resourceful protagonist (who comes up with a variety of wonderfully devi-
ous and giggleworthy ways to oust the interfering prince, one of which includes 
manure) and the maternal, protective nature of her guardian castle. Furthermore, 
Celie’s devotion to her older brother and sister is appealing, and it’s refreshing to 
see siblings who get along despite their differing personalities. Though the political 
machinations behind the attempted assassination are fairly predictable, readers will 
be too far under the castle’s spell to notice; readaloud audiences will also be enticed 
by this inviting fantastical world.  KQG 
griffin, Paul Stay With Me. Dial, 2011 304p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3448-7 $16.99   
R* Gr. 9-12
It’s a classic opposites-attract scenario: fifteen-year-old Cece is a good girl, hard-
working and excelling in school; Mack is a high-school dropout with a rap sheet 
and a bad temper. After being introduced by Cece’s brother, however, the pair 
realizes they have much more in common than they thought. Both are products of 
alcoholic households, both dream of a better life, and both are ready to cling to the 
small semblance of hope that they offer each other. Inevitably, they fall in love—a 
sweet, sensual romance that unfolds with hushed whispers and trembling hands; 
all falls apart, though, when Mack commits a crime so heinous that it destroys 
the only good thing in his life, leaving Cece to pick up the pieces as they come 
to terms with the fact that they can no longer be together. This tender portrayal 
of a doomed romance is utterly engrossing, drawing readers in with engagingly 
authentic dialogue and fully realized characters. Although their story spans a mere 
102 days, it will take readers through the entire trajectory of their relationship from 
the flustered anxiety of a first kiss, to the total consumption of first love, to the 
devastation that comes with heartbreak, and to the eventual recovery. Mack and 
Cece alternate narrating chapters, giving readers the chance to know them both as 
individuals and as a couple, and they’re both endearing in their own right—Cece 
for her indefatigable toughness and Mack for his notions of compassion and love. 
Secondary characters are just as cleverly drawn and provide a bit of hope and levity 
amid what is otherwise a bittersweet and tragic ending. Be sure to hand out tissues 
with this one.  KQG 
grimes, nikki Planet Middle School. Bloomsbury, 2011 [150p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-284-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-8
Joylin isn’t feeling much joy these days; puberty is knocking at her door, making 
her grumpily question her tomboy ways and casual wardrobe. Even her best friends 
are becoming strangers, as KeeLee starts flirting with boys and Jake keeps apolo-
gizing when he bumps into her on the basketball court. What’s worse, her own 
body is betraying her, making her come over all goofy whenever Santiago, a guy 
she never noticed before, looks her way. In clean, accessible free verse that perfectly 
captures Joylin’s cri de coeur against encroaching adolescence, Grimes conveys all 
of the humor and horror that comes with the changes of puberty, subtly deploy-
novemBer 2011 • 147
ing secondary characters as object lessons for Joylin. As Joylin bumbles her own 
way through trying to remake herself into the kind of girl who might get noticed 
by a guy like Santiago, her younger brother, Caden, begs her to teach him to play 
basketball so that their dad will be proud of him, even though Caden is as good 
at drawing as Joylin is at hoops. The lesson she teaches Caden—to be proud of 
what he can do rather than trying to force himself into a mold that doesn’t fit—is 
the lesson she herself needs to learn, and readers will cringe, laugh, and most of all 
relate to her learning process as it is sensitively and sweetly depicted here. Mom 
and Dad, though definitely in the background, are especially well rendered as they 
try to ride with the changes in this compact title that has broad appeal and solid 
curricular possibilities.  KC 
hallowell, george Wagons Ho!; by George Hallowell and Joan Holub; illus. 
by Lynne Avril. Whitman, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-8612-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Pulling up roots and transplanting a family clear across country never is and never 
has been easy. In this lively picture-book account of westward migration, Jenny 
Johnson and her family’s covered-wagon trek from Independence, Missouri to 
Oregon City, Oregon is portrayed alongside that of Katie Miller, whose family 
is now following the same route by car, trailer, and moving van. The Johnsons’ 
five-month journey is marked by regret over friends and items left behind, the 
needling antics of a younger brother, worries about whether they can find their 
way, friends briefly made and lost, and long periods of boredom. Not much differ-
ent, actually, from the scenes that play out among the Millers. On the whole, most 
kids will agree Katie has the sweeter deal, with hotel pools, plenty of snacks, paved 
roads, bridges, and a ready-made house waiting for her at trail’s end. Still, there 
are moments over the five interminable days in which Katie might envy Jenny’s 
campfires, easy access to “bathrooms” (behind just about any bush), and the sheer 
joy of hopping off the vehicle and walking alongside to stretch the legs. Parallel 
layouts of the breezy cartoon-styled jaunt make comparisons easy, and the overlap 
of the stories at Independence Rock, where the Johnsons inscribe their names and 
Millers read them, invites the past into the present for a young audience. The final 
panels realistically situate the families in their new surroundings, with Jenny far 
from school and the nearest friend, and Katie pretty close to just about everything, 
including the mall. And, happily, both gals can envision good times ahead in their 
new Home Sweet Homes.  EB
hartley, a. j. Darwen Arkwright and the Peregrine Pact; illus. by Emily Os-
borne. Razorbill/Penguin, 2011 [432p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-409-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
As a transplant from England now living in Atlanta, eleven-year-old Darwen Ark-
wright is having a tough time: his rough Northern English accent does nothing to 
impress his new schoolmates, his distracted workaholic aunt makes a terrible cup 
of tea, and now the mirror hanging in his bedroom closet has become a potential 
gateway for monstrous creatures from another realm. That last problem starts as a 
lark: after receiving the antique mirror as a gift from the mysterious Mr. Peregrine, 
148 • The BulleTin
Darwen discovers it leads to Silbrica, a magical place complete with fairies and 
woodland spirits where Darwen can forget his worries. Unfortunately, Silbrica also 
houses a number of other much less pleasant creatures who, under the leadership 
of an evil sorcerer, plan to infiltrate the human world and destroy all that is good. 
From the tusked, piggish beasts called scrobblers to the barrel-chested, no-headed 
gnashers, the frightening creatures of Silbrica are indeed impressive feats of imagina-
tion. Unfortunately, the plot lacks similar inspiration—Darwen’s inevitable defeat 
of the creatures with the help of two similarly outcast classmates and the power 
of love is too predictable, and there’s unnecessary complication in the revision of 
elements of Native American history to create the supernatural backstory. There is, 
however, an entertaining connection between Darwen’s elite academy and Silbrica, 
and young readers will certainly agree with the author’s supposition that some 
teachers are simply inhuman. The literary world can always use another orphaned 
boy with a knack for heroics, and Darwen fills that bill nicely.  KQG 
haskell, merrie The Princess Curse. Harper/Harper Collins, 2011 325p
ISBN 978-0-06-200813-8 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Thirteen-year-old Reveka isn’t all that impressed with the curse that leaves twelve 
princesses exhausted and their footwear worn out (“It’s a curse of shoes and naps”), 
but she’s going to do her best to break it and thus earn the hefty reward offered 
to anyone who can save the royal daughters. An herbalist’s apprentice, Reveka has 
big plans to use the reward to start her own herbery; her mission takes on a new 
urgency, though, after her friend falls victim to the enchantment and Reveka real-
izes that the curse goes well beyond the princesses to threaten the entire kingdom. 
Donning an invisibility cap of her own making, Reveka follows the princesses 
one night into the Underworld; here the tale takes a darker turn and builds upon 
themes that were only hinted at in the first half of the book—loss, loneliness, 
grief, and regret. The transition from classic fairy tale to something more somber 
is surprisingly unforced, as Haskell uses much of the setup to subtly point towards 
the tragic aspects of Reveka’s life that belie her genial nature. While the moodier 
elements of the book at times read a bit older than the princess story, even younger 
readers will recognize the allusions to “Beauty and the Beast” and find themselves 
sympathizing with the isolated, outcast villain. The ambiguity of the conclusion 
regarding the villain’s identity and Reveka’s ultimate fate may leave some wanting 
a more definite outcome, but this intriguing mix of fairy tale, Romanian folklore, 
and classic mythology offers the possibility of a sequel; readers will likely be as 
anxious to return to the Underworld as Reveka.  KQG 
haston, meg How to Rock Braces and Glasses. Poppy/Little, 2011 [294p]
ISBN 978-0-316-06825-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-8
When Kacey Simon tells people they should close their lips to hide their metal 
mouth, or need a push-up bra, or shouldn’t blog because of their grammatical 
deficiencies, she’s not being mean, she’s being honest. Really. Unfortunately, when 
vanity contact lenses cause an eye infection, which necessitates glasses, the rejection 
of which leads to a chipped tooth, which tips the orthodontist off to Kacey’s need 
for major dental work, the resulting glasses, braces, and lisp yank her from her 
middle-school throne and prompt some serious soul-searching. Haston gives her tale 
novemBer 2011 • 149
of a mean girl in exile both warmth and perception, and the humor, while ample 
and employing elaborately dramatic setups worth of Kinney’s Wimpy Kid, is never 
leveled at any character’s expense. Instead, everyone from Kacey’s original posse to 
her new allies—former friend Paige and fashion-backward rocker Zander—are fully 
and thoughtfully developed. Kacey is brash and thoughtless, and she may not be 
someone readers would readily befriend, but she’s sympathetic nonetheless, as she 
genuinely doesn’t realize the depth of her hurtfulness until her social life collapses. 
Still, this is not about the lessons, or the nuanced characters. It’s about the good, 
old-fashioned, in-her-shoes fun of considering life from the view of royalty brought 
down to the level of the plebs . . . and finding that, actually, it’s pretty similar.  CG
healey, karen The Shattering. Little, 2011 312p
ISBN 978-0-316-12572-7 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Nestled on the west coast of New Zealand’s South Island with breathtaking views 
and perpetually mild weather, Summerton is about as idyllic as a small town can 
get; for Keri and Janna, however, its beauty is in stark contrast to their own grief. 
Both girls lost their beloved older brothers to suicide; Janna’s brother took his life 
nearly ten years ago, while Keri’s shot himself just two weeks ago. Sionne, one of 
the many holiday tourists Summerton sees, shows up with something more than 
condolences to offer Keri: as the younger brother of another boy who supposedly 
committed suicide, Sionne has been tracking the mysterious connection between 
Summerton and suicidal older siblings, and he is pretty sure he has come up with a 
pattern. While the three friends initially think they are hunting a serial killer, they 
soon discover that the source of these murders is something much more sinister and 
that it strikes at the very heart of the town’s success. An effective blend of potent 
realism and supernatural malice makes this one a noted standout in the recent YA 
trend of sacrificial lambs. The chapters shift focus among the three protagonists, 
but only Keri’s story is told in first person, lending her tale in particular both a 
sense of suspenseful urgency and genuine heartache for the loss of her brother. 
The transition from a straight-up whodunit to supernatural mystery occurs nearly 
seamlessly, helped by the placement of a multitude of clever clues that point toward 
the inevitable conclusion. Although this isn’t quite as gruesome as Yovanoff’s The 
Replacement (BCCB 9/10), readers who tend to believe that nothing good comes 
without a cost will have their suspicions confirmed here.  KQG 
hodkin, miChelle The Unbecoming of Mara Dyer. Simon, 2011 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2176-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2178-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Mara Dyer isn’t even her real name, but it is the one our heroine uses in this this 
tale of psychological drama and supernatural suspense. Six weeks have passed since 
a freak accident left Mara’s best friend and boyfriend dead and Mara recovering 
from a coma, with no memory of the events leading up to the tragedy. To escape 
the suffocating grief of their small town, Mara’s parents decide to pack up the fam-
ily and move to Florida, but Mara remains haunted: buildings crumble before her 
eyes only to reappear a blink later, and the faces of her dead friends show up at the 
most inconvenient of times. Mara’s psychologist mother insists that that her hal-
lucinations are part of Mara’s post-traumatic stress disorder, but this doesn’t quite 
150 • The BulleTin
explain the latest spate of accidental deaths Mara seems to be connected to or the 
failure of medication to stop her visions. Mara’s relationship with Noah Shaw, the 
obligatory beautiful boy, eventually sheds some light on the matter, leading to a 
climactic revelation that may or may not be the entire truth. Hodkin effectively 
disorients the reader by keeping the line between Mara’s reality and the goings-on 
in her head perpetually blurry: we know that Mara is a bit off-kilter but the extent 
of her departure from reality is always in question, even on the last page. Some of 
the more compelling plot threads are set aside to pursue the amorous developments 
between Mara and Noah, but since said developments are oh-so-sexy, few fans of 
romance will be disappointed by this sacrifice. The conclusion points towards a 
possible rift between the lovebirds while still questioning Mara’s sanity, and readers 
are left to breathlessly wait for what becomes of Mara Dyer next.  KQG 
jenkins, steve Just a Second: A Different Way to Look at Time; written and illus. 
by Steve Jenkins. Houghton, 2011 36p
ISBN 978-0-618-70896-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 2-5
Jenkins has a full and varied catalogue of vivid approaches to natural history, and 
here he takes a new tack by chronicling chronology itself. Each spread focuses on a 
unit of time, offering eight to ten thumbnails with information about what occurs 
during the interval (the “In One Second . . . ” pages mention, for instance, that 
“a bat can make 200 high-pitched calls” and “a hummingbird beats its wings 50 
times”) while also providing a brief explanation of the history behind the unit of 
time measurement, explicitly differentiating between time units based in nature 
(the day, month, and year) and those wholly manmade (the second, minute, and 
week). The examples are thoughtfully chosen, with close comparisons (the one-
minute heart rates of an elephant, a crocodile, a hamster, and a human adult and 
child) sharing space with broadly varied information (how many pounds of rice 
are harvested, the record rainfall); there are recurring themes of consumption, 
production, and movement, but they’re interpreted in broad and creative ways. 
While details of the natural world predominate, aspects of human-made industry 
and technology thread through as well, and the pressure of human habitation is 
clearly documented. This is a fascinatingly different way to approach natural history 
as well as time, and it invites curricular activities such as searches for additional 
statistics—and just observing a moment of stillness and noting what’s happened 
within that time. The book concludes with a compact visual timeline of the history 
of the universe, a graph indicating the changing and growing human population 
in the last quarter of a millennium, a comparative visual timeline of lifespans in 
the natural world, and a timeline of timekeeping itself.  DS
jones, Carrie After Obsession; by Carrie Jones and Steven E. Wedel. Blooms-
bury, 2011 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-681-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 7-10
After a local fishing boat goes down, taking its crew with it, the residents of a small 
Maine town begin behaving strangely—or, more to the point, meanly. Aimee tries 
to brush it off, but as her best friend, Courtney, becomes increasingly cruel and 
erratic, Aimee begins to wonder if the hostility that has suddenly taken over the 
town has something to do with the recent spate of nightmares she has been hav-
novemBer 2011 • 151
ing. Still, having weird dreams about shadowy river demons and hearing voices are 
not typical teenage behavior, so she stays mum until she meets Alan, Courtney’s 
gorgeous half–Native American cousin, who recently moved to town and seems 
to instinctively know that something isn’t quite right. Together, they discover that 
Courtney is slowly becoming possessed by a demon and that Aimee and Alan are 
fated to combine their powers and defeat it. This is pretty standard supernatural 
romance fare, but neither supernatural nor romance element is all that compelling. 
As protagonists go, Aimee and Alan are fairly generic, the artistic good girl with 
secret powers and the hot, mystical bad boy who knows better than everyone, so 
their rushed romance feels simply obligatory. The plot moves along clunkily as well, 
with much of the action being sparked by convenient catalysts such as a helpful 
school librarian who bestows upon Aimee a miraculously informative packet con-
taining the entire history of the local river and the origins of the demon. There are 
plenty of solidly creepy tales of possession and redemption out there these days, 
and readers will better served by turning to them.  KQG 
juster, norton Neville; illus. by G. Brian Karas. Schwartz & Wade, 
2011 [34p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96765-8 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86765-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
Being the new kid really is tough, as the protagonist of this picture book could tell 
you (“He imagined the teacher saying . . . ‘He comes from the South Pole, and you 
can all make fun of him as much as you want’”). Pushed out by his eager mother 
for a walk down the block, he randomly stands on the corner and shouts “Neville!” 
Soon kids cumulatively join him in his pursuit, helping make sure that the yells 
are loud and querying him about this wonderful, highly sought Neville. Bolstered 
by his new acquaintanceships, he returns home cheered and settles down for his 
first night in his new house as his mother tucks him in: “Good night, Neville, 
pleasant dreams.” That funny, prankish notion is the center of an effortlessly spun 
yarn touched with lively dialogue, made by Juster’s effective pacing into a short 
short story rather than an overlong picture book. While the logic isn’t perfect (in 
real life, some kids are going to think it’s weird when they find out he was hanging 
around yelling for himself), it’s refreshing seeing a new-kid story that’s got some 
real creativity to it; some youngsters will anticipate the closing revelation, while 
others will want to go back and read the story anew once they discover Neville’s 
identity. The visuals partner generously and aptly with the text in work of a slightly 
different flavor than usual for Karas: clever layout paces out elements with panel 
sequences and lets the cries of “Neville!” float loosely across the background, in 
a variety of shapes, colors, and patterns, while the scenes are an inspired blend of 
dismal geometric hopelessness, in a subdued-tone neighborhood awash in diagonals 
pointing off to nowhere, and Karas’ familiar scratchy-lined people. This could spark 
an interesting discussion about creative ways to get to know people—or just other 
methods of faking out a crowd.  DS
152 • The BulleTin
kargman, jill Pirates & Princesses; written by Jill Kargman and Sadie Kargman; 
illus. by Christine Davenier. Dutton, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42229-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
“Ivy and Fletch had known each other their entire lives. That’s five whole years, 
people!” Their firm lifelong friendship is challenged when they hit kindergarten, 
though: despite their initial attempts to play together, Fletch is quickly recruited 
by the boys for their piratical enclave (password: ARRGH!), while Ivy is inveigled 
into the girls’ princess club (password: TIARA). When boy vs. girl teasing starts to 
get out of hand, however, Fletch and Ivy break gender boundaries and honor their 
friendship, setting an example that the rest of the kindergarten soon happily follows. 
There’s nothing subtle about the lesson here, complete with a utopian transforma-
tion that’ll appeal more to adults than to kids. The overtness of the message is in 
keeping with the bouncy in-your-face engagement of the text, however, and there 
are some useful explicit talking points about exclusion offered; the sassy, energetic 
tone makes the chronicle of friendship and playground hijinks particularly viva-
cious. Davenier’s familiar loose, rangy watercolor strokes in startling yet subtle color 
combinations such as coral, plum, and blue are an excellent match for the story, 
capturing the freewheeling spirit in portraits of kids always on the go whether they’re 
princesses, pirates, or unaffiliated. You might use this as a conversation-starter if 
factions are starting to form or just as a reassurance that neighborhood friendships 
can survive the ups and downs of school.  DS
kennedy, emma Wilma Tenderfoot: The Case of the Frozen Hearts. Dial, 
2011 355p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3540-8 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-7
The headmistress of the Cooper Island Lowside Institute for Woeful Children has 
had just about enough of Wilma Tenderfoot’s mischief, so Wilma is shipped off 
to be the unlucky servant of a dreadful old woman on the other side of the island. 
Luckily for Wilma, however, her new gig turns out to be not so bad: sure, she has 
to clean up the old toenail clippings of her new boss, but she’s managed to make 
friends with the resident dog. Better still, her new next-door neighbor is none 
other than Theodore P. Goodman, renowned detective and Wilma’s hero. Despite 
Goodman’s insistence that he does not need an apprentice, Wilma is quite sure she 
would make an excellent one, and to prove it to him, she decides to try to solve his 
latest case involving a missing gemstone and two unsolved murders. While most of 
her efforts prove to be futile and, at times, cause the detective even more trouble, 
Wilma’s plucky resolve and winsome spirit endear her to both the adults in the story 
and the reader as well. The third-person narration carries a bit of gloomy snark, 
reminiscent of Lemony Snicket, but the darker elements here are counterbalanced 
by Wilma’s irresistible charm. The mystery itself is cleverly set up, with plenty of 
clues and red herrings for the reader to follow, and the ultimate revelation of the 
villain will bring a big smile to those familiar with Scooby-Doo. Between this and 
Angie Frazier’s Suzanna Snow and the Mystery of the Midnight Tunnel (BCCB 3/11), 
young Nancy Drew wannabes will find their sleuthing skills put to the test.  KQG 
novemBer 2011 • 153
klassen, jon I Want My Hat Back; written and illus. by Jon Klassen. Candle-
wick, 2011 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5598-3 $15.99   
R 5-7 yrs
“My hat is gone. I want it back,” says the determined bear narrator. As he questions 
various animals as to his hat’s whereabouts, tuned-in viewers will rightfully suspect 
the rabbit, wearing a red triangular object on his head, who “doth protest too much”: 
“No. Why are you asking me. I haven’t seen it. I haven’t seen any hats anywhere. I 
would not steal a hat.” Finally, as the despairing bear describes his missing hat to 
a deer, he realizes that he has seen his hat—on the rabbit. Back he goes to claim 
it. When he’s later approached by a squirrel in search of the rabbit, he echoes the 
rabbit’s false denials: “I haven’t seen any rabbits anywhere. I would not eat a rabbit. 
Don’t ask me any more questions.” This is a familiar picture-book formula (think 
Eric Carle’s Have You Seen My Cat? ) with a twist, and the minimalist style Klassen 
employs with both text and art (a combination of digital illustration and Chinese 
ink) only emphasizes the humor of the situation. The large, textured brown bear 
looms on each mostly blank, creamy page as he politely interrogates different smaller 
creatures. His emotions are effectively conveyed not by his expression but by his 
stance (upright when questioning, horizontal when despondent, in mid-stride when 
he is trying to find the rabbit), by the use of all capitals when he is upset, and by 
color (on the page in which he realizes where he has seen his missing hat, his creamy 
background is replaced with a brilliant red). The large-font text appears against a 
stark white background; the bear’s dialogue is printed in black while the responses 
of the various animals are printed in colors that match their own coloring. While 
these design choices and the simplicity and pattern of the text would make this a 
good choice for beginning readers, it would also make an amusing readaloud or a 
great little readers’ theater piece.  JH
könneCke, ole Anton Can Do Magic; tr. by Catherine Chidgey; written and 
illus. by Ole Könnecke. Gecko, 2011 32p
ISBN 978-1-877467-37-0 $17.95   
R 4-6 yrs
Young Anton “has a magic hat. A real one.” His hat is an oversized turban (complete 
with large feather) that has a habit of slipping down over his eyes at the very moment 
in which he wiggles his fingers to “do magic.” Since the things he’s trying to make 
disappear—a bird, his friend—take off while his eyes are covered, he’s convinced he’s 
successful. Reappearance proves a bit more complicated, but eventually, after a little 
unplanned sleight of hand, Anton’s friend is back, and Anton is able to wield one 
final piece of magic to present the girls looking for a lost pet with the missing bird, 
hidden under his hat. This is a simple but satisfying story by Swedish-born German 
artist Könnecke (the book is imported from New Zealand), and young listeners 
will revel in knowing more than Anton about how his “magic” works. The minimal 
text, easy vocabulary, and a large, bold font will also make this quite accessible for 
young readers as well as readaloud audiences. Könnecke’s illustrations, which have 
the look of silkscreened prints in their easy brushstroked line and digital colors, 
keep things pleasingly simple as well, with a limited palette of oranges, yellows, and 
olive greens (and an occasional lavender for the bird) crisply accented with black 
and white on ivory pages. The children resemble classic cartoon kids, with rounded 
heads, small dashes for eyes, slightly protruding noses, and their figures outlined 
154 • The BulleTin
in black. Particularly effective is Könnecke’s rendering of Anton’s friend Luke at 
the end, as he rolls his eyes at Anton’s insistence that he can do magic, is shocked 
when Anton does produce the missing bird, and wiggles his fingers hopefully in 
an attempt to make some magic of his own. Pair this with Agee’s Milo’s Hat Trick 
to add a bit of millinery magic to readaloud time.  JH
kosteCki-shaw, jenny sue Same, Same but Different; written and illus. by Jenny 
Sue Kostecki-Shaw. Ottaviano/Holt, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-8946-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Elliot lives in the U.S. and Kailash lives in India, and the two boys become pen 
pals through an art exchange program between their schools. Their illustrated 
correspondence makes up the bulk of this richly composed picture book, which 
effectively demonstrates how much the boys share even if the specifics are differ-
ent. Both boys, for example, love to climb trees, but Elliot’s picture features a tree 
house in the yard, high above a wrought-iron fence, while Kailash’s shows him 
perched on a limb surrounded by monkeys (“My name is Kailash, and I love to 
climb trees too. Same, same but different!”).  Both boys are familiar with traffic, 
but Elliot’s surroundings include taxis, buses and cars while Kailash’s streets are 
filled with elephants, rickshaws, and horse-drawn carts. The penultimate spread 
shows how familiar each boy has become with the other’s world, as it features each 
child sleeping in a bedroom adorned with the other boy’s artwork. Acrylics, crayon, 
pencil, collage, and tissue paper combine in compositions dense with bright, spicy-
sweet hues in detail, pattern, and backgrounds. Elliot and Kailash themselves are 
always incorporated in the scenes, driving home the point that the views are their 
interpretations of the worlds they live in. There is considerable usage potential 
here, from art projects to classroom community projects to diversity awareness 
projects, possibly paired with Baker’s similarly comparative Mirror (BCCB 1/11); 
there’s also plenty of pleasure to be found just in sharing the thoughtful story and 
perusing the artwork.  HM    
lansdale, joe r. All the Earth, Thrown to the Sky. Delacorte, 2011 [228p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90782-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73931-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89748-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
When Jack Catcher loses his mother to lung disease, his father to suicide, and 
the farm to the dust clouds ravaging Oklahoma, he knows it’s time to move on. 
Neighbor Jane Lewis and her younger brother Tony are in similar straits, and the 
trio agrees to appropriate the auto of a deceased farmer and head to East Texas, 
where the Lewises have relatives. They don’t get far before running across a pair of 
gangsters with auto troubles of their own, who take the kids hostage and drive off to 
locate and eliminate an ex-partner who swindled them during a bank robbery. Jack, 
Jane, and Tony get free, but their adventures are far from over as they encounter a 
compassionate woman who offers them a home; a big-hearted, well-dressed hobo 
who teaches them to ride the rails; an insidious sheriff who lures them into forced 
labor in a bean field; and, yet again, the criminals who swiped their stolen vehicle. 
While there’s plenty of Dust Bowl period atmosphere, this is at heart a classic road-
novemBer 2011 • 155
trip tale, laced with danger and an unexpected (but welcome) sprinkling of humor. 
Jack narrates in a wry, deadpan voice, underplaying much of their peril at the hands 
of the gangsters, while confiding his growing attachment to Jane, who has a severe 
case of wanderlust and a propensity to stretch the truth until it snaps. In the end, 
each kid gets what he or she needs most, and all but the most effusively romantic 
readers will be satisfied when their roads ultimately diverge.  EB
lazebnik, Claire Epic Fail. HarperTeen, 2011 304p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-192126-1 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
At Elise and Juliana’s new high school, it really matters who your parents are, and 
with the principal for a mother and a math teacher dad, the sisters have drawn the 
short straw amidst the sons and daughters of Hollywood celebrities, producers, and 
agents. Things are not so bad for Jules, as she is immediately coupled with Chase, 
but Elise has a harder time connecting with Chase’s best friend, Derek, a hot guy 
whose mother is the biggest female star in the movie universe. Derek seems to like 
Elise, but he’s so moody and guarded that she prefers the charming Webster Grant, 
a boy Derek hates with a seemingly inexplicable intensity. Jane Austen fans will 
immediately recognize the constellation of characters, and LaZebnik has done a 
masterful job of reimagining the social caste system and plot twists of Austen’s tale 
into a believable if romanticized modern high-school setting. Most successful is her 
recreation of Elizabeth as Elise, who is every bit as witty, judgmental, and appealing 
as her nineteenth-century antecedent. Derek runs a close second and may even be 
a bit more swoon-worthy than Mr. Darcy, since he manages to evoke empathy for 
his position as the sensitive, overexposed son of a celebrity who can never trust the 
motives of those who would befriend him. Whether or not they are fans of the origi-
nal, readers looking for a light-hearted romance featuring a protagonist who always 
has a snappy comeback at the ready will happily lose themselves in this one.  KC
long, loren Otis and the Tornado; written and illus. by Loren Long. Philomel, 
2011 40p
ISBN 978-0-399-25477-2 $17.99   
R 4-7 yrs
Following his triumph in rescuing a little calf in Otis (BCCB 12/09), Otis the trac-
tor and his pals around the farm have settled into a happy life of backyard games 
and frivolity. When they play follow-the-leader, everyone joins in; everyone, that 
is, except for the bull, who would “snort and snarl and huff hot air” if any of the 
animals got too close to his private enclosure. When a tornado is spotted in the 
near distance, the farmer and farmhands run for cover without even checking on 
the animals. Instead, it is Otis who heads for the barn and unlatches the stalls so 
that the animals can dash to lower ground. Just then, Otis hears the mournful 
bellowing of the bull, whose pen is directly in the path of the tornado, and he 
runs to release the massive creature, who then joins the other animals and, in the 
aftermath of the storm, becomes a new playmate. The storytelling is particularly 
effective in this tribute to friendship and compassion; Long builds the plot up to 
a riveting crescendo, then gently brings it back to a happy and familiar place. The 
anthropomorphized tractor is an absurd and delightful companion for the farmyard 
animals, their relationship coming across as perfectly normal under Long’s deft hand. 
Aside from being a solid friendship tale, this is also a remarkably useful weather 
story that would fit snugly into early science curriculums. The vivid description of 
156 • The BulleTin
the tornado is well matched in the art, which offers large-scale gouache and pencil 
interpretations of the changing light and impending danger of the storm, while Otis’ 
shiny metallic exterior juxtaposes nicely with the threatening backdrops. Listeners 
are certain to cheer Otis on in this gentle and nostalgic tale of doing what is right, 
despite the dangers.  HM
maCdonald, margaret read, ad. The Boy from the Dragon Palace: A Folktale 
from Japan; ad. by Margaret Read MacDonald; illus. by Sachiko Yoshikawa. Whit-
man, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-7513-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-9 yrs
This Japanese folktale features a flower seller who, after a slow day, offers his leftover 
flowers to the Dragon King, who lives in the sea. The Dragon King rewards the 
man by bequeathing him a “snot-nosed little boy” who, if fed his favorite shrimp, 
grants wishes. The flower seller first asks for gold, then a palace, a staff of servants, 
and whatever else he desires. In time, he has everything he could possibly wish for 
but still must prepare shrimp each day for the boy; sick of the task and the kid, the 
flower seller locks the boy out, only to find that the magic immediately undoes itself 
and leaves him back where he started. There is some real child appeal in the boy’s 
wish granting, particularly as it involves an elaborate ritual wherein he wipes his 
snotty nose first on one sleeve, then the other, then blows “HNNNK! HNNNK! 
HNNNK!,” and those sharing the story aloud will have a particularly good time 
with this routine. Unfortunately, the ending falls a little flat, and the narrative lacks 
much of the cadence typical of MacDonald’s works; though occasionally punched 
up by a snot explosion, it is somewhat dry for reading aloud. Yoshikawa’s digitally 
enhanced collage and watercolor compositions feature the most clean-faced snotty 
kid ever, wasting the opportunity for some good kid-appealing grossness, but the 
art is otherwise inviting, tempering the strong colors with a soft, dappled fade in 
color planes and at edges. A source note, citing several anthologies of Japanese 
folklore, is included.  HM 
maClaChlan, PatriCia Waiting for the Magic; illus. by Amy June Bates. Ath-
eneum, 2011 146p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-2745-7 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3125-6 $9.99   
R Gr. 3-5
William can scarcely believe how his mother reacts when Papa walks out on them; 
she loads William and his four-year-old sister Elinor into the car and heads to the 
animal shelter for the pet his father would never allow, and they leave with not one 
but five animals (“Four dogs and a cat named Lula replaced my father”). Miracu-
lously, Elinor can hear the animals talking, and soon William can converse with the 
pets, too. Meanwhile, in the human realm, their mother discovers she’s pregnant 
and their father returns, and it’s a difficult adjustment on all sides. This thoughtful 
tale is aptly titled; the story is not about acts of magic or seeking out magic but, 
rather, quietly waiting for and observing magic in the world. The talking animals 
are presented as an everyday occurrence, and the true magic of the story is the way 
the family recovers and moves forward from their separation. There is great appeal 
in stories of mundane magic, and the combination of a fanciful plot and likable, 
honest, straightforward characters makes this a solid cross-genre work with lots of 
novemBer 2011 • 157
appeal. The animal voices add further interest, as the pets observe the emotions of 
the humans around them, particularly William, before the people are even aware 
of their own feelings. While this will obviously draw in fans of animal tales, it will 
also attract fans of realism willing to stretch. Final illustrations not seen.  HM
manna, anthony l. The Orphan: A Cinderella Story from Greece; by Anthony 
L. Manna and Soula Mitakidou; illus. by Giselle Potter. Schwartz & Wade, 
2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-375-86691-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs 
“A child becomes an orphan when she loses her mother,” goes the Greek saying, and 
that’s precisely what happens to the unnamed heroine in this Greek version of the 
Cinderella tale. The tale has the familiar elements of stepmother and stepsisters and 
a handsome prince, but it’s Mother Nature who confers the fancy outfits and it’s a 
church service at which the orphan sports them and wins the heart of the prince. 
When she returns to the church the next week, the wily prince spreads honey and 
wax on the church’s threshold and traps the fleeing orphan’s shoe, resulting in the 
classic fit-the-slipper-to-the-maiden drama. The piquant differences from the Per-
rault and Grimm Cinderella versions (the orphan also distracts the villagers with 
gold coins while she escapes and rides a white horse created from a cloud) and the 
friendly, conversational voice will seem fresh and engaging to young audiences 
who have been over-saturated with Disney-fied tales. Potter’s signature folk art-ish 
watercolor illustrations are a perfect fit for the folkloric Greek setting and characters, 
and her black-haired heroine is an appropriately Mediterranean version. Potter is 
particularly effective at evoking emotion with her images: the spread depicting the 
orphan receiving her gifts simply radiates joy. This would be a useful for a lesson in 
comparative literature, as a readaloud, and for storytellers looking for new versions 
of old tales. It’s unfortunate that there’s no note, so it’s not clear whether this is a 
traditional Greek version or an original tale that happens to be set in Greece.  JH 
marsden, Carolyn Starfields. Candlewick, 2011 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-4820-6 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5622-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Nine-year-old Rosalba, a Mayan girl living in a remote Mexican village, learns from 
Alicia, a ladina girl from faraway Mexico City visiting with her father and his team 
of environmental scientists, of an ancient Mayan prophecy that predicts the world 
will end in the following year, 2012. Alicia convinces Rosalba that the decline in 
the region’s frog population (the subject of her father’s research) is an indicator of 
the world’s demise; the frog population is further affected by road construction in 
the region that is destroying frog habitat in the name of building an unwanted road 
to Rosalba’s village. Interwoven with Rosalba’s story are passages in the voice of a 
shaman boy named Xunko living in the year 600; the two narratives meet when 
Rosalba sees visions of the shaman and begins to follow his directives. Marsden, 
author of titles such as Take Me with You (BCCB 4/10), tackles some topics unusual 
for her here, particularly the story of Xunko and the violent, visual descriptions 
of sacrifices and rituals experienced in his time. It’s not always a successful effort, 
though: the accessibly told story of the two girls has a very different audience than 
158 • The BulleTin
the account of Xunko and the violent sacrifices of his time. Ultimately, this is a tale 
about the impact of environmental destruction, a lofty topic made approachable 
through Rosalba’s understanding; however, the dialogue occasionally reaches beyond 
the girls’ level, impairing both credibility and accessibility. Those willing to put 
forth the extra effort to understand the two plotlines and the big lessons, however, 
will find much to reflect upon in this contemporary exploration of deforestation 
and modernization. A glossary and author’s note are included.  HM
martin, ann m. Ten Rules for Living with My Sister. Feiwel, 2011 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-312-36766-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Nine-year-old Pearl Littlefield can’t understand her thirteen-year-old sister, Lexie, 
who always seems to be mad at Pearl. Furthermore, thanks to the Three Bad Things 
that happened last year at school (wearing Mickey Mouse ears for show-and-tell 
when there was no show-and-tell, wetting her pants in class, and getting separated 
from her group on a field trip), Pearl is also friendless, except for first-grader Justine, 
who lives across the hall in the same apartment building. Pearl’s relationship with her 
sister gets both trickier and deeper when they must share a room to accommodate 
their grandfather, Daddy Bo, who needs care while he recovers from a nasty fall. 
Gradually, it becomes clear that Daddy Bo won’t be returning to his home, and 
his increasing forgetfulness results in an impromptu bus trip with Pearl back to 
his now-sold home in New Jersey. Although the pacing occasionally lags, Martin 
manages to juggle all of her plot pieces effectively, and Pearl’s voice is believable in 
its youthful bewilderment at the actions of both her older sister (“I didn’t know why 
she got so embarrassed about some things, but she did, and when she was embar-
rassed she got mad. Usually at me”) and Daddy Bo. The situation with Daddy Bo 
provides genuine drama and emotion, just as Pearl’s internal commentary and the 
comic family situations provide genuine humor. The imaginative, artistic Pearl is 
a likable character, and girls with sisters will easily recognize themselves in either 
Pearl or Lexie. Fans of Megan McDonald’s Sisters Club books or Beverly Cleary’s 
Ramona series will particularly enjoy this slice of sibling life.  JH
martin, C. k. kelly My Beating Teenage Heart. Random House, 2011 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96855-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86855-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89925-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Ashlyn wakes up with no memories of her past life, even her name. She has a 
heightened emotional sense, however, and thus can hear the ragged pain in the 
breathing of the boy in whose bedroom she finds herself. She soon realizes that she 
can see everything about Breckon, but he can’t see or even sense her unless she really 
focuses on making her presence known. The tormented Breckon has just lost his 
little sister in an accident for which he blames himself, since he was babysitting and 
not watching her at the time. As he attempts to manage his grief through self-harm, 
burning his hand and cutting his thighs, Ashlyn desperately tries to communicate 
with him while piecing together her own past. She realizes soon enough that she 
must be dead, but she has no idea how, or why she is attached to a boy she never 
knew when she was alive. Breckon’s grief ebbs and flows but eventually takes a path 
novemBer 2011 • 159
toward self-destruction, and Ashlyn is able to finish at least one of the goals she left 
unrealized in her too-short life—to really help someone. Full of the sensibilities 
of Lurlene McDaniel without the romantic schmaltz, this heart-rending story will 
appeal to teens fascinated by the emotions that accompany the death of young 
people. Readers may wish to see a little more of Ashlyn’s end and its consequence, 
but she does recover memories of her life; the focus now is on Breckon, and his 
story is more than enough to engage the empathy switch and wet the tissues. Give 
this and Jessica Warman’s Between (BCCB 7/11) to readers who gravitate toward 
McDaniel but might wish for something more substantive.  KC   
mCkissaCk, PatriCia Never Forgotten; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2011 [48p]
Library ed, ISBN 978-0-375-94453-6 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN ISBN 978-0-375-84384-6 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-9
In this mythically flavored sequence of narrative free-verse poems, the blacksmith 
Dinga raises his baby son on his own after the death of his wife, aided by the Mother 
Elements Earth, Fire, Water, and Wind. Dinga ignores the distant drums telling of 
oncoming war and treachery in Mali, focusing on teaching Musafa the ways of the 
forge. One day, however, Musafa fails to return from the bush, and Dinga sends 
the elements to find his son. Earth reports that Musafa is “bound to other captives” 
and “force-marched toward the Big Water”; then Fire confesses herself unable to 
bring him back from the ships traveling across the sea; Water tells of the terrible 
journey and the auction block that awaited Musafa in the Caribbean. Finally, Wind 
manages to cross as a hurricane and offers a breath of hope in her report of Musafa, 
now Moses, who works the forge in Charleston in the tradition of his father and 
who’s promised freedom in his future. McKissack gives her legend-making genuine 
emotional momentum as well as scope, making her grieving father an effective 
point of contact. The elements aren’t overplayed, and they prove a genuinely use-
ful storytelling device as well as a dramatic concept. The verse has an incantatory 
flavor, with touches of folkloric structure, that will make this a strong contender 
for use in reading aloud, recitation, or readers’ theater. The Dillons’ watercolor and 
acrylic illustrations here employ a more iconically stylized technique than their past 
delicate intricacy, with smooth thick lines that recall woodblocks and even stained 
glass. The art neatly differentiates mundane reality, with its black outlines, from 
the appearance of the elements in their dusty, pale hues and self-colored borders. 
Stories of the middle passage rarely focus on the pain of those left behind, and 
this is a creative yet poignant treatment of that grief. An author’s note explains her 
inspirations in putting the story together.  DS
meloy, maile The Apothecary; by Maile Meloy; illus. by Ian Schoenherr. Put-
nam, 2011 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25627-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Jane Scott, now well into her seventies, recalls her week of life-threatening adventure 
back in 1952, when she and her parents, television writers accused of Communist 
sympathies during the Red Scare, moved from California to London to continue 
their careers. A quotidian trip to the local apothecary for hot water bottles and candy 
160 • The BulleTin
bars puts Jane on the radar of the apothecary’s son, Benjamin Burrows, who is also 
a classmate in her new school. Benjamin has to date resisted his father’s attempts 
to draw him into the family business, feeling that life as a druggist is a prospect 
too boring to entertain. But when he discovers that his father is the keeper of the 
Pharmacopoeia, a book of near-magical instructions and concoctions passed down 
through generations, his days take on sudden, perilous interest. Russian scientists, 
aided by a spy ring that includes the teens’ teacher, are after the book and its users; 
Mr. Burrows and his associates are equally determined to use their arcane knowledge 
to contain the fallout from a hydrogen bomb that’s scheduled to be tested in the 
Russian outpost Nova Zembla. Benjamin and Jane are of course in the thick of spy/
counterspy machinations, and a trip to the test site as stowaways nearly costs them 
their lives. References to Russian scientist Andrei Sakharov, a number of actual sites, 
and period television programming add authenticity to the Riordan-esque fantasy/
thriller, and readers who revel in the current output of Cold War novels will enjoy 
this genre-crossing romp. Jane hints broadly at other adventures (and maybe some 
romance?) with Benjamin, so watch for Meloy to brew a sequel.  EB
naPoli, donna jo Lights on the Nile. Harper/HarperCollins, 2011 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-06-166793-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
A simple chore turns into a life-changing adventure when ten-year-old Kepi is 
kidnapped, forced onto a boat traveling the Nile, and set to be sold as a servant 
amidst the bustling streets of the ancient Egyptian city of Ineb Hedj. Though 
she doubts the gods will listen—they didn’t when her father was injured while 
building pharaoh Khufu’s great pyramid—she pleads with them anyway and gets 
some surprising results. Not only do they apparently ward off her captors so she 
can escape when she arrives in the capital, the deities also assist her in her mission 
to meet the pharaoh and confront him about the unjust treatment of his people. 
Lacking the elegant cohesion of ancient culture and fairy tale found in Napoli’s 
earlier Bound (BCCB 1/05), this blend of historical and scientific facts paired with 
modern sayings and attitudes never quite reaches its potential. The utterly bizarre 
climax fails to build on any of the story’s multiple, disjointed threads and forces its 
main character to act against her established character. Still, Kepi’s journey along the 
Nile is a veritable field trip through ancient Egypt, and history buffs and aspiring 
Egyptologists will find plenty to interest them among the many tidbits concerning 
daily life and particularly, the effect of the gods in this ancient civilization. Readers 
expecting an Egyptian fairy tale will most likely feel duped, but those simply looking 
to take a jaunt through a faraway land may find the appeal in Kepi’s story.  KQG
nelson, kadir Heart and Soul: The Story of America and African Americans; 
written and illus. by Kadir Nelson. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2011 $19.99
ISBN 978-0-06-173074-0 $19.99   
R Gr. 4-7
The fictional narrator, an elderly African-American woman, weaves together family 
lore and American history to impart to her child listener understanding and pride in 
his heritage: “You have to know where you come from so you can move forward.” 
The resulting narrative is an intimately styled history lesson in which family mem-
bers who took part in landmark events, from the Revolutionary War through the 
civil rights movement, take their rightful place beside players of greater renown. The 
novemBer 2011 • 161
narration spins out smooth as silk, and that is paradoxically the strength and the 
weakness of the title—a social studies lesson in which historical episodes are retold 
more compellingly than in any textbook, yet so ably and unfalteringly presented 
that the narrator herself seems (despite the frequent, down-homey interjections of 
“chile”) implausibly glib. There is ample reward here, however, even for children 
who don’t read a word of the text. Nelson’s monumental paintings portray the 
humblest laborers, the most prosaic families as heroic figures in the epic drama of 
their history, and unnamed faces are imbued with the same dignified pride as those 
of Douglass and King and Parks. A timeline, bibliography, and index will assist 
students trolling for report material, but it’s the powerful imagery that ultimately 
makes this essential to the American History collection.  EB
ness, PatriCk A Monster Calls; illus. by Jim Kay. Candlewick, 2011 [206p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5559-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5633-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Already troubled with nightmares since his mother fell ill with cancer, Conor is 
desperately angry, more angry than afraid, even, when a giant treelike monster pulls 
him from his bed and tells him they have business to attend to. This monster tells 
Conor that he will tell three stories and then Conor must tell the fourth, which 
will contain the truth he can’t face, an idea that Conor resists with everything that 
is in him. Conor’s grief over watching his mother die is forcefully rendered in both 
realistic and fantastic ways over the course of her final weeks. He courts the atten-
tion of a school bully in order to replace his emotional pain with physical pain, 
lashes out at an old friend who reminds him of better days, and becomes lost in the 
stories the monster tells to the point of destroying property and savagely beating 
the bully in an attempt to displace his rage. The heavily textured monochromatic 
illustrations are silent screams, rendering Conor’s inner chaos palpable with dense 
shading and jagged edges symbolizing the wildness within while shifting perspectives 
alternately create intimacy and distance, like the push and pull he feels as he tries to 
stay engaged in an impossibly painful situation. The stories the monster tells capture 
the burgeoning complexity of the moral world for nascent adolescents; they, like 
Conor, will find themselves railing against a world where fairness and happy endings 
can no longer be counted on, even in story, and where human goodness, including 
their own, is always tinged with conflicting desires. Emotionally wrenching, this 
draws truth across pain in a way that is accessible to middle-school readers.  KC 
nimmo, jenny Chronicles of the Red King: The Secret Kingdom. Scholastic, 
2011 207p
ISBN 978-0-439-84673-8 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Nimmo, author of the Charlie Bone series (Charlie Bone and the Invisible Boy, 
BCCB 9/04, etc.), returns here to provide the backstory to the legend that will 
shape most of Charlie Bone’s future. Long ago, the idyllic peace of a faraway secret 
kingdom was shattered when the evil Lord Degal invaded with his army of the 
monstrous viridees. Knowing that her children would be protected by the gifts 
bestowed upon them by a forest-jinni at birth, the queen forced her son Timoken, 
the future Red King, and his sister Zobayda to flee the palace, telling them both 
of their supernatural powers. Kept in a state of perpetual childhood by a magical 
162 • The BulleTin
elixir, the siblings spend the next two hundred years narrowly escaping the viri-
dees as they are hunted across much of Africa. Zobayda is caught, but Timoken 
continues in his travels, coming into his powers as a magician and meeting people 
who will eventually set the stage for the battle between his descendants that will 
change Charlie Bone’s life. Knowledge of the other series isn’t necessary but would 
be helpful, as events in this book often have significance that is not always made 
entirely clear, although some hints are offered in the prologue narrated by Charlie 
Bone himself. As a stand-alone, however, this can be viewed as a series of linked 
fables, a structure that is matched by Nimmo’s folkloric tone and direct language. 
The world is richly developed, and the magical creatures therein are both fascinating 
and frightening. Timoken is a noble, likable hero, and readers who are unfamiliar 
with his successor’s adventures will most likely be compelled to check out Charlie 
Bone until the Red King returns in the next installment of this series.  KQG 
oliver, lauren Liesl and Po; illus. by Kei Acedera. Harper/HarperCol-
lins [320p]
ISBN 987-0-06-201450-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Three days after her beloved father passes away, young Liesl has an encounter that 
changes her world forever. And a good thing too, since her current world isn’t all 
that fabulous: the sun hasn’t shone in 1,728 days, the outside is dreary and bleak, 
and Liesl herself has been locked up in an even gloomier attic by her wicked step-
mother. When Po, an androgynous child ghost, makes an appearance in her room 
one night relaying a message from Liesel’s father, the two embark on a journey to 
bring the ashes of Liesl’s father’s body to her old family home. Meanwhile, across 
town, an abused and exhausted apprentice to an evil alchemist makes a terrible 
mistake, switching a box that contains “The Most Powerful Magic in the World” 
with an old box that contains what appear to be ashes. The series of fortunate—but 
still sometimes life-threatening—accidents that ensue eventually bring Liesl and the 
apprentice together, grant peace to both Liesl’s father and Po, and coax the long-
hidden sun out from behind the clouds. As in her works for older readers (Before I 
Fall, BCCB 4/10, Delirium, BCCB 2/10), Oliver brings a characteristic eloquence 
that imbues even the simplest statement with a poignant authenticity, and she yet 
again capably portrays the unpredictable nature of loss and it consequences. Her 
offering here, however, balances these more contemplative aspects with a wonder-
fully quirky sense of humor that oscillates between a sort of Dahl-esque smugness 
and outright slapstick. Liesl’s journey from the dreary, gray world of grief to the 
cheerful, colorful place of acceptance is a bit literal, but readers will nonetheless 
enjoy the ride and want to bask in the glow of its sunny ending. Final illustrations 
not seen.  KQG
Paquette, a. j. Nowhere Girl. Walker, 2011 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2297-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Luchi Ann Finn, a thirteen-year-old American girl, was born and raised in a rural 
Thai prison. When her mother dies from a fever, Luchi is left on her own to face 
the world and to piece together who she is from the few clues left behind by her 
mother. She travels to Bangkok and there begins investigating her mother’s story 
novemBer 2011 • 163
while staying with a friend of a friend, who ends up robbing her and abandoning 
her at the port. Penniless and clueless, Luchi stows away on a ship headed for Cali-
fornia in hopes of somehow contacting the grandmother who doesn’t even know 
of her granddaughter’s existence. Though she’s discovered on board, she gains an 
ally in the ship’s captain, who supports her in preparing for her meeting with her 
newly discovered relatives. While the plot description may sound rather farfetched, 
the story is remarkably woven, free of contrivance and rich with description and 
emotion. Luchi’s character is unique: she is completely unaware of the world and of 
human interaction, so her observations and actions are entirely pure and her sense 
of rootlessness profound. Her deeply sheltered past means that she’s now interact-
ing with strangers for the very first time, and she is subsequently bewildered and 
amazed by the many emotions she feels. This is an outstanding novel for exploring 
perspective as well as themes of identity and belonging, and readers will remember 
Luchi’s quest long after the last page.  HM 
Patten, e. j. Return to Exile; illus. by John Rocco. Simon, 2011 [512p] (The 
Hunter Chronicles)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2032-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2034-2 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8 
An avid puzzle-solver, twelve-year-old Sky can figure out just about any trap his 
eccentric uncle Phineas lays out for him; for the life of him, though, he cannot 
figure out the mystery that is his family. Why, for example, have his parents, who 
think Phineas is crazy, allowed Sky to train under his uncle as a supposed “Hunter” 
to learn about monsters such as Shadow Wargs and Echo—creatures his parents 
insist do not exist? Why also do they perpetually keep the family moving, leaving 
Sky the new kid at six different schools in as many months? And why won’t anyone 
tell him the full story behind his birthmark—two eye-like shapes on his hand that 
seem to emit light or bleed depending on the circumstance? The family’s most 
recent relocation to Sky’s childhood hometown of Exile may hold the answers: 
there Sky learns that monsters are indeed very real, and, after teaming up with a 
group of local amateur hunters, he realizes he may have more in common with the 
terrible creatures than he’d like to think. Blood, gore, and a host of otherworldly 
creepies mark this debut fantasy thriller that builds upon the premise that there 
is a monster within all of us. Patten offers up a compelling mythology behind 
Sky’s existence, but a bloated plot and a cast of mostly interchangeable characters 
weaken what should have been an action-packed adventure. Even the monsters 
seem to lose their ability to scare once readers have been subjected to convoluted 
and ultimately unhelpful lessons regarding the difference between a Whisper and a 
Wargarou. More cohesive storytelling—and just as much viscera—can be found in 
Rick Yancy’s The Monstrumologist (BCCB 11/09), but readers keen on nightmarish 
creatures will find plenty to haunt their dreams here.  KQG 
Peet, mal Life: An Exploded Diagram. Candlewick, 2011 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5227-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5631-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Clem Ackroyd’s grandmother was widowed in World War I, and his mother, a 
World War II war bride, gave birth to Clem during a bombing raid; he himself 
164 • The BulleTin
weathered adolescence, and nearly lost his life, during the Cuban Missile Crisis. 
It’s therefore no surprise that Clem would view war as a unifying theme of his 
existence. Looking back from his current vantage point as a successful adult artist, 
though, Clem is less interested in the composite picture than its individual ele-
ments—the subtitular exploded diagram—and as he reviews the long path toward 
the single, critical moment on which, at seventeen, his entire life pivoted, he reflects 
with often bitter irony on the causes, correlations, and coincidences that seem to 
govern his fate. If this all sounds very philosophical and adult-oriented, well, it is, 
particularly the family backstory that’s vital in understanding Clem’s personal tale. 
But his single-minded teenage pursuit of the beautiful, wealthy Frankie Mortimer, 
daughter of his father’s employer, is at the vortex of the novel, and it will certainly 
resonate with any young adult reader who has ever planned, agonized, or obsessed 
over his/her own sexual initiation. That Clem and Frankie’s one and only encoun-
ter culminates in a tragedy of sorts is paradoxically both random and inevitable, 
and readers who try without success to nail down how or whether history plays 
a role in our little lives will probably share Clem’s conclusion that “history is the 
heavy traffic that prevents us from crossing the road.” Cold War literature seems 
to be on a strong trend, and Peet’s provocative offering should prove an important 
contribution to the theme.  EB 
Pixley, marCella Without Tess. Ferguson/Farrar, 2011  [288p]
ISBN 978-0-374-36174-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Once Tess was the whole world to Lizzie, her younger sister; now Tess is gone and 
Lizzie’s on her own, struggling through high school with the aid of a therapist and 
handing in Tess’ poems as her own. More real to Lizzie than this present is the past, 
when Lizzie was nine and Tess eleven, and Tess’ rapt involvement with fantasies 
of selkies and flying horses dominated the sisters’ daily thoughts. As the narrative 
of the sisters’ past unfolds, interspersed with the account of Lizzie’s tortured pres-
ent and with Tess’ poems, it becomes clear that Tess’ imaginings extend beyond 
childhood pretend to something more psychologically disabling; as Tess descends 
further into her fantasy world and repudiates reality, Lizzie witnesses her desperate 
parents’ attempts to pull Tess back to mental health. Pixley, who skillfully tackled 
another complicated sisterly relationship in Freak (BCCB 10/07), takes a rather 
provocative step here: she sets up some alluring and imaginative magical conceits 
that will immediately catch the attention of fantasy readers just as they did Lizzie, 
and then mercilessly makes their appeal their danger. This really isn’t a cautionary 
tale about make-believe, though; it’s the poignant tale of a younger sister who is 
caught up in the world made by the elder, and who abandoned her sister both 
by not believing and, in a key tragic moment, by believing. It’s both ironic and 
understandable that the story is at its most vivid when following Lizzie and Tess 
as they cast their Merlin-taught spells, while contemporary Lizzie moves quietly 
through a silenced house and slides darkly under the radar at school. The nature 
of Tess’ delusions will give this particular impact, but ultimately it’s Lizzie’s find-
ing her own artistic voice that’s the triumph, and readers will be happy to see her 
moving out from under Tess’ haunting shadow.  DS
novemBer 2011 • 165
Porter, Pamela I’ll Be Watching. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 2011 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-095-6 $18.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-096-3 $12.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
George Loney has never had his wife’s strength of character, and when dust and hail 
claim his Saskatchewan farm and force the family into the dying town, he begins 
his retreat into the rye bottle. After death claims his wife, Margaret, he spinelessly 
follows his neighbors’ advice to marry widow Effie, who quickly proves to be a 
shrew to her new husband and a religious tyrant to her stepchildren. George’s four 
children know how to pull in harness together, though, and even after Effie locks 
George out of the house, leaves him to freeze to death on his own porch, and 
then runs off with a Bible salesman, Ran, Nora, Jim and Addie are determined to 
make it on their own. Ran enlists in the Canadian Air Force, Nora manages the 
house, Jim does what he can with odd jobs and hunting, and Addie, mute since 
his mother’s death, is the fragile darling who holds the family together emotion-
ally. Set on the Canadian prairie in World War II, this has all the plot points of 
an unremarkable kids-in-crisis novel, but Porter raises it to distinction. It’s lifted 
through the image-rich free-verse narration of the main characters; through the 
quiet, staunch resilience of the Loney children, which is far more convincing than 
the showier pluckiness of so many of their fictional counterparts; through the stories 
of the obstructive and supportive neighbors who form their tightly interconnected 
community; and through the protective presence of Margaret and George, who 
intervene when they can as benevolent poltergeists on their children’s behalf. The 
supernatural element, both playful and poignant, functions more as magical realism 
than ghost-story subplotting. Margaret is still the no-nonsense captain of the clan, 
but George finally manages in his incorporeal state to grow the backbone he never 
had in life as he shepherds Ran out of Germany and into the tenuous safety of the 
French Resistance. True to its genre, the novel awards happy endings all around, 
but the Loneys’ journey from abandonment and crushing poverty into a promising 
future is fairly won.  EB
Portis, antoinette Princess Super Kitty; written and illus. by Antoinette Por-
tis. Harper/HarperCollins, 2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-06-182725-9 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Maggie has taken on a new identity: “I have ears and a tail. Because today I am a 
kitty!” And kitty she determinedly is, responding to all human queries with “Meow” 
and eating and drinking from a dish. As her play continues, she transforms herself 
again into a “Super Kitty” (“When Mom says, ‘Super Kitty, can you bring me the 
baby’s bottle?’ I say, ‘Yes!’ And zoom there in zero seconds”), to a Princess Super 
Kitty (“Princess Super Kitties do not open jars. They do royal things. With jewels”), 
and to (at bathtime) a “Water Lily Hula Porpoise Princess Super Kitty of the Sea.” 
Portis’ concise text works smoothly in tandem with her precise illustrations to present 
an amusing and believable look at a young girl’s perspective on imaginative play. 
When Maggie is “Super Kitty,” for example, she imagines that “Super Kitties can 
see things with their superstrong eyes,” which translates visually into her being able 
to see her brother’s underpants through his clothing; her proclamation that “a Super 
Princess Kitty is someone you obey” is accompanied by an illustration showing her 
166 • The BulleTin
brother submissively kneeling as he ceremonially offers her a glue stick. The well-
composed spreads highlight the dot-eyed, black-haired kitty-girl cavorting her way 
through a candy-colored backdrop of domestic tidiness, while heavy, crayon-like 
black outlines help keep the art from becoming too saccharine. The kid-centered 
topic, brevity of the story, and bold, clear illustrations make this an excellent and 
useful addition to storytime lineups as well as a possible inspiration for some fresh 
new dress-up options.  JH
rodriguez, béatriCe Rooster’s Revenge. Enchanted Lion, 2011 32p
ISBN 978-1-59270-112-4 $14.95   
Ad 3-7 yrs
Rooster, Bear, and Rabbit row away after a visit with their friends, the very odd 
couple Hen and Fox. Rooster is in a funk, and his humor is hardly improved by a 
giant wave that capsizes the boat and deposits them, with the assistance of some 
helpful turtles, at the mouth of a cave. There Rooster discovers a glowing blue ball, 
which he promptly purloins. With his friends in hot pursuit, he races through the 
cave, through a toadstool forest, and back to sea on an upturned mushroom. Back 
ashore, the blue ball hatches into a baby dinosaur, and the circle of friends is now a 
little bigger and much happier than ever. This wordless adventure is altogether more 
perplexing than its predecessor, Fox and Hen Together (BCCB 9/11). The nature 
of Rooster’s snit is never explained, and the hatchling comes as no surprise, given 
that the blue ball is quite clearly an egg, sitting on a nest beside a dino skeleton. 
Why the egg glows, why the mushrooms glow, and how any of Rooster’s actions 
constitute the titular “revenge” are anyone’s guess. Still, there’s a fair helping of fun 
to be had in following the chase across the long, horizontal panels of the dreamy 
fantasy landscape as lizards and bats and flying fish escort the trio to their cozy, 
happy ending.  EB
russo, marisabina I Will Come Back For You: A Family Hiding During World 
War II; written and illus. by Marisabina Russo. Schwartz & Wade, 2011 36p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96695-8 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86695-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98515-7 $10.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs
When a little girl asks her grandmother about the charms on her bracelet, Nonna 
shares her story of growing up Jewish in Italy during World War II. Told as a linear 
series of events, each symbolically linked to a charm on the bracelet, Russo’s story is 
based upon her own mother’s experiences in Italy during the 1940s. The episodes 
range from tragic (her father receives orders to leave his family) to shocking (her 
mother, so as to avoid being sent to a concentration camp, drinks a concoction of 
tobacco and hot water that causes a fever so she cannot leave with the soldier sent to 
fetch her) to amusing (the children escape to the mountains in bicycle baskets piled 
high with baby piglets) that, while varied in tone, share a kid-centered perspective 
on the complex events of the times. Much like her Always Remember Me (BCCB 
6/05), Russo’s latest Holocaust offering provides an entry-level overview to this 
period of history. The framing of the story is contrived, however, and making it all 
the grandmother’s dialogue distances the events, lessening the immediacy and the 
momentum. Russo’s boxy gouache illustrations are composed of broad planes of 
solid, painterly color that almost resemble cut-paper art in their lack of detailing. 
The stylized flatness is at times intriguing, but portraits are too often awkward and 
novemBer 2011 • 167
stiff. Pictures of the corresponding charms are included with each relevant episode, 
serving to tie the narrative back to the guiding story. An author’s note, detailing 
the specifics of Russo’s family story, is included, and the endpapers are filled with 
Russo’s family photos.  HM
sChröder, monika My Brother’s Shadow. Foster/Farrar, 2011 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-374-35122-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
As the first World War staggers to a close in 1918, German civilians suffer from 
food shortages and many look to the cessation of hostilities as a mixed blessing 
that brings disappointment and uncertainty for the future as well as an undeniable 
sense of relief. Sixteen-year-old Moritz lives in a divided family. His father died 
earlier in the war, his older brother, charged up with nationalist fervor, is now a 
soldier on the Western front, and his mother works in a munitions factory by day 
and as a Socialist agitator by night. Moritz inherits his brother’s membership in a 
local gang that scams and outright steals food, and although he’s ashamed of his 
involvement in petty crime, he’s slow to embrace his mother’s political aspirations 
for better times in a democratically elected German state. His own hope for the 
future lies in his nascent efforts as a writer, which already show signs of leading to 
a career in journalism. When his brother returns, permanently disabled and eager 
to find a scapegoat on which to blame his perceived failure and misery, the family 
erupts as their respective values collide. Schröder’s fictional family portrait puts a 
human face to the political power struggle at the war’s end and illuminates the first 
rumblings of anti-semitic sentiment that would soon clear a path for Nazi ascent. 
Though the dialogue is sometimes stiff, the issues are clear and their effects on 
individuals clearer. Readers who are aware of the aftermath closing in on Moritz 
and his family will feel a chill looming over his romance with a Jewish neighbor 
and the illusory nature of the family’s brief respite after the war.  EB
sharif, medeia Bestest. Ramadan. Ever. Flux, 2011 299p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7387-2323-5 $9.95   
Ad Gr. 7-10
After cheating last year and paying the price (her strict grandfather’s disapproval), 
Almira is determined to make it through this year’s Ramadan, fasting from sunrise 
to sunset. Her friends are not supportive, however, and someone keeps leaving 
chocolates on her chair at school. To make matters worse, she is completely dis-
tracted by her crush on Peter, a guy whom she’s always secretly liked, but who has 
suddenly gotten hot enough to attract the attention of her best friend, Lisa, who has 
claimed him for her own. He’s sending mixed signals, though, as one minute he’s 
cozying up to Lisa while the next he’s superfriendly to Almira. Then there’s the new 
girl, Shakira, the only other Muslim in school, who just happens to be gorgeous, 
artistic, and outspoken to the point of meanness. Almira frets her way through the 
month, offering comic accounts of her family’s breaking fast at sunset, her disastrous 
driving lessons with her reckless grandfather, who calls every non-Muslim either an 
infidel or a prostitute, and her tortured obsession with getting Peter to notice her 
as something more than a friend, even though her parents would never let her date 
him. Almira’s worries are like her religious devotion, however, in that they’re are 
only an inch deep; she’s happy to have lost weight during Ramadan and gotten her 
first kiss, but while she does pull back from Peter at first to salvage her friendship 
168 • The BulleTin
with Lisa, she never poses serious questions about her faith or her ethics. When 
she and Shakira finally bond, their most heartfelt discussions concern how to hide 
their boyfriends, among other things, from their parents, making this very mild 
book something Almira’s real-life analogues might have to read in a plain brown 
wrapper unless such deceptions are an open secret in their communities. Readers 
who are looking for American works that explore similar themes to Abdel Fattah’s 
Does My Head Look Big in This? (BCCB 9/07), however, may appreciate this story 
of a girl negotiating traditional values in nontraditional settings.  KC
shea, bob Dinosaur vs. the Library; written and illus. by Bob Shea. Disney 
Hyperion, 2011 40p
ISBN 978-1-4231-3338-4 $15.99   
Ad 2-5 yrs
Rowdy, roaring Dinosaur (from Dinosaur vs. Bedtime, BCCB 10/08, etc.) is back, 
this time on an outing to the library. Along the way he encounters various animals 
(a cow, baby chicks, a shy turtle, a sad owl) against whom he “wins” by convincing 
them to quit what they are doing/saying and roar along with him. When Dino-
saur gets to the library (“where no one has ever roared before”), he is admonished 
to “use his inside roar,” which he does happily . . . until storytime begins: “BUT 
WAIT! …Can Dinosaur not roar for a whole story?” The last page shows a quiet 
Dinosaur paying rapt attention to a book while the text claims, “The library wins! 
Okay, they both win.” Dinosaur’s shtick is wearing a bit thin here, as his “van-
quishing” of the different critters is rather weak (they make their sounds, he roars 
at them, then they roar, too), and the abrupt end in which Dinosaur actually has 
to curtail his roaring altogether may relieve the librarians leading storytime (and 
the parents in attendance), but it will probably disappoint younger fans of the 
rebellious reptile. Still, Dinosaur is a deservedly popular guy, and Shea’s striking, 
color-saturated digital artwork, accented with thick black outlines and bold-faced 
text, is definitely a candy-colored feast for the eyes. This would lend itself, naturally, 
to library storytime use, but might also be considered by parents wanting to prep 
their obstreperous offspring for a trip to the local library.  JH
shireen, nadia Good Little Wolf; written and illus. by Nadia Shireen. Knopf, 
2011 
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96904-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86904-4 $16.99   
Ad 5-7 yrs
Rolf is such a good little wolf: he eats his veggies, plays nicely with his friends, and 
generally makes himself helpful. Then he meets Big Bad Wolf (“Now, what do we 
have here?” asks the menacingly looming BBW), who tells him he’s not a real wolf 
unless he howls at the moon, blows houses down, and gobbles up people. Rolf 
tries to prove himself at the set tasks, but he finally rebels, maintaining that he can 
be a “proper wolf” and also be good. To celebrate, Rolf and his best human friend 
invite Big Bad Wolf for tea and implore him to stop eating people. Big Bad Wolf 
acquiesces . . . after eating Rolf and his friend (“I’ll stop first thing tomorrow”). 
While there is a certain bad-boy charm to Big Bad Wolf, Shireen has up until that 
point made adorable Rolf the hero of the tale; it’s therefore really quite disappointing 
for him to be eaten at the book’s end. If listeners can get past that (and some may 
not), and if they’re not confused by the reappearance of Rolf in a vignette on the 
final page, they may enjoy the sly and unexpected ending. What Shireen lacks in 
novemBer 2011 • 169
satisfying endings, she makes up for in her zesty mixed-media illustrations, even if 
her rendering of Rolf as a cute and furry little gray guy serves to make his demise 
even more traumatic. Widely spaced eyes and top-heavy figures give Rolf and his 
friends a sweet look of innocence (although the humans look a little South Park), 
a sensibility echoed by the subtle patterns and pastels of many of the background 
spreads. The Big Bad Wolf, in contrast, stunningly, sometimes comically, dominates 
every spread he’s in by reason of his larger size, his inky blackness amid the sweet 
hues, and his yellow eyes, red nose, and pointy white teeth. Adults will have to 
decide if their kids are up for this somewhat twisted tale; if so, they’ll find some 
wolfishly amusing unjust deserts here.  JH
sidman, joyCe Swirl by Swirl: Spirals in Nature; illus. by Beth Krommes. Hough-
ton, 2011 40p
ISBN 978-0-547-31583-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Sidman turns her poetic talent to an introductory treatment of one of nature’s 
favorite shapes, the spiral. Spare, simple text, with a few words on each page, talks 
about the virtue of the spiral shape (“It fits neatly in small spaces . . . it is grace-
ful and strong”) while the illustrations demonstrate various instances of spirals in 
nature. While the details of the shape’s benefits are mostly celebratory rather than 
informative, there’s more explanation in the end matter, and this is a thoughtful 
way to tickle youngsters into searching for this pattern in nature. The art of Beth 
Krommes, who worked with Sidman on Butterfly Eyes (BCCB 10/06), is particularly 
suited to the structural theme. Her scratchboard details have a crisp regularity and 
geometry that brings the dense illustrations crisp order and balance amid the dark 
intensity of the black background to the linework, while tasteful text tags identify 
some of the critters thickly populating the pictured land- and seascapes. Use this 
with Campbell’s Growing Patterns (BCCB 5/10) for an introduction to one of the 
world’s most effective shapes. A closing spread describes different kinds of spirals, 
drawing on the textual examples.  DS
skye, obert Wonkenstein: The Creature From My Closet; written and illus. by 
Obert Skye. Ottaviano/Holt, 2011 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9268-4 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
“I’m kind of like a backup singer in the song of life,” says twelve-year-old Robert 
Columbo Burnside, average kid. Not totally wimpy but clearly not totally cool 
either, Rob has managed to carve out a safe little place for himself in the middle 
ground of the middle-school hierarchy—that is, until a small creature who appears 
to be a combination of Willy Wonka and Frankenstein emerges from his closet. 
Apparently, of the many unread books Rob has tossed into his closet, Charlie and 
the Chocolate Factory and Frankenstein decided to commingle and create Wonk. 
Now the book-bred imp proceeds to make Rob’s life anything but ordinary as he 
terrorizes the neighborhood (with candy and grunts), destroys the family garage, 
and somehow manages to get Rob involved in a dramatic poetry reading at school. 
There’s a fresh sense of wackiness here that culminates on the final page with the 
appearance of yet another creature, this time a combination of Harry Potter and 
Chewbacca. This is clearly one of many recent books that’s tonal kin to Diary of 
a Wimpy Kid; the now-standard line-drawn cartoon figures and speech bubbles 
170 • The BulleTin
accompany a mostly straightforward text that covers the typical travails of middle 
school, from dealings with the opposite sex to sibling and parental drama. While 
reluctant readers may prefer the hero’s strict anti-book attitude in Janet Tashjian’s 
similarly formatted My Life As a Book (BCCB 9/10), there’s enough humor here to 
elicit at least a few guffaws from even the most literary averse.  KQG
sleator, william The Phantom Limb; by William Sleator and Ann Monti-
cone. Amulet/Abrams, 2011 210p
ISBN 978-0-8109-8428-8 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Fourteen-year-old Isaac is angry: angry at his father for dying in a plane crash 
last year, angry at his once-vibrant grandfather for succumbing to dementia, and, 
finally, angry at his mother, whose seizure disorder has landed her in the hospital 
and forced her to leave Isaac to look after himself at their dreary new home. The 
only thing that brings him any pleasure is his collection of optical illusions, so he 
is initially thrilled to find what appears to be an old “mirror box” in the closet of 
his bedroom; literally a box with mirrored walls, the contraption was once used 
to help rehabilitate amputees experiencing severe phantom limb pain, a fact that 
Isaac finds fascinating. Or, at least, he finds it fascinating until a hand that is not 
his own shows up in the reflection and starts giving him clues that point toward 
grave danger for both Isaac and his mother. Toss in a maniacal, serial-killing nurse, 
an ominously staffed hospital, and the tragic death of a young prodigy, and you’ve 
got yourself one wholly unbelievable but still compellingly readable ghost story. 
There is an impracticality behind the whole rescue-mom-from-the-crazy-person 
endeavor that almost reaches an absurd level, but convenient plotting aside, the 
book ratchets up the creep factor from the first page and doesn’t let up until the 
conclusion. The same cannot be said for the consistency of the story, however, and 
several threads get lost amidst the jumbled, chaotic ending. While not quite as tight 
as some of his previous works, this title, possibly the last from the now-late author, 
will still send chills down the spines of his fans.  KQG 
sneve, virginia driving hawk The Christmas Coat: Memories of My Sioux Child-
hood; illus. by Ellen Beier. Holiday House, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2134-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 4-8 yrs
As the daughter of the Episcopal priest on their South Dakota reservation, Virginia 
is resigned to her family’s custom of putting the needs of congregation members 
before their own. She’s badly in need of a new winter coat, but when the mission 
boxes of donations arrive, she’s not really surprised when the “shimmering gray fur 
with a satiny silver lining” in her exact size goes to Evelyn, a decidedly unamiable 
classmate, instead. Evelyn’s lovely rabbit-skin coat gets wet on the way to school 
and begins to smell; Evelyn’s mother sends it back as unsuitable, and now Virginia 
is forced to give up even her own second-choice cloth coat from the donation box. 
But her sacrifice, however reluctant, is apparently rewarded when another box ar-
rives that contains the hooded red coat Virginia wanted all along (“Sometimes the 
congregations in the East send boxes especially for the priest and his family. They 
ask what the family needs the most and then they try to send those items”). Beier’s 
somewhat bland watercolors capably interpret the action, but young listeners may 
certainly wonder why this entire congregation is in need of charity and why nobody 
novemBer 2011 • 171
seems to have paid attention to the needs of the Driving Hawk family in the past. 
No historical note is provided to address the implied poverty on the Rosebud reser-
vation in the 1940s, or to explain whether the Christian Christmas rituals depicted 
here were prevalent across the reservation. Nevertheless, amid seasonal titles that 
emphasize the virtue of giving, it’s refreshing to find a story that challenges listeners 
to imagine charity from the recipient’s point of view.  EB 
snyder, laurel Bigger Than a Breadbox. Random House, 2011 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96916-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86916-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89998-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Rebecca is righteously incensed when her mother, without pre-
amble or explanation, packs her and her two-year-old brother into their car and 
drives them away from their father and home in Baltimore to Atlanta. Rebecca’s 
anger propels her into hiding in her grandmother’s attic, where she discovers an 
antique breadbox that has the power to deliver whatever she wishes for, as long as 
it fits inside the breadbox. She uses her wishes and her anger to reinvent herself 
as the cool kid she never was in Baltimore, until an ill-advised wish causes her to 
realize that these gifts from the universe aren’t appearing out of nowhere but are 
actually taken from other people and places to whom they rightfully belong. While 
the fantasy element provides movement and texture for the plot as well as a site 
for moral development, the engine behind this story is Rebecca’s growing sense of 
self as she struggles to look at her situation from other people’s perspectives, par-
ticularly that of her little brother, whose feelings, like hers, have been completely 
overlooked in their mother’s decision. Rebecca’s ultimate assertion of her own 
needs thus emerges as the logical outcome of a carefully staged series of setbacks 
and small victories that test and reveal her limits. Rebecca’s perspective is squarely 
preteen—sparks of emotional insight and other-directed compassion compete with 
stubborn selfishness that is ultimately rewarded as necessary self-preservation; her 
story will find favor with every kid who’s ever felt pushed around and lost in the 
middle of adult problems.  KC 
sPiegler, louise The Jewel and the Key. Clarion, 2011 456p
ISBN 978-0-547-14879-3 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
When an earthquake in her Seattle neighborhood reveals the door to a hidden 
closet, Addie finds an mirror that has the power to send her back in time to 1917. 
She is soon drawn into a world linked to her own through an historic theater, 
vibrant and new in 1917, but a decrepit wreck in need of major renovations in the 
current day. The connection between then and now is augmented by war protests, 
and Addie finds herself peripherally involved in both the International Workers of 
the World protest that led to the Everett Massacre and the modern-day protests 
against an unspecified Middle Eastern conflict that threatens to take her best friend 
away from her as he wants to enlist. Meanwhile, she thrills to participating in the 
original theater productions and falls in love with a boy about to leave for service 
in World War I. Both present and past settings are keenly realized, and the charac-
ters of both eras are interesting and likable. Between the strong antiwar message, 
which is mostly centered around the fact that Addie doesn’t want to lose two boys 
172 • The BulleTin
she loves rather than any larger political objections, the back and forth time travel, 
the IWW plot thread, and the self-realization that Addie undergoes about her own 
career desires, though, there is a lot going on here; indeed, too much for the fully 
realized development of any one strain. The labor movement in particular gets short 
shrift, so that readers interested in that history and its outcomes will have to seek 
out other sources after being tantalized by the few fugitive glimpses given. However, 
readers who themselves have dreams of a life in theater, whether on stage or in the 
director’s chair, will relate to Addie’s excitement at getting to know an endangered 
classic and preserving it for the future.  KC  
starmer, aaron The Only Ones. Delacorte, 2011 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90839-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74043-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89919-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
In this curious mix of gritty apocalyptic story and whimsical, creative time-travel 
fable, a boy named Martin must face the way one person’s actions, however well 
intentioned, can literally change the world. Martin is one of a small number of 
children still struggling to accept the fact that they have been left behind after 
nearly all of humanity has disappeared. The few remaining kids all find themselves 
drawn to one town, Xibalba, where they figure out who they are without parental 
and family influence, think about ways they can get all the people back (and what 
could have happened to them), and struggle with notions of authority, power, and 
intelligence in situations that would have, in their old worlds, been handled by 
grownups. The balance between cautionary tale about the dangers of messing with 
the fabric of time and end-of-the-world survival story is sometimes an awkward 
one, but Starmer offers a group of kids so peculiar and vulnerable that they work 
in either scenario. They are useful props (with a wide mix of skills) to explain and 
resolve how the world got so empty, and their scrambling to live another day will 
lead readers to identify with their plights. The fact that there can be no true happy 
ending is tempered by many smaller successes and a well-integrated acknowledgment 
that priorities and notions of happiness adapt to make even minor victories worth 
savoring. While this grim tale is not for everyone, thoughtful middle-schoolers who 
don’t mind ambiguity and loss mixed into their futuristic adventures will find this 
a contemplative, engaging read.  AS
staunton, ted Power Chord. Orca, 2011 [128p] (Currents)
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-55469-904-9 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55469-903-2 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-10
“All at once I can see myself on a stage with Pig and Denny. . . . I want it to be me 
you hear at Rock ’N Bowl, especially if you are a girl.” Thus is born the musical 
dream of ninth-grader Ace, spurred by his ebullient and ambitious friend, Denny, 
who’s a walking PR machine for their band even before it actually exists. The guys 
sort out the realities of practice (“Out comes a sound like pigs in a blender”), 
touring (“Does getting a ride from someone’s dad count as a road trip?”), and 
performance in a youth-center contest (“While we mangle my song, part of me 
floats above everything”) to find that the band isn’t really their scene—except for 
novemBer 2011 • 173
Ace, who’s hooked despite himself, and who goes on to form a new group with a 
cute and talented girl. This entry in the Orca Currents series is excellently tuned 
to its purpose, staying snappy and solid rather than broadening out into needless 
wackiness or inflating the page count with superfluous adventure. Ultimately, it’s 
a fond and focused tribute to the joy of getting together with pals to make some 
noise and draw attention, even if the musical bar is set pretty low (the measure of 
improvement is the fact that they “don’t make the cat barf anymore”). Endearing, 
approachable, and authentic, this is a triple-threat quick pick.  DS
stein, david ezra Love, Mouserella; written and illus. by David Ezra 
Stein. Paulsen/Penguin, 2011 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-25410-9 $15.99   
Ad 5-7 yrs
Mouserella already misses her grandmother, who just left three days ago, so she 
decides to write her a letter. This book (which reads top to bottom rather than 
side to side) is that letter, complete with Polaroid-like “photos,” crayon drawings, 
and souvenirs (like a ketchup packet from a museum cafeteria) for Grandmouse. 
Although the childlike voice of the text is appealingly authentic and sometimes 
amusing (“We ate fries in the cafeteria with squishy packs of ketchup. I bet you don’t 
have them in the country”), there is virtually no plot, just a catalogue of Mouser-
ella’s everyday activities since Grandmouse left. Stein’s multimedia art (“created in 
watercolor, stencils, water-soluble crayon pencil, two paws, and one brain”) can 
be slightly garish or muddy in spots but overall adds some much-needed punch to 
the text. The background resembles colored notebook paper, complete with ruled 
lines, and Mouserella’s penciled epistle is accented with her crayon drawings, faux 
photographs, and occasional illustrations of three-dimensional objects that appear 
to be lying atop the letter, giving the pages a certain detailed novelty that book 
browsers may enjoy. Although there are better “letter books” out there, Mouserella’s 
missive would still be a useful addition to a mail-themed storytime or a pleasant 
prompt to letter-writing activities.  JH
tashjian, janet My Life As a Stuntboy; illus. by Jake Tashjian. Ottaviano/Holt, 
2011 [272p]
iSBn 978-0-8050-8904-2 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
After a successfully adventurous summer complete with avocado hand grenades 
and various canine shenanigans in My Life As a Book (BCCB 9/10), twelve-year-old 
Derek Fallon is not at all thrilled to be heading back to school: not only will he 
have to contend with the usual drudgery of the classroom grind, but now that he’s 
been officially dubbed a “reluctant reader,” he just knows that the grownups in his 
life are going to be on his case about schoolwork 24/7. Fortunately, a bright spot 
comes along in the form of a small movie role when Derek’s daredevil skateboard-
ing routines near his Los Angeles home snag the attention of famous stuntman. 
His parents agree to their son’s new Hollywood gig only if he promises to keep up 
his on homework, and Derek soon finds out that being a stuntboy requires more 
than one kind of balancing act: between his assigned reading, his jealous ex-best 
friend, and his pet monkey, Derek struggles to meet all his responsibilities and 
finds himself missing the simpler days of a movie-free life. As with Book, Tashjian 
uses a light hand where many would have tempted to get a bit more pedantic, and 
174 • The BulleTin
the result is an amusing, effervescent tale that manages to sneak in a few poignant 
lessons under the radar. Derek’s voice remains dry, witty, and above all, honest, and 
his efforts to overcome his learning disability will certainly strike a chord with those 
readers struggling with similar issues and offer insight to their bookish counterparts. 
Jake Tashjian, the author’s son, provides another slew of wonderfully comic stick 
figures to populate the margins, mirroring and often elaborating on the text’s sly 
humor. Fans of the first will be utterly delighted by this sequel and anxious to see 
what Jake will turn up as next.  KQG 
urban, linda Hound Dog True. Harcourt, 2011 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-547-55869-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 4-7
Mattie Breen finds purpose in assisting her uncle Potluck, the custodian at her 
new elementary school (her fourth new school in five years), so she decides that 
she is going to offer herself as his apprentice in the study of “janitorial pursuits” 
rather than face another year of lunches and recesses alone. She writes all of her 
custodial notes in a notebook, where she also jots down the occasional story. Then 
Mattie meets Quincy, the niece of a neighbor, who has a matter-of-fact “way of 
talking—flat and dull, like stones dropping plunk, plunk in a puddle” that emo-
tional Mattie finds both fascinating and terrifying, and the two begin an awkward 
friendship. An on-the-job accident that was questionably Mattie’s fault and a mother 
prone to escapism further add to this thoughtful tale of an imaginative kid who 
is repeatedly thrust into new situations. The narration deftly reveals Mattie as an 
acutely shy girl who constantly second-guesses herself and lives with a deep fear of 
nothing and everything all at once. Uncle Potluck is the solid adult who eventually 
calls out Mattie’s mother for running her daughter all over the place, and Mattie 
finds considerable comfort in his gregarious presence. Quincy’s complexities add 
further to the dimensionality of the novel, as Mattie eventually comes to realize 
that her friend is not nearly as unaffected as she chooses to portray herself. More 
delicate than Urban’s A Crooked Kind of Perfect (BCCB 2/08), this pervasively sad 
yet ultimately hopeful story will speak to many young readers.  HM
vande velde, vivian 8 Class Pets + 1 Squirrel ÷ 1 Dog = Chaos; illus. by Steve 
Björkman. Holiday House, 2011 [80p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2364-4 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
When sassy squirrel Twitch is threatened by an owl, the open door of the nearby 
elementary school seems like a godsend. The principal’s dog (over whose nose 
Twitch has trampled in his escape from the owl) thinks otherwise, though, so the 
chase is then on, and Twitch darts in and out of every classroom in the building 
trying to keep out of the indignant dog’s grasp while enlisting aid from various 
class pets (each of whom narrates a chapter) in the process. That turns out to be a 
surprisingly successful recipe for a middle-grades novel; the storytelling is smart and 
snappy, and the tone is highly humorous. Additionally, each pet’s narrative voice is 
both entertaining in its individuality and faithful to that animal’s characteristics: the 
third-grade class’ neon tetras, for example, keep repeating (somewhat mindlessly) 
“We are in a school,” while the science-lab geckos speak alternate lines (“NEWTON: 
Sometimes we get mangoes. I like mangoes. GALILEO: I know you do. I prefer 
novemBer 2011 • 175
the houseflies, which are crunchier. NEWTON: But not as sweet”), and the fifth 
grade’s corn snake favors words with sibilant syllables (“Sneaky and slithery, yes. 
But stroke my skin and see: I’m not the slightest bit slimy”). Björkman’s slightly 
scratchy black-and-white illustrations effectively echo the text’s light, comic tone, 
and they successfully serve to punctuate, but never interrupt, the narrative flow. 
This will be an easy sell to animal lovers and those looking for a quick, funny read, 
but it also sits up and begs to be read aloud; creative adults and kids might also be 
able to develop it into a comedic readers’ theater production.  JH
vaught, susan Going Underground. Bloomsbury, 2011 [324p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-640-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Del Hartwick is trudging through his final months of high school with little hope 
for the future. The affection of his pet African parrot, his job as a gravedigger, and 
the loyalty of his friend Marvin keep him focused on his single attainable goal of 
getting his juvenile criminal records sealed when he reaches his majority. When a 
beautiful teenage girl begins to visit a particular grave in the cemetery, Del is struck 
with the first desire he’s allowed himself in years—a desire for a romantic relation-
ship with Livia. This would, however, mean admitting to her the past crime that 
will, regardless of his good behavior, shut down any chance he might have for a 
normal career. Although Vaught makes some nominal effort to cast Del’s story as 
an unfolding mystery, cover blurb and ham-fisted clues soon tip readers off that 
he was caught sexting with his girlfriend in eighth grade, and due to their relative 
ages (her thirteen to his fourteen) and an aggressive campaign by the prosecuting 
attorney, Del is now a felon who must, for the rest of his days, register as a sex 
offender wherever he goes. Appropriate punishment for this new, technologically 
enabled crime is a complex issue, to be sure, but Vaught’s multiple approaches to 
the problem muddy the waters more than they clarify. Del’s juvenile action could 
be considered a cautionary tale, but his reluctant participation in a crusade to have 
state law changed in a way that retroactively negates his status as a rapist is really 
just a polemic for liberalizing the law—until one considers that Del still has a por-
nography conviction intact, which leaves him in legal limbo. Teens who gravitate 
to hot-button issues are welcome to respond to Del’s situation with sympathetic 
outrage, I-told-you-so contempt, or simple schadenfreude, but few will be able to 
look their cellphone in the screen without a shudder and a “What if . . . ?”  EB
wallner, alexandra J. R. R. Tolkien; illus. by John Wallner. Holiday House, 
2011 32p
ISBN 978-0-8234-1951-7 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
J. R. R. Tolkien’s early life was beset by tragedy, as he lost his father at age three 
and his mother when he was a teen, facts that Wallner intersperses with a portrait 
of Ronald as an eager student with a love for nature but an even more persistent 
fascination with words. She hits the highlights of his life and career, eliding some 
details that might have been of interest to her audience, such as his close friendship 
with C. S. Lewis and Roger Lancelyn Green. She also omits mention of his Chris-
tian faith, which was clearly of great importance in his life and work. The picture 
that does emerge, though, is very likely spot-on; Tolkien is portrayed as a gentle, 
bookish sort of fellow who loved his family and lived his most vivid adventures 
176 • The BulleTin
in his imagination. The pictures that accompany Wallner’s text, however, tend to 
undermine the sense and dignity of the words and the gravitas of Tolkien’s own 
work, as they turn Tolkien’s life journey into a board game that features cards that 
trivialize the experiences of losing parents and friends, as well as being kept from 
one’s beloved. Cartoonish watercolors in sweet candy colors feature prettified scenes 
and figures that resemble, if somewhat stiffly, the people they represent, but hobbits, 
dragons, and trolls are rendered childlike and rather clownish in their features, utterly 
unlike the characters Tolkien imagined and populated his worlds with. While the 
effect is decidedly child-friendly, readers may suffer confusion if they jump from 
this biography into their own reading of The Hobbit with the expectation that that 
text will be similarly mild and age-appropriate.  KC 
warren, andrea Charles Dickens and the Street Children of London. Houghton, 
2011 [160p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-547-39574-6 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Combining elements of social history, biography, and literary synopsis, Warren 
draws connections between Charles Dickens’ reformer impulses and some of Great 
Britain’s early efforts to provide assistance to the poor. It’s a tall order to adequately 
describe the miseries of the lowest classes in Victorian London, to analyze the 
complex life of a renowned author, and to bring up to speed the many readers 
who have probably never encountered Dickens directly through his novels. It’s 
not surprising, then, that treatment tends to be a bit shallow, and the organization 
a tad bumbling. Warren clearly establishes the hardships of Dickens’ own youth 
and the many ways his personal experiences have been integrated into his novels. 
She also spends considerable time describing his adult walks through the city’s 
meanest streets and the way genuine concern for the plight of the poor led him 
to use fiction as a persuasive force to open the hearts and pockets of the Great 
and Good. Chapters, though, display a piecemeal approach to the topic, ranging 
from earlier efforts by reformers like Thomas Coram, George Frederic Handel, 
and William Hogarth, whose charities Dickens supported, to retellings of Oliver 
Twist and A Christmas Carol, highlighting his personal experiences and larger 
philanthropic motives. An adulatory tone dominates the text, and even the most 
generous readers might question why Warren doesn’t call out her hero for charging 
“a small admittance fee” to read to the workingmen he regarded with an obvious 
touch of condescension (“They . . . laughed and cried,” said Dickens, “with the 
most delightful earnestness”). Nonetheless, children who enjoy historical fiction 
set in the nineteenth century will find plenty of connections to inform their read-
ing, and may even tackle a Dickens original well before it becomes a high-school 
English requirement. Black-and-white illustrations, source notes, and a selected 
bibliography are included.  EB
webb, PhiliP Six Days. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2011 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-545-31767-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
It’s the near future, and most of London’s population was obliterated when invad-
ing Russians dropped a series of bio-bombs during the Quark Wars. Any survivors 
were forced to begin “scaving” the city—a back-breaking task that involves busting 
novemBer 2011 • 177
up any standing structures and feeding them to a crusher in search of some sort of 
powerful artifact for the Russians. Fifteen-year-old Cass and her younger brother, 
Wilbur, are among the scavs, but Wilbur is pretty certain the entire endeavor is 
futile; the artifact, he is convinced, can be found by following a series of clues set 
out in his favorite comic book, if he can only figure out the code. Cass thinks this 
is nuts, but when they meet a boy named Peyto and his mysterious space shuttle, 
her brother’s theories start to look more credible. Now the siblings have six days 
to find and return the artifact to its mothership, or the world will end. The time 
constriction creates an immediate sense of urgency, and the pace steadily increases 
to near breathlessness as Cass and companions evade the “Vlads,” travel to and from 
outer space, confront a sentient spaceship, and eventually save the day. Although 
Cass’ thick Cockney accent and use of British slang may confuse some American 
readers, her narration is both gripping and authentic; her resentment towards and 
concern for her younger brother will be instantly recognizable to older teens, even 
as her world and language are not. Although some of the science-fiction elements 
fall a bit short on the explanatory science, the proposed origins of our planet and 
its potential fate in light of the power of the “artifact” will make for plenty of 
discussion. The ending is nothing if not promising, so hand this to those readers 
who have grown weary of the genre’s bleak outlook.  KQG  
What You Wish For: A Book for Darfur. Putnam, 2011 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25454-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
If there is one thing that unites human beings across cultures, history and circum-
stance, it’s the persistent desire that things might be other than the way they are. 
We wish for things we don’t have, we wish our lives and bodies were different, we 
wish that others might notice us, we wish to be left alone, we wish that certain 
things would never change. In this richly varied collection centered on the theme 
of wishing, eighteen widely known writers, from Meg Cabot to John Green to 
Francisco X. Stork, share fresh and insightful stories, almost all published here for 
the first time, of wishes and their consequences. Most offer hope through wishes 
realized, but some settle for the act of wishing itself, the humor of wishes gone 
awry, or a warning to indeed be careful what one wishes for. There are refashioned 
fairy tales, light-hearted sibling, friend, and crush dramas, a graphic short about 
the wishes our ancestors made for us and helped us realize, several poems, and an 
open-ended concluding story by Joyce Carol Oates that resists easy interpretation. 
Settings range from the nineteenth-century cities of Andersen’s “Little Match Girl” 
and the Grimms’ “Aschenputtel” to more contemporary urban, suburban, and rural 
environs to futuristic cityscapes, with main characters of multiple ethnicities. The 
book opens with a moving forward by Mia Farrow about her experiences with a 
boy from a refugee camp in Darfur and ends with an explanatory note from the 
co-founder of the Book Wish Foundation, the charity organized to establish libraries 
in Darfuri refugee camps that will receive proceeds from this volume. With high-
quality stories that appeal to varied tastes, this is a great collection to have on hand 
in the classroom for spare moments of reading alone or aloud to spur reflection 
and discussion, as well as to awaken students to the ways in which wishing might 
lead to doing good where it’s most needed.  KC  
178 • The BulleTin
wiggins, bethany Shifting. Walker, 2011 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2280-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
The small town of Silver City, New Mexico, is Maggie Mae’s last chance; kicked 
out of yet another foster home, she’s been parked with her social worker’s mother 
in Silver City to finish out high school and, hopefully, get her life together enough 
to have a decent chance at a successful adulthood. No one knows, however, that 
the reason Maggie keeps racking up indecent exposure and prostitution charges 
is that, at the full moon, she involuntarily shifts into the form of whatever animal 
is closest at hand, and when she shifts back (again involuntarily), it’s in the nude. 
As Maggie settles into her latest home—complete with satisfying restaurant job, 
confusing potential romance with rich-kid Bridger, and ostracization from her 
remaining peers—and begins to gain new control over her transformations, she 
finds that local Navajo beliefs about Skinwalkers, who trade their souls for the abil-
ity to take animal form, may be the key to understanding her condition. There’s a 
Hitchcockian touch to the sinister and growing horde of animals that stalks Maggie, 
adding some genuine menace to the proceedings, and Maggie herself is a deeply 
sympathetic protagonist, angry and outcast, buffeted by forces beyond her control 
but also filled with longing for home and care. However, the Navajo characters 
tend toward the overly magical/mystical as they conveniently insert the needed 
supernatural background into the plot, and Bridger’s class-inflected hot-and-cold 
reversals on the romantic front may frustrate readers as he withholds his own secrets. 
Suspense and plotting are nevertheless solid, and Wiggins’ debut makes for a nice 
departure from the more played-out werewolf plots.  CG
wignall, k. j. Blood. Egmont, 2011 [272p] (Mercian Trilogy)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-220-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-258-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
In a darkened crypt beneath a derelict cathedral, the former Earl of Mercia wakes 
from a twenty-year slumber and prepares to return to the city above to find a suit-
able target for his first vampiric feed. A teenager in appearance, William Mercia 
is actually nearly eight hundred years old, and he has spent much of his long life 
asleep, occasionally waking throughout the centuries to seek sustenance from the 
blood of humans. This time around, however, feels different, and Will begins to 
suspect that there are darker forces than him at play, especially after his first victim 
starts babbling prophecies regarding the death of the Earl and he subsequently suf-
fers not one, but two, attacks by demonic dogs. Will also has a chance encounter 
with Eloise, a beautiful runaway to whom he feels an instant (and, fortunately for 
her, non-predatory) attraction. It soon becomes clear that Eloise has something to 
do with the prophecy, but the revelation of how she fits into Will’s fate will have 
to wait for the next installment as this series opener focuses mainly on the Earl’s 
more urgent task of figuring out who is sending the demon dogs and how to stop 
them. Wignall offers a nice balance of action and backstory, peppering Will’s current 
travails through the city (which feels London-like, but is never specifically named) 
with flashbacks to his other “active” periods. As teenage vampires go, Will himself 
has a world-weary practicality that, while making him far less romantic than some 
novemBer 2011 • 179
of his more angsty counterparts, feels incredibly authentic for a protagonist who 
has suffered through plagues, wars, and famine without the relief of death. Fans of 
the undead will find plenty to whet their appetites here.  KQG
winters, ben h. The Mystery of the Missing Everything. Harper/Harper Col-
lins, 2011 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-06-196544-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
The first and only trophy ever won by a student at Mary Todd Lincoln Middle 
School has gone missing—but never fear, Bethesda Fielding, intrepid eighth-grader 
and aspiring detective, is on the case. Although her previous attempts at sleuthing 
(The Secret Life of Ms. Finkleman, BCCB 12/10) led to a fair amount of trouble 
for both her and her best friend, Tenny, Bethesda remains undeterred; she’s pleased 
that this recent theft provides the perfect opportunity to redeem herself—espe-
cially now that the histrionic principal has canceled all school activities, including 
the much loved eighth-grade camping trip, until the culprit is caught. With her 
tendency to find the right clues but jump to the wrong conclusions, Bethesda is a 
sort of lovable bumbler who does, in fact, eventually get her man (or in this case 
boy, girl, and bird) but not without insulting most of the eighth-grade class and 
nearly losing her best pal in the process. Fortunately, Mary Todd Lincoln Middle 
School is populated with a whole host of quirky characters, including the return-
ing Ms. Finkleman (in a wonderfully tongue-in-cheek portrayal of an overworked 
but dedicated teacher), who are quick to forgive Bethesda’s eccentricities once she 
solves the case. The mystery here isn’t terribly compelling, but the middle-school 
antics and general good humor will surely strike the right chord with returning 
readers.  KQG 
yelChin, eugene Breaking Stalin’s Nose; written and illus. by Eugene 
Yelchin. Holt, 2011 [154p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9216-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-8
Sasha Zaichik has finally arrived at the proudest moment of his ten-year life—his 
induction into the Young Pioneers, a Soviet youth group that will establish him as a 
staunch, loyal Communist like his father, an honored member of the State Security 
police. Mr. Zaichik has already handed his son the coveted red scarf that he’ll receive 
formally in a ceremony the next day, but amid the domestic pomp is the troubling, 
whispered advice that Sasha should go to his aunt’s apartment if anything should 
go wrong. And go wrong it does. A jealous neighbor who wants the Zaichiks’ more 
commodious apartment space rats him out to State Security, and as Sasha tries to 
cover up this family shame in school the next day, he inadvertently cracks the nose 
off a bust of Stalin and sets off a witch hunt among staff and students to determine 
who should be arrested for vandalizing state property. Two classmates with their 
own dark histories and private agendas initially deflect the blame from Sasha, but it 
soon becomes clear that nobody keeps a secret for long, even among the humblest 
echelons of Stalinist Russia. Slightly oversized font, short chapters, small trim size, 
generous illustration, and simple sentence structure all suggest a middle-grades 
chapter book, but a tone of relentlessly grim irony, underscored by pictures that 
feature the distorted features and vertiginous angles of nightmares, quickly clue 
180 • The BulleTin
the casual reader that this is serious, sophisticated stuff. The cat-and-mouse chase 
that pits Sasha’s whole world against him will rivet middle-grade readers, but this 
title will hold special appeal for older students whose grasp of content outstrips 
their reading proficiency.  EB
young, ed The House Baba Built: An Artist’s Childhood in China; as told to Libby 
Koponen; illus. by Ed Young. Little, 2011 48p
ISBN 978-0-316-07628-9 $17.99   
R Gr. 5-9
This blend of arresting mixed-media visuals (including multiple foldouts) and 
recollective text chronicles Young’s remarkable childhood in Shanghai. There his 
engineer father designed a huge, apartment-building-esque house, making a deal 
for the use of the property on which it stood (in the area of Shanghai that was 
safest from the encroaching war). Not only was it the headquarters for Young’s 
immediate family, including his four brothers and sisters, but it also drew family 
fleeing Nanking, an additional crew of cousins, and then, late in the war, a German 
refugee family. Despite the shadow of war, this is a story of rollicking family life, 
with hordes of kids pelting around the place (hearing a door slam, Young’s father 
noted that “when you hear one bang, you know four more are coming”) under 
the loose and benevolent supervision of tolerant adults. The strand of the young 
artist’s early career is explored as well, with mention of young Eddy’s early artistic 
influences, from a bit of cousinly demonstration to the “luscious illustrations” in 
his sister’s English adventure stories. The art relies strongly on photos, some altered 
or decorated, with additional paper collage, pastel, and soft linework, creating full-
bleed spreads that vary between immersive high-impact layouts and more allusive or 
focused vignettes. The overall effect is a sort of elegant teeming, effectively conveying 
the high-spirited togetherness of the household from a more aesthetically inclined 
distance. While more context would have been helpful, especially to fill kids in 
on the Sino-Japanese War, this is an intriguing story of an unusual and surpris-
ingly idyllic childhood. Back matter includes an afterword (which includes recent 
photographs of the house and a few family members), a timeline, a floor-by-floor 
elevation of the house, and a note explaining the creative process for the book.  DS
zevin, gabrielle All These Things I’ve Done. Farrar, 2011 [368p] (Birth-
right)
ISBN 978-0-374-30210-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
This curious mix of sci fi, mob story, and meandering diary follows the life of 
sixteen-year-old Anya Balanchine. Anya is doing her best to juggle her love for 
her high-maintenance family, her fear that her mobster relatives will ruin her life 
even more (both of her parents were murdered), and daily existence in a future 
that involves chocolate as an illegal substance, strictly rationed water, and an all-
around scarcity of resources. Falling in love with the son of the ambitious new 
assistant district attorney is probably not her best move, but Anya has always been 
driven by her heart rather than her logic, and she and Win seem to be irresistibly 
drawn to one another. Zevin’s world is hauntingly grim, collapsing slowly under 
the weight of old habits and large populations, and it’s clear that the young genera-
tion is aware of the ways in which they will always be limited. Unfortunately, Anya 
herself, laid bare in her narration, is not terribly likable, choosing to avoid action 
novemBer 2011 • 181
(and thereby hurting many) rather than make tough choices, obsessing over tiny 
things while her older brother is led astray, and lying to herself about inevitabili-
ties because she is, quite simply, unwilling to let go of the way she thinks things 
should be. In addition, the witty chapter titles and frequently flippant tone clash 
uneasily with the often-dire circumstances in which the characters find themselves. 
Nevertheless, romance fans will likely adore the star-crossed passionate romance, 
the heroic gestures, and the responsibility-be-damned happy ending that brings 
the protagonists back together.  AS
182 • The BulleTin
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
winChester, simon The Alice behind Wonderland. Oxford University Press, 
2011 110p
ISBN 978-0-19-539619-5 $16.99
Despite its title, the subject of Winchester’s latest examination is not really the 
comparatively enigmatic Alice but rather the circumstances regarding a famous 
photograph taken of her by Charles Dodgson (Lewis Carroll), who would later use 
her as the inspiration for the fictional Alice and her journey through the looking 
glass. The photo in question was taken in 1858 and features Alice Liddell, the young 
daughter of a college dean, dressed dramatically in rags to recreate a scene from a 
Tennyson poem. Though it’s only one of many photos taken of Alice, her siblings, 
and various other children, the somewhat unusual nature of both Alice’s exposed 
flesh and her “coquettish” stance has fueled speculation regarding the potentially 
unseemly nature of her relationship with Dodgson. Winchester takes exception to 
this theory, insisting Dodgson was merely an eccentric innocent misunderstood 
by others. Unfortunately, in his attempt to clear Dodgson’s name, he offers little 
evidence to support either portrayal of the author and instead alludes to the sexual 
proclivities of Alice herself, making her out to be a seductive nymphet. A overview 
of the history of the photographic process and its cultural impact is interesting, 
but it’s tangential in light of the more controversial subjects brought up in other 
chapters. Morton Cohen’s critically acclaimed biography is still the best source for 
Carroll history and lore, but this much slimmer volume points towards some of 
the complicated issues surrounding the man and his muse.  KQG 
November 2011 • 183
Actors and acting–fiction: Spiegler; 
Tashjian
AdvenTure: Barrett; Carson; 
Chabon; Landsdale; Meloy; Pat-
ten; Webb
Africa: Cowcher
Africa–fiction: Atinuke; McKissack
African Americans: nelson
African Americans–fiction: Grimes
Aliens–fiction: Castellucci
Amnesia–fiction: Hodkin
Animals: Jenkins
Animals–fiction: MacLachlan; vande 
velde
Animals–stories: Aesop; Agee; Crimi; 
Klassen; rodriguez; Stein
AnTHoLoGieS: What You Wish 
For
Art and artists: Young
Art and artists–fiction: Peet
Bands–fiction: Staunton
Behavior–stories: Shea; Shireen
BioGrAPHieS: Wallner; Warren; 
Young
Birds–fiction: Carman
Boarding school–fiction: Baer
Books and reading–fiction: Skye
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Grimes; 
nimmo; Porter; Webb
Brothers–fiction: Healey
Castles–fiction: George
Cats–fiction: Cameron
China: Young
Christmas: Sneve
Christmas–stories: Buzzeo; dunrea
City life–fiction: Biggs
Cold War–fiction: Peet
Crime and criminals–fiction: ells-
worth; Griffin; vaught;Winters
Crime and criminals–stories: Agee
Current events: Amir
Curses–fiction: Haskell
death–fiction: Garvey; Martin, C.; 
oliver; Pixley
demons–fiction: Jones
depression, the–fiction: Landsdale
detectives–fiction: Kennedy; Win-
ters
dinosaurs–stories: Shea
disease–fiction: ellis
dogs–fiction: Cameron
dystopias–fiction: McLaughlin; 
Starmer; Zevin
ecology–fiction: Marsden
egypt–fiction: napoli
elephants: Cowcher
ePiSToLArY fiCTion: Kostecki-
Shaw; Stein
eskimos–fiction: edwardson
Ethics and values: Long; McLaugh-
lin; Sneve; vaught
fABLeS: Aesop
faith–fiction: Sharif
families: Young
families–fiction: Abela; Amir; 
Atinuke; Cumyn; MacLachlan; 
Martin, A.; Schröder; Snyder; 
Zevin
fAnTASY: Barrett; Carson; George; 
Hartley; Haskell; Martin, C.; 
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
184 • The bulleTiN
ness; nimmo; oliver; Patten; 
Snyder; Spiegler; Wignall
fathers–fiction: Cumyn; McKissack; 
oliver; Yelchin
fathers–stories: dunrea
fear–stories: Crimi
foLK-LiKe TALeS: McKissack
foLKTALeS And fAirY TALeS: 
Haskell; Macdonald; Manna
food and eating–stories: Shireen
foster care–fiction: Wiggins
friends–fiction: Abela; Castellucci; 
Cottrell Boyce; Haston; Marsden; 
Staunton
friends–stories: Juster; Kargman; 
Kostecki-Shaw; Long; rodriguez
future–fiction: Webb
Gender–fiction: Brezenoff
Gender–stories: Kargman
Germany–fiction: Schröder
Ghosts–fiction: Abela; ford; oliver; 
Sleator
Gifts: Sneve
Grandfathers–fiction: Martin, A.
Grandmothers–stories: Stein
GrAPHiC noveLS: Amir
Grief–fiction: Martin, C.; ness
HiSToriCAL fiCTion: Avi; 
edwardson; Lansdale; McKis-
sack; Meloy; napoli; Peet; Porter; 
russo; Schröder; Yelchin
History, European: Warren
History, U.S.: Hallowell; nelson
Horror: Patten
Hotels–fiction: Carman
HuMor: Agee; Crimi; Cumyn; 
Juster; Kennedy; Klassen; Kön-
necke; Shea; Skye; Tashjian; 
vande velde
identity–fiction: Haston; Paquette
illness–fiction: ness
imagination–stories: Chabon; Portis
immigrants–fiction: Avi; Cottrell 
Boyce
india–fiction: ellis
Japan–stories: Macdonald
Jews–stories: russo
Labor–fiction: Spiegler
Learning disabilities–fiction: Tashjian
Libraries–stories: Shea
Lighthouses–stories: Buzzeo
Literature, English: LaZebnik; 
Wallner; Warren
Magic–fiction: Carson; MacLachlan; 
nimmo; Skye
Magic–stories: Könnecke
Mathematics: Sidman
Memory–fiction: ellsworth
Mental illness–fiction: Castellucci; 
Pixley
Mexico–fiction: Marsden
Monsters–fiction: Patten
Mothers–fiction: ford; ness; Sleator
Movies–fiction: Tashjian
Moving–fiction: Snyder
Moving–stories: Juster
Music and musicians–fiction: 
Staunton
Music and musicians–stories: Crimi
Muslims–fiction: Sharif
MYSTerieS: Avi; Carman; ford; 
Healey; Hodkin; Kennedy; 
Winters
Mythology, classical: Barrett
native Americans–fiction: edward-
son
native Americans: Sneve
Nature study: Cowcher; Jenkins; 
Sidman
orphans–fiction: Paquette; Kennedy
orphans–stories: Manna
Pets–stories: Agee; MacLachlan
Play–stories: Kargman; Portis
PoeTrY: Sidman
Popularity–fiction: Haston
Possession–fiction: Jones
Poverty: Warren
Poverty–fiction: Avi; ellis
Princesses–fiction: Haskell
racism–fiction: edwardson
Readers’ theater: Klassen; vande 
velde
Reading aloud: Atinuke; Cameron; 
MacLachlan; vande velde
Reading, beginning: Klassen
Reading, easy: Atinuke; Cameron; 
vande velde
November 2011 • 185
Reading, reluctant: Skye; Staunton
refugees–fiction: Cottrell Boyce
relationships–fiction: Barrett; Breze-
noff; Cumyn; ellsworth; Garvey; 
Griffin; LaZebnik; Peet; Sharif; 
vaught; Wiggins
romance–fiction: Griffin; Hodkin; 
LaZebnik; Zevin
royalty–fiction: George; nimmo
runaways–fiction: Brezenoff
russia–fiction: Yelchin
School–fiction: Hartley; Haston; 
McLaughlin; Sharif; urban; vande 
velde; Winters
School–stories: Kargman
SCienCe fiCTion: Starmer; 
Webb; Zevin
Science: Jenkins
Servants–fiction: ford
SHorT STorieS: What You Wish 
For
Sisters–fiction: Martin, A.; Pixley
Slavery–fiction: McKissack
Space travel–fiction: Webb
Spies and espionage–fiction: Meloy
Storytelling: Manna
Storytime: Aesop; Klassen; Portis; 
Shea
Suicide–fiction: Healey
Superheroes–stories: Chabon
SuPernATurAL STorieS: Baer; 
Garvey; Healey; Sleator; Wiggins
SuSPenSe: Baer
Theaters–fiction: Spiegler
Time: Jenkins
Time travel–fiction: Spiegler
Tornadoes–stories: Long
uncles–fiction: urban
vampires–fiction: Wignall
verSe noveLS: Grimes; McKis-
sack
voyages and travel–fiction: Biggs; 
Lansdale; napoli; Paquette
voyages and travel–stories: Hallowell
West, the–stories: Hallowell
Wishes–fiction: Snyder; What You 
Wish For
Wishes–stories: Macdonald
Wolves–stories: Shireen
WordLeSS BooKS: rodriguez
World cultures: Amir; Kostecki-Shaw
World War ii–fiction: Porter; Schröder
World War ii–stories: russo
Writers and writing: Wallner; Warren
 
T
he Bulletin of the Center for 
Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and 
critical evaluations of current children’s 
books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding 
the ever-evolving children’s literature field. 
Reviews give an in-depth look at a selected book’s content, reading 
level, strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, as well as 
suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August).  
To order: 
Volume 65 (2012). 
Call: 800-548-1784 or 410-516-6987
$55.00, individuals (print), $58.00 (online) 
Fax: 410-516-3866 
$95.00, institutions (print), $100.00 (online)  Email: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu 
$133.00, institutions (print & online) 
Online: www.press.jhu.edu/journals
ISSN 0008-9036 / E-ISSN 1558-6766
Published by  
T h e JOhns hOpkins UnivErsiTy prEss
The BulleTin of The CenTer  
for Children’s Books: 
essenTial.
Deborah stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
 
T
he Lion and the Unicorn, an 
international theme- and 
genre-centered journal, 
is committed to a serious, ongoing 
discussion of literature for children.  
The journal’s coverage includes the 
state of the publishing industry, regional authors, 
comparative studies of significant books and genres, new developments 
in theory, the art of illustration, the mass media, and popular culture. 
It is especially noted for its interviews with authors, editors, and other 
important contributors to the field, as well as its outstanding book 
review section. 
Published three times per year.  
To order: 
Volume 36 (2012). 
Call: 800-548-1784 or 410-516-6987
$40.00, individuals (print), $43.00 (online) 
Fax: 410-516-3866 
$123.00, institutions (print), $130.00 (online) Email: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu 
$172.00, institutions (print & online) 
Online: www.press.jhu.edu/journals
ISSN 0147-2593 / E-ISSN 1080-6563
Published by  
T h e JOhns hOpkins UnivErsiTy prEss
The Lion and The Unicorn: 
a criTicaL JoUrnaL of  
chiLdren’s LiTeraTUre 
expLoring LiTeraTUre 
for chiLdren.
state of the publishing industry, regional authors, 
David L. russell, Ferris sTaTe UniversiTy, 
karin E. Westman, Kansas sTaTe UniversiTy,  
and naomi J. Wood, Kansas sTaTe UniversiTy, 
Editors
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP,
MANAGEMENT, AND CIRCULATION, 10/1/11
Title: Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books. Pub. No. 0008-9036. Frequency: Monthly 
(except August). Eleven issues published annually. Subscription price: $95.00 institutions, 
$55.00 individuals. Location of office of publication: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218. Headquarters of publisher: Same. Publisher: The 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218. Editor: Deborah 
Stevenson, University of Illinois, 501 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Owner: 
University of Illinois, 501 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820-6601. The purpose, function, 
and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status for Federal Income tax purposes 
have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Extent and nature of circulation 
Av. no. copies 
Actual no. copies
 
each issue 
single issue pub.
 
preceding 12 months nearest to filing date
A. Total no. copies printed 
1,718 
1,679
B. Paid circulation, mail subscriptions 
1,191 
1,087
C. Total paid distribution 
1,252 
1,147
D. Free distribution 
29 
29
F. Total distribution 
1,281 
1,176
G. Copies not distributed 
437 
503
H. Total 
1,718 
1,679
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete. William M. Breichner,
Journals Publisher.
