U
IL LIN 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
F.
,3
I·
r·
b··:
II
·:-
by TRACEY PORTER
"Annie and Violet, both 11, altatrnate [in the telling of their
families' stories in rural Oklahoma [and in California as
migrant-workers] during the drought and Great Depression. A
historical piece, this is also a story of friendship between unlike
personalities. A story rich in descriptive language and lyrical
images... that will give young readers a sense of the past and what
it means for two friends to help each other come of age."-SLJ
"Fans of Sarah, Plain and Thl will feel at home with Porter's lyrical
language, setting and characters. And those not quite ready for
Steinbeck's bleaker classics will find this a stirring depiction of
survivors beating the odds."-Publishers Weekly
Ages 8-12. $14.95 TR (0-06-027563-4) Joanna Cotler Books
t HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10022
http://www.harperchildrens.com
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
March 1998
Vol. 51 No. 7
A LOOK INSIDE
233 THE BIG PICTURE
Beautiful Warrior: The Legend of the Nun's Kung Fu written and illus. by
Emily Arnold McCully
234 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
237 * Snoozers: 7 Short Short Bedtime Stories for Lively Little Kids written and
illus. by Sandra Boynton
254 * Diez Deditos/Ten Little Fingers & Other Play Rhymes andAction Songs
from Latin America comp. and tr. by Josd-Luis Orozco; illus. by Elisa
Kleven
254 * My Life in Dog Years by Gary Paulsen; illus. by Ruth Wright Paulsen
259 * Cookie Count: A Tasty Pop-Up written and illus. by Robert Sabuda
264 
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 1998
266 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
CENTER STAFF
Shirley Chan
Linda Fenster
Kate McDowell
Jordan Martin
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1998 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Emily Arnold McCully from Beautiful Warrior, ©1998. Used by permission
of Arthur A. Levine Books, an imprint of Scholastic Press.
MARCH 1998 
* 233
THE BIG PICTURE
Beautiful Warrior: The Legend of the Nun's
Kung Fu
written and illus. by Emily Arnold McCully
You don't generally see "nun" and "kung fu" in the same sentence (and the juxta-
position in itself is going to grab kids' attention), but they're inextricable in this
picture book, which tells of Wu Mei, the legendary Ming dynasty scholar who
became a Buddhist nun and kung fu master.
McCully's control of her unusual story is superb, and she doesn't make
the mistake of ignoring the more conventionally appealing aspects in order to
focus on high-minded philosophy. Wu Mei's principles are succinctly and amus-
ingly described: she taught young men who came to study with her "if they were
sincere, and didn't just want to beat somebody up." The book focuses primarily
on Wu Mei's teaching of Mingyi, a young woman who seeks to avoid an arranged
marriage, and it cinematically revels in their meeting: a pair of huge footpads set
upon Mingyi in a deserted street as the little nun hovers on the edge of the picture;
a page turn reveals the dream-fulfilling comeuppance as the demure nun unleashes
her hidden powers and sends the lugs sailing through the air. Mingyi seeks to
avoid marrying a brigand, and under Wu Mei's guidance she challenges him to a
kung fu match in a year's time, his victory prize to be her hand in marriage. The
book then describes steps of Mingyi's physical and mental training, making ini-
tially alien imagery into understandable components of a physical discipline, and
leads up to her final victory over her would-be husband and her decision to follow
the study of kung fu rather than to marry at all. McCully's text is simple and
grounded in the real and familiar, so that qi and other concepts related to kung fu
aren't impenetrably mystical despite being paradigm shifts for most youngsters.
The story has verve and momentum, reading rather like one-seventh of The Mag-
nificent Seven; kids who haven't previously contemplated martial arts will find this
awakens their interest, and all will enjoy the idea of being able to trounce overcon-
fident opponents while remaining responsible and mature.
In a genre where the flashy and creatively interpretative are becoming the
illustrative norm, it's easy to underestimate McCully's quieter and more literal art.
Her restraint keeps the visuals from overshadowing the text, however, and more
importantly from undercutting the text's emphasis on the concrete application
rather than the abstract philosophy. Pastel and tempera add an appropriate oomph
to the watercolors, and the figures are characterized by expression and movement
rather than detailed draughtsmanship; the little nun's bald head and blue robe and
Mingyi's dark hair and muted red jacket stand out as recurring motifs even amid
busy crowds, and the book makes the most of the contrast between Mingyi and
234 
* THE BULLETIN
her hefty opponent. Design keeps things moving too: oversized horizontal pages
feature varying numbers of panels, so that the freedom of the drawing is disci-
plined by straight framing borders and boxes of text.
Historical yet energetic, this will make for a vigorous readaloud (one you
may want to save until just before recess); its high-action subject and unthreatening
paneled page design will also entice independent readers, and the brigand, kung-fu
nun, and protagonist going up against great odds are born to be booktalked. An
author's note gives historical background and states that the legend of Wu Mei
may not have been based in fact-but who cares? (Imprint information appears
on p. 250.)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
MTri Rr\n/yc rEDn 
UTT T lTDXT AXT-\ VnTT TI' DrPinTr U
LrIW 
UVSVI rvi kv 
ILvLIRN /lAN 
t 
IUUNGJ I EUJLE
ACKERMAN, NED 
Spirit Horse. 
Scholastic, 1998 
[176p]
ISBN 0-590-39650-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Running Crane is newly transplanted to the Kainaa band of the Blackfoot people,
and he's at a disadvantage, since his Siksika upbringing didn't teach him the Kainaa-
necessary skill of riding. He's nonetheless chosen as one of the youths to join the
warriors on a raiding party, which heads towards the camp of the Snake People to.
steal buffalo-running horses and, maybe, the spirit horse, the magnificent gray
stallion of legend. After an arduous trip and a fracas at the Snake camp, Running
Crane is left alone, first merely surviving, then finding and taming the spirit horse;
eventually he returns home in glory after saving the wounded leader of the raiding
party. The fictional elements here aren't necessarily new and the novel's characters
aren't original, but Ackerman does well by them. Running Crane's desire to prove
himself, his batdes with his fears, and his persecution by a jealous competitor,
Weasel Rider, make him a sympathetic young protagonist, and the gradual in-
crease of his worth in the eyes of his elders and, finally, in his own eyes makes for
absorbing reading. Unconventional this ain't, but its flow and immediacy lift it
above many similar books, and readers will appreciate the classic moves of the
coming-of-age story. A historical note on the Blackfoot (unfortunately absent any
discussion of the spirit horse legend) is appended. DS
ADA, ALMA FLOR 
The Malachite Palace; tr. by Rosa Zubizarreta; illus. by Leonid
Gore. 
Atheneum, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-31972-X
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The little princess living in the malachite palace is not allowed to consort with the
"rude," "ignorant," and "common" children she hears playing outside the ornate
MARCH 1998 
* 
235
iron gates of her home. The queen (in gold), the lady-in-waiting (in white), and
the governess (in black), looking suspiciously like the long-lost cousins of Cinderella's
step-relations, make sure of that. When a delicate yellow songbird flies through a
palace window, they immediately cage it and try to seduce it into singing with
chocolate, caviar, and a golden cage: "But in spite of all their efforts, the little bird
remained silent." Nothing unforeseen happens in this new fairy tale that looks
every inch the part: luminous acrylics create a delicate, hazy lushness and exude an
air of elegance that is pretty to look at, but the fairy-tale plot elements remain
caged in cliches. The three women are never menacing enough to create the re-
quired tension, and the bird's release by the princess, closely coinciding with her
newly declared resolve to play with the children on the outside, is a foregone con-
clusion. While this lacks bite, it might satisfy those with a sweet tooth for frothy
confections. PM
APPELBAUM, DIANA 
Cocoa Ice; illus. by Holly Meade. 
Orchard, 1997 
51p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33040-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30040-4 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-5
This unusual title is written in two parts: the first section is set on the tropical
island of Santo Domingo and features a little girl explaining the harvesting of
cocoa beans and their transformation into cocoa powder for trading; the second
section is set in the cold Maine winter, where another little girl explains the har-
vesting of ice, which is packed in hay and shipped to the tropics, also for trading.
Both little girls benefit from this exchange-they each get some delicious cocoa
ice. Appelbaum's lengthy but absorbing text explains a complex process succinctly
and interestingly, focusing on the children and their view of the proceedings. The
contrast between the blue-white cold of the ice and the blue-white warmth of the
sea and sand is startlingly vivid in the mixed-media illustrations by Meade (illus-
trator of Ho's Hush!: A Thai Lullaby, BCCB 4/96), which skillfully depict both
the lushness of a green island in a warm sea and the wintry chill of a Maine winter
harsh with snow and sub-zero temperatures. This fictionalized treatment of a
nonfiction subject is old-fashioned in its approach but lively in its execution. JMD
ASCH, FRANK 
Barnyard Lullaby; written and illus. by Frank Asch. 
Simon,
1998 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-689-81363-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
"Gather round, my children/ Cuddle as I sing,/ Let yourselves grow sleepy,/ Safe
beneath my wing," sings Mother Hen, and soon animals all over the farm are
tenderly baa-ing, moo-ing, neigh-ing, and oink-ing their babies to sleep. "To
them it was a beautiful lullaby," but to the farmer it means nothing but a sleepless
night. When he can't take any more, he hollers out the window, "BE QUIET!"
and wakes his own baby. "Now look what you've done!" admonishes his wife, and
as she sings a lullaby, the farmer peacefully nods off. A troublesomely non-repeti-
tive tune (made more difficult by recurrent mistakes in the musical notation) is
appended for those readers ambitious enough to sing the treacly lyrics. But it's the
gentle humor of the restive farmer and Asch's elegantly simple figures, outlined in
black and tinted in the jeweled shades of a starry night, that will nudge listeners off
to dreamland with a smile. EB
236 
* THE BULLETIN
BARE, COLLEEN STANLEY 
Sammy: Dog Detective; written and illus. with photo-
graphs by Colleen Stanley Bare. 
Cobblehill, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-525-65253-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Sammy is a German shepherd/Belgian Malinois-cross police dog; he lives with his
handler, Andy, and Andy's family. The book describes the basics of Sammy's
training ("Fireworks are used to teach Sammy to ignore loud sounds such as gun-
fire"), offers a few details of Sammy's career ("Although Sammy has assisted in at
least one hundred arrests, he has only had to bite twice"), and makes it clear he's
part of Andy's family ("Sammy plays ball and swims with the children"). The
narrative tense shifts around a bit, and Sammy's actual police work gets less atten-
tion than his other activities, but it's still a closeup and entertaining introduction
to a kind of peace officer kids may have only seen in passing. The photographs are
endearing portraits, since Sammy is acutely photogenic with his dark mask and
soulful brown eyes; the pictures are often posed but entertainingly self-aware of the
fact as they show Sammy studious in glasses and at the computer keyboard or
dressed up for Halloween. Fuzzy yet responsible, Sammy is a winning hero who
could easily liven up an early civics unit. DS
BELLER, SUSAN PROVOST 
Never Were Men So Brave: The Irish Brigade During the
Civil War. McElderry, 1998 
[112p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-81406-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Acclaimed for their fearlessness by Civil War allies and enemies alike, the Irish
Brigade engaged in one doomed action after another and, with their ranks deci-
mated, returned to fight again with fresh recruits. Beller traces the formation and
deployment of these regiments from their roots in the Young Ireland rebellion of
1848 through demobilization in 1865, and her spirited description of their valor
and defeat at Antietam and Fredericksburg should rivet military history buffs. Too
often, though, she raises serious issues-whether the brigade was driven by bravery
or recklessness, whether it was purposely assigned to hopeless missions--only to
drop them without scrutiny. What's left is a tantalizing but thready celebration of
some of the Union's most colorful soldiers. Source notes and an index are in-
cluded. EB
BOITANO, BRIAN 
Boitano's Edge: Inside the Real World ofFigure Skating; by Brian
Boitano with Suzanne Harper. 
Simon, 1997 
144p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-81915-3 
$25.00 
R Gr. 5-9
Yes, there's plenty of breathless prose: "As usual, we didn't need to speak. She
[coach] said what needed to be said--You can do it-with her eyes. I nodded, took
a deep breath, and took to the ice." Yes, the glossary and list of skaters' slang are
carelessly buried in the text. And yes, flashy sidebars and inserts make the layout a
nightmare. But Boitano's chatty account of his amateur victories and professional
challenges, the wealth of fascinating figure skating addenda and commentary, and
the gallery of enticing snapshots and stunning action photos effectively brush these
concerns aside. Such issues as blade sharpening, judges' training, score computa-
tion, and costume selection are woven into Boitano's own story, introducing the
myriad details involved in skating competitions and exhibitions. And then there's
MARCH 1998 
* 
237
that light sprinkling of dirt (blades vandalized and skates stolen at the Olympics)
and those subtle digs ("Some skaters do a lot of posing and staring at the judges ..
. I want to move people, to have them feel my emotions through my skating") that
simply invite readers to play a little gossipy who's who. Avid followers of figure
skating will have lots of fun mingling with the celebs off-rink, and newcomers
intrigued by the Nagano games can start right here. EB
BOYNTON, SANDRA 
Snoozers: 7 Short Short Bedtime Stories for Lively Little Kids;
written and illus. by Sandra Boynton. 
Little Simon, 1997 
16p
ISBN 0-689-81774-6 
$7.99 
R 
18 mos.-4 yrs
These seven short rhymed anecdotes provide a silly counterpoint to the serious
business of going to bed for the toddler set. Textual humor, enhanced by droll
illustrations in a madcap rainbow palette, will turn the bedtime ritual into a giggle
fest. "Pajamas" informs us, for instance, that "rabbits wear pajamas that are kind
of loose. But you've GOT to have buttons if you're a moose" (those pesky ant-
lers). "The chickens in the bathtub,/ The closet full of sheep,/ The sneakers in the
freezer/ Are all drifting off to sleep," sings the aptly named "Silly Lullaby." Boynton's
bug-eyed menagerie featuring obese hippos in too-tight pajamas, ditzy-looking
rabbits, and dopey-faced sheep, among others, is sure to tickle kids and their adult
reader-friends alike, and the sturdy board-book format with colorful tabs will guide
kids easily to their favorite entries. Plan on hearing "Let's read this one again"
tacked onto the provided refrain of "I'm not tired." PM
BRUCHAC, 
JOSEPH 
Bowman's Store: A Journey to Myself 
Dial,
1997 
3 1 1p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8037-1997-3 
$17.99 
R Gr. 9-12
Bruchac is not only a prolific author but a popular speaker, and this autobiography
shows readers just how good a storyteller he is. The focus of this autobiography is
not the author so much as his grandfather, Jesse Bowman, a man who never dis-
cussed his Abenaki Indian ancestry but still managed to pass some of his knowl-
edge of the sacred onto his grandson. As Grandpa Jesse and Grama were the
loving, emotional center of Bruchac's life, they are the center around which re-
volve these family stories, from his early memories of a warm and loving childhood
in his grandparents' house to his difficulties fitting in in elementary school to his
later memories of success in college. Each chapter opens with a section in italics
that is either a retelling of a traditional American Indian tale or an experience-
enriched personal story that sheds light on what is to follow. Bruchac's intimate
writing style suits the story of his young life, and each incident is plotted in such a
way as to provide both the insight and structure needed for effective storytelling.
Bruchac's current self-awareness informs the story of his life but does not over-
whelm it, and his clarity of vision is enhanced by both a sense of drama and a sense
of humor. Black-and-white photographs and a family tree are included. JMD
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH 
Lasting Echoes: An Oral History of Native American People;
illus. by Paul Morin. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 1997 
148p
ISBN 0-15-201327-X 
$16.00 
R Gr. 6-10
Bruchac uses the words of American Indians (including songs and poetry) from a
wide variety of tribes and sources to bring the history and plight of American
Indians after their initial encounter with European explorers to life. From first
238 
* 
THE BULLETIN
contact to questions of land ownership, from provoked resistance to assimilation,
this text sheds light on stories not found in standard history textbooks. Despite
the subtitle, this is a written, not oral, history, although it does use a great deal of
source material attributed to American Indian speakers and writers. Using ex-
cerpts from speeches, letters, and other source documents, Bruchac presents an-
other view of manifest destiny, describing the changing but nearly always detrimental
policies of the Federal Government regarding American Indians. This is a well-
constructed, involving presentation of an integral part of American history that's
often deliberately overlooked. Suggestions for further reading, sources for quota-
tions, acknowledgments, and an index are included. JMD
CARREIRO, CAROLYN 
Hand-PrintAnimalArt; written by Carolyn Carreiro; illus.
by Carolyn Carreiro and A. J. Greenwood. 
Williamson, 1997 
14 4p 
(A
Williamson Kids Can! Book)
Paper ed. ISBN 1-885593-09-0 
$14.95 
R 
3-8 yrs
Take EdEmberley's Great Thumbprint Drawing Book and make the fun even slop-
pier, and you have this recipe for some gooey mess-terpieces. The print art projects
are organized into chapters by animal type-birds, sea creatures, bugs, forest and
backyard wildlife, farm animals, pets, and "animals from near and far." Although
the book's layout and binding are far from slick, the concise, numbered directions
show children how to form more than sixty critters by painting specific parts of
their fingers and hands and pressing them on paper. Projects are rated according
to three levels of difficulty, but even the most challenging should be manageable
for many young crafters. Each set of directions is accompanied by sidebar tidbits
about the animal and an additional activity suggestion, making this a valuable
sourcebook for youth-group leaders and strong-nerved classroom teachers. Haul
out the plastic dropcloths and get to it. EB
COLE, HENRY 
I Took a Walk; written and illus. by Henry Cole. 
Greenwillow,
1998 
[20p]
ISBN 0-688-15115-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
"I sat in the cool shade," says the narrator, "and poked my head through the soft
fern. I saw. .. " Unfold the flap for a verdant, triple page acrylic spread in which
various woodland creatures are camouflaged. A list of fauna (and an occasional
plant or nest) appears unobtrusively to the left, and the nature observation game
repeats for meadow, stream bank, and pond edge. Some items are easy to identify
and locate-water lily, green snake, wood duck family; others are trickier-which
is the spicebush butterfly and which is the mourning cloak butterfly? Answers are
provided at the end, of course, and additional double spreads that challenge the
reader to discover "who's watching me?" offer an ungraded quiz of identification
skills. This is seek-and-find with a mission, and most readers won't discover they've
actually learned something until it's too late to back out. EB
CONFORD, ELLEN 
Crush. HarperCollins, 1998 
138p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025415-7 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025414-9 
$14.95 
R Gr. 6-9
In a series of interconnected tales, Conford describes the trials and tribulations of
a bunch of high-schoolers getting ready for the Valentine's Day dance, whimsi-
MARCH 1998 
* 239
cally entitled The Sweetheart Stomp. The introductory story opens with a de-
spondent B.J. surveying her classmates and musing on their love lives (or lack
thereof). Conford then swings into a chuckle-inducing parody of O. Henry's
"The Gift of the Magi" ("The Gifts of the Mangy"), followed by eight more tales
of teenage love triumphant-well, mostly. Conford's breezy prose eminently suits
her breezy plots, wherein a nerd gets a makeover and a new girlfriend, a Russian
exchange student parlays his (apparent) lack of English into a romantic date, and a
student breaks an ankle and finds a boyfriend in candy stripes at the local hospital.
Even quasi-narrator B.J. gets her wish when a nice guy who has admired her from
afar asks her to the dance. This is about as deep as a one-layer box of Valentine
candy, but it's still fun, and it will make a nice semi-substantive change from genre
fluff. JMD
COOPER, ELISHA 
Ballpark; written and illus. by Elisha Cooper. 
Greenwillow,
1998 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-688-15755-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
The Country Fair tents are down (see BCCB 9/97), and Cooper shifts venues to
the baseball diamond. It's game day, and there's an outfield to be mowed, uni-
forms to be laundered, cameras to be loaded, practice balls to be thrown ("A singer
belts out the anthem slightly flat and misses a few of the words, but no one seems
to mind .... Play ball"). Cooper reprises the visual format of his previous work,
creating and animating figures with little more than a smudge and a squiggle and
deploying them (and his hand-lettered text) as design elements in spare, stylized
compositions. Happily, he reprises his tidy phrasing ("the locker room smells of
cool lotion and warm feet") and restrained humor as well ("The umpire and the
manager get belly to belly. They get cheek to cheek. They get personal, and kick
dirt"). This offering should hold much the same behind-the-scenes appeal as
Kuskin's The Dallas Titans Get Ready for Bed (BCCB 10/86), with the bonus of an
elegant visual presentation that celebrates the on-field artistry of the boys of sum-
mer. EB
DAVENIER, CHRISTINE 
Leon andAlbertine; written and illus. by Christine Davenier;
tr. by Dominic Barth. 
Orchard, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-531-30072-2 
$15.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
Leon the pig's life follows a pattern of pleasant predictability-a "wallow in a mud
puddle with good friends." But then he is smitten by the charming chicken,
Albertine, and he seeks the advice of other animals on how to woo and win her.
"The best way to get a chicken's attention is to sing," claims the rooster, but Albertine
snores through Leon's performance. "Get tough! Women love us because we're
strong," snorts the bull, but Albertine is "indifferent" to Leon's prowess at juggling
sheep. It's only when Leon abandons his adopted antics and returns to his endear-
ing old habits that Albertine recognizes his allure and joins him frolicking in the
mud. Davenier's dashing line and watercolor figures, which cavort on broad, milky
white spaces, have a feathery airiness reminiscent of Roger Duvoisin's work. If
listeners respond with an emphatic "Yuck!" it won't be for the joyous final mud
bath, but for Leon's whispered, "I love you, Albertine." EB
240 
* THE BULLETIN
DEFELICE, CYNTHIA 
The Ghost ofFossil Glen. 
Farrar, 1998 
[176p]
ISBN 0-374-31787-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Eleven-year-old Allie loves to roam the cliffs of Fossil Glen in search of the historic
stones within, but she's startled one day when a ghostly voice gets her out of a tight
spot there. Her erstwhile friends, Karen and Pam, decide that this is just another
ofAllie's annoying fictionalizations, but loyal Dub helps Allie pursue the mystery
when ghostly hints get stronger. Soon Allie is in trouble when she discovers the
identity and fate of the shade, whose murderer is still at large. The story's more
than a bit labored, and the subplot ofAllie's falling out with her shallow friends is
unnecessary and obvious, but this has an amiable energy with its local and very
recent (dead only four years and Allie's age when she died) ghost. This will engage
young readers looking for a quick supernatural read. DS
DUKE, KATE 
One Guinea Pig Is Not Enough; written and illus. by Kate
Duke. 
Dutton, 1998 
48p
ISBN 0-525-45918-9 
$15.99 
R 3-7 yrs
Tired of counting toes, fingers, sheep? Try guinea pigs. With a mathematical
focus, an irresistible cast of furry friends, lots of kid-appealing details, and enough
conflict to make it interesting, the book goes from one to ten, adding one guinea
pig per spread: "Two smiling guinea pigs plus one silly guinea pig make three
giggling guinea pigs." By the time we add the "ten mom or dad guinea pigs" there
is no doubt that "twenty is plenty," but it's still a fun equation. The title page
reveals the identity of each fuzzy rodent and then one plus one they appear: smil-
ing, being silly, giggling, dancing, jumping, being sorry, helpful, picnicking, even
fighting, while toys spill and bugs scamper. The tawny piggies frolic across deep
pastel settings lightly framed in gold, with each number problem standing tall
amidst the action. And just in case the increasing commotion distracted anyone,
the corresponding math calculation sits sedately in the bottom right-hand corner.
A bunch of guinea pigs plus plenty of hubbub equals quite a diversion from those
ho-hum math worksheets. PM
EVANS, DOUGLAS 
So What Do You Do? Front Street, 1997 
123p
ISBN 1-886910-20-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old Charlie is shocked when he sees his beloved teacher from third
grade homeless and panhandling. Aided by his assertive friend Colleen, he inves-
tigates further and discovers that Mr. Adams, who supposedly left teaching to
travel and write, is an alcoholic living in a crate in the park. At first Mr. Adams
resists the attention of Charlie and Colleen, but he's soon welcoming their visits;
when vandals attack the homeless and destroy his small shelter, the kids smuggle
him into the vacation-empty school and begin to contemplate the necessity for a
more permanent solution. There's a lot of neatness and convenience that strain
credibility (the fact that Charlie disappears with such frequency for nearly half a
year without parental questioning, for instance, and Mr. Adams' quick reentry
into life on the good side), and the book sometimes dips into sentimentality. There
are some interesting edges here, however, in Mr. Adams' loyal friend, a confirmed
panhandler with his own business cards, and with Mr. Adams' initial repulsiveness
and his later understandable reluctance to appear before the public as a supplicant.
Though young readers may get more caught up in the pleasurable idea of the
MARCH 1998 
* 241
school-age saviors, the message that the homeless aren't simply faceless ciphers will
be clear. DS
Fox, MEM 
BOO to a Goose; illus. by David Miller. 
Dial, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8037-2274-5 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
The old phrase about those who "wouldn't say boo to a goose" gets an amusing
treatment in this cumulative cautionary tale. Attractive cut-paper assemblages are
the real highlight of this poetic litany against "booing" said waterfowl. The dozen
or more rhymes tend toward the fantastic ("I'd dance with a pig in a shiny green
wig/ But I wouldn't say 'Boo!' to a goose"), the don't-try-this-at-home ("I'd dive
from a mountain right into a fountain/ But . . . "), or the silly ("I'd skip across
town with my pants hanging down/ But... "), and some of them are a poetical
reach ("I'd take a long walk from here to New York"), but that's not likely to
disturb the intended audience much. A dark-headed tot stars in many of the
brilliant double-page spreads; piles of buttery cubes, translucent bee wings, and
vicious piranhas enjoying pajamas provide additional visual amusement for lapsitters.
Extend the fun by letting listeners try some of their own "Boo" verses. PM
GELMAN, RITA GOLDEN, ad. 
Queen Esther Saves Her People; illus. by Fran6
Lessac. 
Scholastic, 1998 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-47025-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Ahasuerus, the King of Persia, has selected beautiful Esther as his new queen, un-
aware that she is Jewish until his prime minister Hamen orders the destruction of
the Jews and Esther intervenes on their behalf. This skillful retelling of the Book
of Esther compresses but preserves the dramatic story even to Queen Esther's words
of courage as she dares face her king without being summoned, a breach of law
punishable by death: "If I die, I die .. ." Smoothly incorporated are the complex
plot twists of Esther's cousin Mordecai's informing the king, through her, of an
assassination plot, as well as the two dinner parties Esther gives to gain the king's
favor and engineer Hamen's humiliation and death. Gelman inserts the occa-
sional stylistic flourish without subtraction of dignity ("Ahasuerus was too busy
drinking and eating to bother with thinking"), and Lessac's illustrations extend
these flourishes visually. Her paintings employ flat perspective, deep, clear hues,
and naive figures and faces to play out the action. Each double spread is like a
theater set, with a full-page picture extended by motifs framing the text opposite.
Humorous details include an expressive lion accompanying Ahasuerus and two
snappy little dogs that Hamen keeps on spiked collars until they're released at his
downfall (Esther appears with a small white bird throughout). A brief note sets the
scene, and an informative three-page section at the end of the book describes tradi-
tional and current practices of celebrating Purim, the Jewish holiday associated
with Esther and Mordecai's triumph over their enemies. BH
GLASSMAN, MIRIAM 
Box Top Dreams. Delacorte, 1998 
184p
ISBN 0-385-32532-0 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Ariadne (from mythology, but Ari for short) and her very best friend, Danny, are
fifth-graders who love their world of comic book and magazine contests, fanciful
made-up games, and their creation of the soon-to-be longest gum-wrapper chain
242 
* 
THE BULLETIN
on record. Even the dreadful, self-appointed ruler of fifth grade, Martina Wallhoffer,
cannot disrupt their solidarity-until Danny moves. Ari is then miserable, a mis-
ery compounded by her beloved teacher's absence from school for two weeks ("A
substitute. And not just any substitute, but Mrs. Zwort, the meanest substitute of
all the subs who circulated in the school") and by Martina's not-easily-spurned
overtures of creepy friendship, which result in Ari's getting caught cheating on a
test and in a shoplifting nightmare. Then Ari's attempt to stir up her older sister's
love life with secret doses of "Passion Potion" misfires ("'Would somebody please
tell me what this little creep did that made me break out in this rash?' cried Lydia").
Ari is a very funny ten-year-old with wry observations about her very ten-year-old-
type problems. Mythological references are deftly woven into her narrative as this
modern Ariadne wanders through her Minotaurish maze towards autonomy. Her
much-needed stretch towards independence comes as she stands up to Martina's
bullying, gaining some unexpected new friends. Attentive readers will be watch-
ing for a sequel when they realize that the vengeful Martina thinks Ari still owes
her fifteen dollars for a mail-order makeup kit. PM
GREGORY, KRISTIANA 
Orphan Runaways. Scholastic, 1998 
[160p]
ISBN 0-590-60366-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Danny and his younger brother and sister lead a refined life in San Francisco until
the epidemic of 1878 takes their parents' lives and sends them to the orphanage.
Danny grabs brother Judd and flees to the mining town of Bodie, where their
uncle lives, and finds a way of life he'd never imagined: fights and gunplay are
common, a mustached woman runs a gambling den, kids are roaming around
unattended and independent, and his uncle is romantically involved with a young
Chinese woman. After getting a taste of the good and bad of the wild gold-rush
life (he gets a job, nearly gets rich from a discovery of lost gold, loses a friend, and
almost loses his brother to pneumonia), Danny starts to see the place-and his
uncle-in a more favorable light. Characters here are cardboard cutout, and the
events simply happen one after another with little sense of shape. Gregory's done
a fair amount of historical homework on the real mining town of Bodie, however,
and there's a colorful historical-travelogue flavor to the enterprise that should ap-
peal to youngsters who are looking for some wild west adventure with no emo-
tional entanglements. An author's note explains the factual elements of the book.
DS
GROVE, VICKI 
Reaching Dustin. Putnam, 1998 
[208p]
ISBN 0-399-23008-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-7
Carly desperately wants to be editor of the sixth-grade newspaper, a position that's
going to be awarded based on the merit of the students' in-class interviews. She's
therefore horrified when she draws Dustin Groat, a dirty and troublemaking child
of the swamp-dwelling, lawbreaking Groat family, who are rumored to grow mari-
juana and run a methamphetamine lab. Her interview increasingly reveals a Dustin
that no one knows-abused and lonely, fond of animals and talented at music-
and her interest leads her to the discovery that her older brother, too, has a connec-
tion with the Groat family through his romantic interest in Dustin's older sister.
As tensions rise between the school and Dustin and between the law and the Groats,
it looks like Carly's interest may have drawn her and perhaps some of her family
MARCH 1998 
* 243
into more trouble than she had imagined. Grove (author of The Fastest Friend in
the West, BCCB 7/90) has a knack for portraying kids on the outside of things, and
she doesn't shirk from Dustin's weirdnesses; Carly's recalled moment where she,
in the early grades, set Dustin up for jeering when he asked for help has real poi-
gnancy. The book lays it on a little thick, however, with the many strikes against
Dustin and misdeeds of the Groats as well as with the involvement of both Carly's
older and younger brothers. The drama of the outcast is still feelingly depicted,
however, and kids will understand both Carly's repugnance and her awakening
sympathy. DS
HAAS, JESSIE 
Fire!: My Parents'Story. Greenwillow, 1998 
[72p] 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-688-15203-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
A house fire is the stuff of nightmares, and this straightforward account of a family
tragedy is tightly written with a you-are-there perspective that will make begin-
ning chapter readers turn those pages fast. The heart-stopping details of family
members-the story is based on the childhood experiences of Haas' mother-
awakened at 3 A.M. ("Wake up! Wake up! The house is afire!"), futile attempts to
put out the fire ("Dad raises the pump handle for the first stroke. But something
feels wrong. The handle is loose, and when he pushes it down it comes off in his
hand"), and the harrowing retrieval of family treasures ("Soon they are all yelling
at Mom. 'Jessie! Jessie, hurry up!' Patty hugs her bear tighter, and she screams:
'Mom! Mom!"') are some of many gripping episodes in this fast-paced, absorbing
drama. Haas has enhanced her mother's story with lots of known particulars,
making readers the eyewitnesses not only to the compelling spectacle of this fire,
but of family life in rural Vermont in 1948, as well. Black-and-white snapshots
and an afterword provide a satisfying closure to the pyrotechnics in terms of the
family ("In 1958, ten years after he carried her out of the burning house, Bob Haas
married Pat Trevorrow") and their community ("Because of it, farmers all around
southern Vermont built fire ponds"). Whether read aloud or read alone, this is a
four-alarm winner. PM
HALL, ZOE 
The Surprise Garden; illus. by Shari Halpern. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-10075-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Gardening novices will enjoy this lighthearted agricultural mystery ("We're plant-
ing the seeds for a surprise garden. Can you guess what we will grow?"), in which
three siblings receive eleven different kinds of seeds from their mother and then go
about their horticultural business: sorting the seeds, working the soil, planting
and marking the seeds, watering, and watching their garden come alive. Cheerful
cut-paper collages accompany this simple botanical drama where an assortment of
vegetables, a watermelon, and a sunflower plant ripen into a late summer feast:
"We like to pick the food ... and eat it, too! SURPRISE! We're having a garden
party!" Assorted garden visitors (their pet dog, a rabbit, butterflies, dragonflies,
ladybugs, worms, bees, and assorted birds) decorate the garden palette while the
delighted faces of the children allude to the wonder of seed to seedling to plant to
"let's eat." An appended seed chart solves the mystery of "what we grew in our
surprise garden" (though the mystery of how these plants of disparate seasons came
244 * THE BULLETIN
in at the same time remains unexplained). This would be a good one to cultivate
young gardeners-to-be even before "April showers bring May flowers." PM
HARNESS, CHERYL 
Ghosts of the White House; written and illus. by Cheryl
Harness. 
Simon, 1998 
42p
ISBN 0-689-80872-0 
$16.00 
M 
Gr. 3-5
Sara's excited when her class takes a field trip to the White House, but she gets
more than she bargained for when George Washington pulls her into his portrait
and then serves as a guide on a private tour through the White House, introducing
her to the other late presidents on their way. Each spread includes brief sidebar
bios, with nicknames, birth and death dates, terms of office, and a summary presi-
dential sketch, on three or four presidents as they themselves discourse with Sara
and her guide in the relevant part of the house. The book gives a good sense of the
White House, with easy-to-read floor plans and detailed looks at the various rooms,
and there's a browsable amount of presidential and historical tidbits. The format
makes it hard to dig them out, however: the book is overcrowded and stuffed with
clashing elements (the speech balloons are in one font, the sidebars in another, and
room names and additional tidbits in still another) and often awkward drawing,
which make the spreads confusing and unattractive rather than enticingly packed;
the text, especially Sara's contributions, is often stilted (and it wrongly states that
Andrew Johnson was almost impeached). There's a brief overview of the living
men to hold the office, as well as a short bibliography. An appealingly graphic
timeline may entice kids but is difficult to use; a legend identifying all the presi-
dents in the group portrait is confusingly distant from the image it explains. Kids
hoping for real ghost stories will be disappointed; those searching for entertaining
brief presidential biographies will prefer Alice Provensen's The Buck Stops Here
(BCCB 10/90). DS
HARRISON, MICHAEL 
It's My Life. 
Holiday House, 1998 
[144p]
ISBN 0-8234-1363-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Abducted from the home of his rigid and controlling mother, Martin is terrified-
and then furious when he discovers that this is a plot of his mother and her boy-
friend (previously unknown to Martin) to get money from Martin's father. Things
get complicated, however, when it looks like Martin's father may not have the
money, and Martin escapes with the help of Hannah, his kidnapper's daughter.
The adults give chase and the kids become quarry in a high-tension game of cat-
and-mouse, and there's no certainty that the cat is merely playing. This is an
unusual youthful thriller, in which the more traditional adventure at the beginning
retains most of its energy and adds a layer of bitterness when the twist appears.
There are a few holes in the plot, but the characterizations are swiftly effective, and
the alternation of narration between Martin and Hannah capably conveys neces-
sary information in what could easily be an overcomplicated situation. This spin
on the classic kidnap tale will gratify cynical young readers. DS
HELLER, RUTH 
Mine, All Mine: A Book about Pronouns; written and illus. by
Ruth Heller. 
Grosset, 1997 
43p
ISBN 0-448-41606-9 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Heller (author of Up, Up and Way: A Book about Adverbs, BCCB 1/91, etc.) has
MARCH 1998 
* 245
worked her way through the grammar basics and is starting to tackle more com-
plex concepts. In her usual rhyme, she tackles simple pronoun concepts (expressly
addressing common areas of confusion, such as the subjective vs. the objective
case) and then moves into more complex areas such as indefinite pronouns and
relative pronouns (including the old who/whom bugaboo). The pattern of words
in bolded blue is sometimes overly subtle for the audience, and it's surprising that
Heller discusses "everyone" without addressing the common error of the plural
possessive. Those familiar with Heller's work, however, will appreciate how she
again makes a capable and effective book out of an unpromising concept: the
explanations are simple and clear, some of the verbal images are quite amusing,
and the list in the back of categorized pronouns will help many young students.
Heller's high-colored and cheerful art functions as both example and decoration,
and the circus of hues and activity will help maintain reader interest. For a differ-
ent approach to grammar, make this yours. DS
HEST, AMY 
When Jessie Came Across the Sea; illus. by P. J. Lynch. 
Candlewick,
1997 
40p
ISBN 0-7636-0094-6 
$16.99 
R Gr. 3-6
Jessie is thirteen when the village rabbi decides she should be the one to take his
ticket and go to America in his place. Jessie is frightened and her grandmother is
heartbroken at the thought of her so far away, but go she does. Once in New York
City, Jessie lives and works with the rabbi's cousin Kay, a dressmaker. She sews
lace, saves her pennies, and learns to read and write English. One winter day in
Central Park, Jessie meets Lou, a shoemaker and friend from the ship; they will
marry when Grandmother comes from the old country on a ticket bought by
Jessie's sewing money. The strong threads of family and faith run throughout this
unabashedly sentimental story of one family's immigrant experience. Hest's plot
is a familiar if romanticized one-the young immigrant comes to America and
works to bring the rest of the family over-and her narrative is heart-tuggingly
emotional. Lynch's idealized watercolors are dramatically composed, illustrating
the bustling streets of early twentieth-century New York City, the crowded interi-
ors of city tenements, and the emotional relationships and ties among the Jewish
family members; faces are emotion-filled, their expressions individualized and ar-
ticulated. The varying perspectives and the play of light, from ships tossing in a
rainstorm to the new arrivals standing at the ship's rail for their first glimpse of
America to pushcart-crowded streets, have an effective immediacy. Aside from
being a story that has relevance for many, this could be used to personalize a dis-
cussion of immigration issues both historical and current. JMD
HOFFMAN, MARY 
An Angel Just Like Me; illus. by Cornelius Van Wright and
Ying-Hwa Hu. 
Dial, 1997 
[26p]
ISBN 0-8037-2265-6 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
It's the Christmas season, and Tyler, a young African-American boy, is on a mis-
sion: his family's treetop angel is broken and needs to be replaced, and Tyler
wants to find one that looks like him. He scours the shops, but all he finds are
golden blond angels that bear little resemblance to himself. He even tells a depart-
ment store Santa (his art-student babysitter, Carl, moonlighting on the holidays)
about it. Finally, Tyler concedes defeat and settles for a star because "a star's the
same for everyone." On Christmas Day Tyler's mother hands him a "late delivery
246 
* THE BULLETIN
from Santa" (really from Carl) that turns out to be a "beautifully carved wooden
angel" that looks just like Tyler. The day after Christmas, Tyler and a variegated
assortment of smiling children show up at Carl's door as Tyler explains that "now
that my friends have seen my angel, they all want ... angels just like them!" The
watercolor illustrations feature an attractive cast of characters in appropriately fes-
tive holiday settings, depicted in a saturated palette of rich reds, golds, and blues.
This is a palatable message story with a strong emotional core lightened by the
humorous characterization of the somewhat cantankerous angel-seeker. Tyler is
appealingly tenacious and the fulfillment of his quest is satisfyingly achieved, with
the day-after denouement adding an extra fillip of satisfaction. JMD
HOWARTH, LESLEY 
Maphead: The Return. 
Candlewick, 1997 
237p
ISBN 0-7636-0344-9 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 6-9
In Maphead, Howarth introduced a most unusual character, a young boy from a
parallel universe who possesses unlimited power, power which places him outside
the norm in more ways than one. In this sequel, Maphead is cut adrift by his
omniscient father and sent into the world to find his "task." He is heartbreakingly
lonely, and, in a desperate effort to connect, he shares all he knows with Jack
Stamp, son of a family Maphead adopts in a parking garage. Thus, Maphead and
Jack each know everything the other knows; the problem is that Jack cannot handle
Maphead's knowledge because he does not possess Maphead's powers, and things
rapidly begin to unravel. When Maphead realizes his error, it is almost too late,
but he manages to make Jack forget most of the knowledge that has made him so
unhappy, saves Jack's baby sister from crib death, and takes a look at the future, in
which all is (happily) revealed. Howarth has a tight grip on realistic dialogue, and
her characters respond believably in the most unbelievable circumstances. This is
an intriguing speculation on the nature of personal power and the implications of
establishing and maintaining a moral center, but it needs the first novel to provide
the specificity for Maphead and his quest for self to make sense. Fans of the first
book will take a real fancy to this one; motivated readers who haven't read the first
novel and are attracted to Howarth's premise will probably seek out both of them.
JMD
HUGHES, SHIRLEY 
Alfie and the Birthday Surprise; written and illus. by Shirley
Hughes. 
Lothrop, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-688-15187-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
Hughes again demonstrates her finesse in this friendly tale about neighborliness,
cats, and a surprise birthday party. Bob and Jean MacNally, daughter Maureen,
and their elderly cat, Smoky, live across the street from Alfie's family. Smoky's
death followed by Bob's subsequent gloom casts a pall over his upcoming fifty-
second birthday celebration, but not for long. The MacNallys and Alfie's family
cook up a perfect celebration in a surprise format. It is extraordinary how expertly
Hughes has crafted a collection of homely little story details into such a vivid set of
particulars. Her dexterity with feline ways-such as Smoky's mesmeric stare at the
television while sitting on Bob's lap-is sure to bring smiles of recognition from
cat lovers. Alfie's role in the surprise will be appreciated by prospective cat owners
everywhere ("'I got him from a friend at school,' said Maureen, beaming. 'Will
you look after him till tomorrow? It's got to be a real surprise.' 'Oh, YES!' shouted
Alfie"). Text and art coalesce into a tender story that will blanket but never smother
MARCH 1998 
* 247
the listener with gentle humor and plenty of warmth. Read it again, and just try to
resist the urge to cuddle. PM
INKPEN, MICK 
Nothing ;written and illus. by Mick Inkpen. 
Orchard, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-0531-30076-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
The family in Number 47 is moving around the corner and, in cleaning out the
attic, the movers discover a beat-up, raggedy, stuffed something ("'What have we
got here?' said a voice. 'Oh, it's nothing,' said another. 'Let the new people get rid
of it'"). Misunderstanding his name to be "Nothing," the ragged toy is then en-
couraged by a helpful mouse to clear out before the New People show up. But
Nothing really is something, and listeners will relish picking out the clues as Noth-
ing meets a fox ("The fox sniffed at him. Its whiskers quivered. Its ears pricked. I
used to have ears and whiskers! thought Nothing"), sees a frog ("I used to have
stripes! thought Nothing."), and meets a cat (hint, hint) who takes him home to
meet the family. Voilh! "Nothing looked up at Grandpa and saw a face he knew.
The important thought inside his head popped open like a jack-in-the-box." Noth-
ing turns out to be "a little cloth tabby cat" once owned by Grandpa, and his
transformation from Nothing back to Little Toby (with some help from soap and
water and needle and thread) folds out into an engaging triple-page spread. Though
bland and somewhat rambling, this is a sweet toy story with a feel-good ending
and whimsically drawn characters; it may engender the rescue of some old teddy
somewhere. PM
JACKSON, SHELLEY 
The Old Woman and The Wave; written and illus. by Shelley
Jackson. 
DK Ink, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2484-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-9 yrs
In this modern fable, a crotchety old woman is irritated by and a little afraid of the
blue-green wave hovering over her home. She prepares for the eventual deluge by
making a boat out of an old washtub and covering her roof with an assortment of
umbrellas. She doesn't realize, however, that this wave is not only benevolent
(waking her in the morning, providing her with fish for her meals, playing with
her dog, Bones), but "the wave loved the old woman." A young stranger, who
seems to understand the wave's comeliness, broadens the narrow view of the old
woman, and when the weathered protagonist goes after her wave-riding dog, she
succumbs to the wave's charms. She and Bones set out in the washtub carried by
the wave, and "she didn't look back. She looked straight ahead at the mountains,
and the waves that carried her toward them." In this unusual tale, surrealistic
collage paintings, detailed with fragments of maps, musical scores, and multilin-
gual texts, merge the real and the fantastical with splashes of color and myriads of
shapes and viewpoints. There are some intriguing undertones here, and the urge
to linger over the clever and complex illustrations will be hard to resist. PM
KELLER, HOLLY 
Angela's Top-Secret Computer Club; written and illus. by Holly
Keller. 
Greenwillow, 1998 
[60p]
ISBN 0-688-15571-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
When someone breaks into the school computer and alters all the final report
cards, Angela recklessly brags that she and her computer club, who are meeting at
248 
* THE BULLETIN
school over the summer, will solve the mystery before the end of summer vacation.
The group is put on the track when one of them gets a mysterious email message
apparently meant for someone else; a follow-up message reveals another plan, An-
gela puts two and two together, and they trap the culprits in full view of school
authorities. This is a breezy and entertaining mystery for younger readers, and the
idea that school might be an entertaining place to be in summer is a refreshing one
(we're clearly entering the era of guilt-free geekdom). Keller's excellent with her
technical details, keeping them simple and clear but also accurate and generally
plausible, so that the story should appeal to technophiles without scaring off
technophobes. Two-color spot art appears on every spread; Keller's tidy but unprissy
lines make topknotted little Angela and her cohorts an accessible and realistic cast
(though all the computers seem to be missing their CPUs). The author has regis-
tered the domain given for the school (that of the bad guys belongs to somebody
else, which may lead to some trouble), and the final invitation to drop Angela a
note at her provided email address is genuine. Compukids will find it all hard to
resist. DS
KIMMEL, ELIZABETH CODY In the Stone Circle. Scholastic, 1998 
[240p]
ISBN 0-590-21308-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Cristyn's historian father takes Cristyn with him when he's researching in Wales;
this means she's spending the summer in the small Welsh village where her late
mother lived before emigrating to the U.S. More prosaically, it means sharing the
old cottage with another scholar's family, so that Cristyn and sulky Miranda are
roommates, and troublemaking little Dennis is the source of various kinds of mis-
chief. Eventually it's clear that not all of the strange happenings can be blamed on
Dennis, as Cristyn begins to dream of times gone by and the phenomena (coins
falling out of nowhere, doors locking the girls in, typewriters typing of their own
accord) begins to point to a specific source: a Welsh girl, daughter of a prince, who
died some seven centuries ago but needs something still from the house. This is a
nice well-modulated ghost story that includes some classic trappings but empha-
sizes emotion rather than chills. Cristyn's narration is appropriately glib and con-
temporary, but her struggles with both the forces of the past (hers as well as the
house's) and the upheavals of the present have effective emotional undertones.
Those who prefer their ghosts with softer edges and fewer complexities will find
this highly readable. DS
KLASS, DAVID 
Screen Test. 
Scholastic, 1997 
2 51p
ISBN 0-590-48592-X 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 8-10
A sixteen-year-old would-be veterinarian lands a starring role in a Hollywood film,
has her head turned by her charming costar, and rejects glamour in favor of sub-
stance in this facile, unbelievable novel. When Liz ("People have always told me I
was pretty") Wheaton goes to Hollywood, she quickly finds that life in the fast
lane is not easy: her mother's friend Peg wants a relationship but can't commit if
it doesn't conform to a Hollywood fantasy, her leading man, Tommy Fletcher,
wants to be a star and will recreate himself at will to accomplish his goal, superagent
Samantha Wong wants Liz as a client, and Liz doesn't know what she wants. This
sort of environment ought to generate some excitement, or at least some glamor-
MARCH 1998 
* 249
ous trash, but the preachy, ponderous text never does. Liz's first-person narration
has little tonal variability, sounding the same whether she is describing her on-
camera makeup or her attempted seduction by boy-wonder Fletcher. Her feelings
about Eric, the boy she left behind, are somewhat vague, and their reunion is
remarkably tepid. Liz, the most developed of the novel's characters, is still not
fully realized, and when she rejects Hollywood and its superficiality, it is a decision
without impact because there has been little evidence of her internal life. The
cover (on which a blushing Liz and her costar share a kiss) will attract adolescent
girls, who will probably snort in disbelief at the story and move on. JMD
LIPINSKI, TARA 
Triumph on Ice: An Autobiography; as told to Emily
Costello. 
Bantam, 1997 
116p
ISBN 0-553-09775-X 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-8
By the time this review appears, we'll know if the title has an ironic ring or victo-
rious overtones, but Lipinski followers will still enjoy this chatty account of the
fourteen-year-old skater's rise to stardom. Don't look here for depth or subtlety,
but then that's not what readers want from this kind of book. The narrative is
appealingly anecdotal and refreshingly free of preachiness (though Lipinski works
hard, she openly enjoys the glamour); readers may not envy the work that goes
into her skating (a day-in-the-life chapter makes the labor clear), but they'll wish
they had the talent, the fame, and the endless supply of dogs. Short chapters and
easy phrasing make this a useful hi-lo, and readers of all stripes will love imagining
that that's exactly how they'd be if they were skating stars. Appendices include a
list of Lipinski's favorite things, a useful guide to scoring in figure skating, and a
glossary of skating terms; a hefty insert of color photos shows Lipinski on and off
the ice from early childhood to now. DS
LUCAS, EILEEN 
Cracking the Wall: The Struggles of the Little Rock Nine; illus. by
Mark Anthony. 
Carolrhoda, 1997 
48p
ISBN 0-87614-990-5 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
This easy reader tells the story of the Little Rock Nine, the nine African-American
students who integrated Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas in 1957.
Lucas individualizes the students, calling them by name and giving information
about their enthusiasms (glee club, track, band) that makes them people instead of
icons. Despite a merely utilitarian text, the facts of the case may be enough to rivet
young readers: the nine students are turned away from the high school by angry
mobs and by soldiers placed by the governor of Arkansas, and it is only when
President Eisenhower sends the United States Army to Little Rock that the stu-
dents are successful in their attempt to attend school. An afterword gives addi-
tional information on the students' sojourn at Central High School and includes
an account of the thirty-year reunion of the Little Rock Nine there in 1987: "This
time the crowd that greeted them cheered them as heroes. The president of the
student body was a young black man. The mayor of Little Rock was a black
woman." Lucas' succinct text is illustrated with watercolors in an earthy palette,
and although the drafting of the human figures is awkward and the compositions
are pedestrian, the pictures still pack a subliminal punch as sunglassed students,
helmeted soldiers, and angry mob confront one another. A photograph of the
Arkansas Nine accompanies the afterword. JMD
250 
* THE BULLETIN
McCuLLY, EMILY ARNOLD 
Beautiful Warrior: The Legend of the Nun's Kung Fu;
written and illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. 
Levine/Scholastic, 1998 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-590-37487-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 7-10yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 233, for review.
MAHY, MARGARET 
Beaten by a Balloon; illus. by Jonathan Allen. 
Viking,
1998 
26p
ISBN 0-670-87697-6 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Sam Appleby wants a sword, but his dad reminds him that there can be "no violent
toys in our family!" and he has to make do with a sunflower and a balloon instead.
This is difficult because Hacky Mackie, an irritating neighbor boy, has a sword, a
plastic dagger, a slingshot, and a laser gun, and he obviously thinks the arsenal-
deprived Sam is a sissy. Hacky Mackie and his equally obnoxious father get their
anticipated comeuppance when Buckbounder, a bank robber on springs, attempts
to rob the bank (wherein all the aforementioned characters wait in line) and is
foiled by Sam and his father with the help of a chocolate cake, the sunflower pot,
and an exploding balloon. Don't look too hard for logic-the point here is the
silliness of it all as Mahy pokes fun at just about everything, including Dad Appleby's
stance against toy weaponry. Allen's cartoony illustrations (reminiscent of James
Marshall in their use of black outlined figures with simple yet expressive faces) suit
the goofy nature of this tall story, in which the masked bandit leaps about on giant
red springs and is undone by the flower pot on his head and the chocolate cake in
his nose. This would make a snortingly funny classroom readaloud and a handy
title to recommend to those children looking for an unusual early readalone. JMD
MARSHALL, 
JANET 
Banana Moon; written 
and illus. 
by Janet
Marshall. 
Greenwillow, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-688-15768-8 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
"Look out the porthole," the first spread exhorts, "and see ... a peach," and indeed
a peach shows through the die-cut hole in the recto-until a turn of the page puts
the word "sunrise" under "a peach" and the orange globe reveals itself to be the sun
setting behind a palm tree. Similarly, a striped row of candy canes reveals itself to
be candy-cane sailboat sails, saltwater taffy reveals itself to be a saltwater taffy turtle
shell, and so on as food turns into various travel sights. Some of the conceptual
conversions rely too much on fancy for their effectiveness, but it's a fanciful kind
of book and the game has some spice. The artwork, clean-edged collage in tropi-
cal-punch colors, balances its busy whimsicality with simple lines and designerly
shapes, and the thoughtful design of the book (typefaces carefully linked but vary-
ing) ties things together effectively. Kids not ready for the drawing games of Istvan
Banyai (Zoom, BCCB 2/96, and others) will have their eyes opened to some possi-
bilities here. DS
MARTIN, JAMES 
Frogs; illus. with photographs byArt Wolfe. 
Crown, 1997 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-70906-6 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-70905-8 
$15.00 
R Gr. 4-6
Sometimes it's hard for amphibiaphiles to defend their case, but this book packed
with luminous close-up photographs of various members of the frog family should
MARCH 1998 
* 251
help considerably. The book moves from characteristics to habitats, from defenses
to elaborate adaptations, from reproduction to ecology. Some of the text isn't as
clear as it might be (the frog across from "All frogs have triangular bodies" doesn't
look particularly triangular, for instance), but it has a dash and insouciance un-
usual in younger nonfiction (Martin notes that sucking the water out of the stor-
age bladder of the white-spotted burrowing frog "can be a lifesaver for the
Aborigines, but doesn't do much for the frog's chances"). Readers will relish read-
ing natural history tidbits about frogs that freeze solid for the winter and the eti-
quette of frog calls. Glossy, deep-hued photographs of lustrous frogs are worthy of
amphibian centerfolds; even the poisonous frogs, who theoretically "advertise their
toxicity with warning colors that signify danger," will make young readers want to
touch. Pictured frogs are identified by common name, scientific name, and habi-
tat. Between the enticing details in the text and the spectacular froggy photogallery,
readers'll be ribbeted. An index is included. DS
MARTIN, RAFE, ad. 
The Brave Little Parrot; illus. by Susan Gaber. 
Putnam,
1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22825-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
Since the opening double spreads of this book seem to indicate the realistic setting
of a forest fire, it comes as a surprise when the titular parrot begins to think and act
heroically ("Suddenly a desperate idea, a way to save them, came to her"). Even
more surprising-after she makes several trips with a cupped leaf full of water and
with flames charring her wings-is the appearance of a collection of gods and
goddesses, one of which appears to be the Hindu deity Ganesha (or, to the untu-
tored eye, an elephant with human feet), along with Vishnu and Lakshmi, both
unidentified but traditionally attired. It is not really until this moment of visual
clues that the whole story comes together for the informed reader as a myth from
India, since this is never mentioned in the text. One of the gods takes the form of
an eagle (Vishnu's traditional vehicle is the gigantic bird Garuda) and sheds tears
over the parrot's valiant efforts, putting out the fire and turning the parrot's new
feathers into bright colors. Gaber's paintings sometimes make effective use of deep
color contrasts, but the somber tones become muddy in several spreads. The drafting
is capable but uninspired, and some of the animals are more cute than dignified.
It's simply mystifying why this story was not put into its cultural context, where,
despite its pedestrian language and images, it would have been much more under-
standable and a lot less sentimental. BH
MASTOON, ADAM, comp. 
The Shared Heart: Portraits and Stories Celebrating Les-
bian, Gay, and Bisexual Young People; comp. and illus. with photographs by Adam
Mastoon. 
Lothrop, 1997 
88p
ISBN 0-688-14931-6 
$25.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7 up
Forty young people, ranging from teenagers to young adults in their twenties,
relate their experiences as gay, lesbian, or bisexual. Subjects tell of coming out,
depression and joy, parents (supportive and otherwise), and friends lost and kept.
Each spread contains an essay from the subject (identified by first name and age),
an oversized black-and-white photograph, and a handwritten message; the tone of
the essays leans strongly towards the earnest and somber, to the point where the
voices can sound a bit repetitive and the rare bits of humor are a relief. It's also a
gap, in a book openly discussing teen sexuality, that there's virtually no mention of
252 
* THE BULLETIN
any sexually transmitted diseases, HIV or otherwise. The photographs, which
apparently tour as a show on their own, are the high point here; sensitive and
beautiful portraits of an ethnically and experientially diverse collection of indi-
viduals, they picture a group that nervous young readers wouldn't mind being a
part of (though the subjects do seem uniformly and age-atypically clear-skinned,
good-looking, and slender). Less lively and individual than Roger Sutton's Hear-
ing Us Out (BCCB 11/94), this nonetheless has a solidity and respectability that
may well reassure parents as well as teens just approaching the topic. A resource
guide including books, organizations, and websites is included. DS
MILLER, WILLIAM 
Richard Wright and the Library Card; illus. by Gregory
Christie. 
Lee & Low, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 1-880000-57-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
In this fictionalized account of an incident in his life, a young, intellectually curi-
ous Richard Wright talks a white co-worker into letting him use his library card,
thus bypassing a Jim Crow law that said black citizens could not use the white
library. Braving the suspicion and stares of the white librarian and library patrons,
Wright checks out some books, ostensibly for his white co-worker. When asked
by the librarian, "Are you sure these books aren't for you?" he replies, "No
ma'am . . . heck, I can't even read" and is allowed to leave, his stack of books
intact. After some time passes, Wright finally has enough money to buy a ticket to
Chicago where he hopes to start a new life, and on the train, "the words came back
to him, the stories more real than the train itself. Every page was a ticket to free-
dom, to the place where he would always be free." Adapted from Wright's autobi-
ography, Black Boy, this promotes, despite limited child appeal and a lack of historical
context, a belief in the ability of books to change lives for the better. Acrylic and
colored pencil illustrations by artist Christie (who made his picture-book debut
with The Palm ofMy Heart, BCCB 12/96), although compositionally inconsis-
tent, contain images that have a strength and emotionality that is both evocative
and moving, particularly in the large, workmanlike hands and the starkly bare
backgrounds. Within the sterile walls of his room and his workplace, a young
Wright reads and knows he will never be the same again. An author's note gives
some additional biographical information about Wright. JMD
MULLINS, PATRICIA 
One Horse Waiting for Me; written and illus. by Patricia
Mullins. 
Simon, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81381-3 
$16.00 
R 2-5 yrs
Ideal for those young ones who perked up to "All the Pretty Little Horses" in their
cradle, this is a counting book of dream horses. Starting with "one horse waiting
for me," the book proceeds through half-a-dozen couplets describing horses "proud
and strong" and "wearing ribbons and prizes" and finally reaches an even dozen
"running wild and free." Mullins' illustrations depict exquisitely desirable equines
both fantastical (silvery mer-horses roaming the sea) and real (a chestnut and dapple
gray companionably engaging in mutual grooming as they swish away flies), and
her familiarity with horsey detail shines through. The paint and collage artwork is
a far cry from the more common sharp-edged shapes in that medium: Mullins
employs the softest of edges, leaving fibers to create a touchable nap at the bound-
aries and sometimes working with individual strands, allowing them to stream
MARCH 1998 
* 253
across as manes and tails; her frosty painted highlights add a delicate glitter that
gives the proceedings a crystalline prettiness without sinking the book into saccha-
rine sweetness. Little ones will particularly enjoy the fillip at the end, where the
spread that should show the final dozen reveals their empty paddock instead; a
turn of the page shows the escaping herd in full gallop. There's no story here
except for horses and more horses, but that will be enough for many young
equiphiles. DS
MURPHY, JIM 
West to a Land of Plenty: The Diary of Teresa Angelino
Viscardi. Scholastic, 1998 
[208p] 
illus. with photographs 
(Dear America)
ISBN 0-590-73888-7 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
"I Hate Poppa. And Momma-for letting him do this to us! And Uncle Eugenio-
I hate him for seeing the advertisement and for making Poppa leave our street."
Teresa vents to her diary her considerable displeasure with her family's move from
New York City to the wilds of "THE WESTERN TERRITORY OF IDAHO,
WHERE LAND IS CHEAP AND THE SOIL IS OF THE RICHEST KIND."
As their train sluggishly chugs its way toward the frontier, younger sister Netta
worms her own entries into the diary, and soon the two complementary (and
occasionally bickering) voices paint a pretty complete picture of the rail/wagon
train journey west. Outgoing Netta records the characters and pranks along the
route; Teresa soon revels in the newfound opportunities, away from the watchful
eyes of her family, to tackle "boys' jobs" and to pursue her first romance. What
could have been merely another overland trail story is considerably enriched by
Murphy's attention to the rapid and profound Americanization of these fictional
Italian immigrants as they meet the exigencies of wagon train life-Teresa's father
wiggles out from under the authoritarian thumb of his older brother Eugenio, and
even superstitious, platitude-spouting Nanna relaxes some of her Old World atti-
tudes. Newcomers to the series will find this an enticing selection, and readers
who are already hooked will recognize it as one of Dear America's stronger entries.
EB
NOLAN, DENNIS, ad. 
Androcles and the Lion; ad. and illus. by Dennis
Nolan. 
Harcourt, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-15-203355-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
This tale of an escaped slave befriended by a wounded lion has long held a place in
the popular imagination. Androcles escapes from his cruel master into the Egyp-
tian desert, preferring to die of thirst than remain in captivity. When Androcles
removes a crippling thorn from a lion's paw, the friendship between man and lion
is assured. The two live in harmony until Androcles is captured by Roman soldiers
and taken to the Circus Maximus, where he is thrown into the arena to be killed by
a wild beast for the amusement of the Emperor Tiberius and other spectators. The
beast turns out to be Androcles' lion friend, and the two are granted their freedom
by order of the Emperor. The relationship between man and beast is the crux of
this fable, and Nolan's text gently emphasizes that relationship as he describes how
"the lion brought food to Androcles, and Androcles brought companionship to
the lion." The full-page illustrations, rendered in a monochromatic sepia palette,
are uneven, with occasionally clumsy compositions and exaggerated facial expres-
sions distracting from the whole. The most successful illustrations are those that
254 * THE BULLETIN
portray the fabled friendship, featuring slave and lion together. Despite the un-
even visual presentation, this classic story may well find a new audience with Nolan's
retelling. An author's note neatly explains the origin of the tale. JMD
OROZCO, Josfi-Luis, comp. 
Diez Deditos/Ten Little Fingers &r Other Play Rhymes
andAction Songs from Latin America; comp. and tr. by Jos6-Luis Orozco; illus. by
ElisaKleven. 
Dutton, 1997 
56p
ISBN 0-525-45736-4 $18.99 
R 
2-5 yrs
This collection of fingerplays and action songs in Spanish and English comes with
clear instructions for physical movements and simple musical notation. A brief
sentence or paragraph introduces each entry (the musical notation, which usually
includes chording, is given for each song); the text in Spanish and English partners
a column of pictographs that illustrate the appropriate actions for each verse.
Orozco's selections, some traditional, some written by himself, include versifica-
tions on such child-appealing subjects as dancing, singing, animals, weather, and
food, as well as a few standards such as "The Wheels on the Bus" and "Where is
Thumbkin?" From the fireworks bursting off the endpapers to the ornamental
borders on each double-page spread, Kleven's collage illustrations practically pop
off the pages with flashy colors and rich details that make each bustling composi-
tion a viewer's delight. Parents, librarians, and other caregivers are going to use
this book till the stitching comes apart-better buy a reference copy, too. JMD
PANAGOPOULOS, JANIE LYNN 
Little Ship under Full Sail: An Adventure in
History. River Road, 1997 
146p
ISBN 0-938682-46-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In this fictionalized account, young Nellie Lytle, an ancestor of Girl Scouts founder
Juliette Gordon Low, is kidnapped by the Seneca and claimed as a family member
by a powerful young warrior and his mother. During her three years of residence
in Cornplanter's household, Nellie's courage, hard work, and quick grasp of a new
language win the respect of her new family and neighbors but fail to soften
Cornplanter's wife, who even attempts to poison the girl out of jealousy.
Cornplanter's support of his adoptive sister results in his wife's exile, and Nellie
looks forward to choosing a husband among her adoptive people. Panagopoulos
relates little of the efforts of Nellie's family and their agents to reclaim the girl and,
when Nellie is reintroduced to her natural parents at an arranged meeting, readers
are unprepared for how abruptly Nellie abandons the people with whom, we are
led to believe, she has so thoroughly assimilated. Moreover, Nellie's story has been
set into a slender, thoroughly extraneous plot involving Juliette Gordon's trip to
her grandparents' home during the Civil War. Readers who can brush these con-
cerns aside, though, will follow Nellie's sojourn with interest. EB
PAULSEN, GARY 
My Life in Dog Years; illus. by Ruth Wright Paulsen. 
Delacorte,
1998 
137p
ISBN 0-385-32570-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-10
In eight short chapters, Paulsen introduces readers to the dogs that have made a
difference in his life. The first-person narration tells stories about his dogs, who
were the friends and companions that supported and loved him through an un-
happy childhood, a turbulent adolescence, and a risky adulthood. Paulsen opens
MARCH 1998 
* 255
this book with a chapter-long dedication to Cookie, his lead sled dog, that in-
cludes the story of how she saved him from drowning when he fell through the ice
while ice-fishing. From this dramatic opening he segues into the story of his child-
hood in the Philippines and the rescue of his first dog, Snowball (who was almost
someone's dinner). After Snowball came Ike, a black Labrador that the author
found while hunting when he was twelve; and after Ike, Dirk, a mean alley dog
who adopted and protected the bullied Paulsen; and after Dirk, Rex, and after
Rex, Caesar, all the way to his current dog, Josh, a border collie. Paulsen had a
tough life early on, but he wastes no time on self-pity; rather, he describes the
activities-and the dogs-that helped him make it to the present. Each dog is
memorable, each one is greatly loved, and each chapter-long story is rivetingly on
target. This is a title with remarkable range-a great title for a booktalk, a terrific
title for reading aloud, and a remarkably successful book to offer hi-lo readers. All
you have to do is read the dedication to Cookie aloud, and this book will sell itself.
JMD
PEARSON, MAGGIE, ad. 
The Fox and the Rooster &' Other Tales; illus. by Joanne
Moss. 
Little Tiger, 1997 
77p
ISBN 1-888444-17-7 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
An introduction asserts that these fourteen tales are not the world's best-known
stories, i.e., "no Cinderella, no Little Red Riding Hood," but some of these are
nevertheless frequently anthologized, especially "The Pied Piper," "Stone Soup,"
and "The Fox and the Rooster." Others, such as "The Snow Child" and "Anansi
and the Scarecrow" are fairly well known, while tales such as "The Terrible Dibdib"
and "A Song for Hinemoa" will be new to most readers. The language is fluid and
rhythmic, with a natural cadence that makes these tales perfect for storytelling.
The illustrations, including full-page watercolor paintings and narrow picture strips
or ornamental borders above and below the text, are admirably drafted and subtly
hued, with a dynamic sense of motion in each large composition. Landscapes and
indoor scenes are equally vivid, and young readers will find the visual detail a
refreshing diversion without getting distracted by it. Each selection runs to three
or four pages of text, including considerable dialogue that suits the book for read-
ing alone as well as aloud. While the country of origin is given for each tale, no
source or context notes are included. BH
PECK, JAN, ad. 
The Giant Carrot; illus. by Barry Root. 
Dial, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1824-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1823-3 
$15.99 
R 
4-7 yrs
Tall Papa Joe has a hankering for a tall glass of carrot juice, wide Mama Bess
prefers "to park her lips on a wide bowl of carrot stew," strong Brother Abel wants
strong carrot relish, and sweet Little Isabelle longs for sweet carrot puddin'. While
the others fertilize, weed, and water a planted carrot seed, Little Isabelle sings and
dances, causing the apparently easily influenced carrot to grow to mammoth pro-
portions. The four family members pull up the carrot, and all culinary desires are
granted due to its generous size. Peck has taken the traditional Russian tale of the
great big enormous turnip and relocated it in an American rural setting with bare-
foot farmers, a rusty tin-roofed shanty, and a rosy Chevy on blocks in the side
yard. The language is catchily colloquial ("Well, for cryin' in a bucket. That carrot
sure takes a shine to Little Isabelle's singin' and dancin'" says Brother Abel), and
256 
* THE BULLETIN
Peck's new twist on this old tale may have real appeal for listeners as well as read-
ers-aloud. Root's watercolor and gouache illustrations feature characters of hardy
stock, with a graceful Isabelle dancing about the carrot top in a variety of appropri-
ately flowered shifts. The palette is burnished with a golden tone and, while the
faces could be more articulately rendered, the compositions are nicely balanced.
An author's note gives the sources for Peck's retelling. JMD
PRINGLE, LAURENCE 
Elephant Woman: Cynthia Moss Explores the World of El-
ephants; illus. with photographs by Cynthia Moss. 
Atheneum, 1997 
42p
ISBN 0-689-80142-4 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Cynthia Moss didn't start out as a scientist, but her trip to East Africa in the mid-
'60s introduced her to the world of elephants, which she's formally studied since
the early '70s. Now director of research at the Amboseli Elephant Research Project,
Moss has a full twenty-five years of experience with the habits and families of
elephants in Kenya's Amboseli National Park and sometimes with individual el-
ephants themselves. Pringle gives time both to the elephants Moss observes ("A
newborn calf... may trip over its trunk while walking. It also sucks on it in the
same way a human infant sucks its thumb") and the adventures and techniques of
observation ("After some other close calls with Bad Bull, Cynthia made a rule for
herself and other researchers: always have a clear escape route when near this
elephant"). The book also discusses the difficulty of balancing the needs of the
neighboring human population and those of the elephants and describes some
ongoing research projects. The specifics on elephant life (and the multitude of
photographs, especially some of irresistible babies) help make Moss' fascination
understandable, and her success in following her unexpected passion may hearten
young readers. An address, toll-free number, and URL are provided for the Re-
search Project; a bibliography and index are included. DS
RABINOVICI, SCHOSCHANA 
Thanks to My Mother; tr. from the German by James
Skofield. 
Dial, 1998 
[15 6p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8037-2235-4 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 8 up
Israeli citizen Schoschana Rabinovici chronicles her experiences of the Holocaust
as a child named Susie Weksler, eight years old when the Lithuanian city of Vilnius
falls to the Nazis in 1941 and thirteen when she is liberated (close to death) by the
Russians. In between comes a compelling story of the step-by-step destruction of
her extended family, first in the Vilnius ghetto where they are herded in Septem-
ber, and then in the camps of Kaiserwald, Stutthof, Tauentzien, and the transports
or forced marches in between. The extraordinary endurance and resourcefulness
with which her mother maneuvers to survive and save her daughter is exhaustively
detailed, et riveting. Throughout these ordeals, the author maintains an even
tone-supported by the restrained translation-that allows the facts to speak for
themselves; thus the reader is moved to feel the outrage that the victim leaves
unexpressed. Meticulously sequenced with the full scope of an adult book, this is
nevertheless well within reach and interest of good readers in junior high and high
school. Occasional black-and-white photographs illustrate the text, which also
features a few unrevised poems the author wrote during her imprisonment. One
of the most comprehensive and coherent of the recent young-adult Holocaust
memoirs, this will be an essential purchase where the subject is focus for curricu-
lum units. BH
MARCH 1998 
* 
257
RADCLIFFE, THERESA 
Bashi, Elephant Baby; illus. by John Butler. 
Viking,
1998 
26p
ISBN 0-670-87054-4 
$13.99 
R 3-6 yrs
Only hours after his birth, Bashi is up on his feet and following the herd to the
water hole. It's a rough first day for the elephant calf, who promptly finds himself
mired deep in the mud of the bank, with a trio of lionesses "waiting for a chance to
seize him." His grandmother, Lorato, charges the predators; his mother, Neo,
struggles to free him; and the herd moves in to enclose him amid their protective
legs. "Soon the little elephant could rest and sleep again. He would lie down in
the long grass beside his mother. Bashi had survived his first day." Simple text and
photorealistic paintings, which cast a golden haze over the events, keep the action
accessible and immediate. The storyline, which is at least as informative as it is
dramatic, generally avoids anthropomorphization; however, alert listeners will have
to wonder how and where these elephants got their names. EB
ROBERTS, WILLO DAVIS 
The Kidnappers: A Mystery. 
Karl/Atheneum,
1998 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-689-81394-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Joey Bishop (no, not thatJoey Bishop) is trying to avoid a beating from his archen-
emy, Willie Groves; while hiding, he sees Willie abducted. Nobody believes the
word of an imaginative eleven-year-old, so at first it's just Joey and his friend Pink
on the trail. Soon the police are involved, however, and they warn Joey to stay
home safe after a couple of attempts are made to silence him. Failing to heed their
good advice, Joey runs into the kidnapper in his own building, leading to his
captivity alongside Willie and possibly worse to come-unless he can figure out a
way to escape. There isn't a shred of likelihood in the whole story, and the charac-
terizations are gossamer-thin, but it's still a swiftly paced and involving read. Rob-
erts knows the conventions of her genre well; the book keeps within the necessary
constraints for a middle-grades crime story but spices it with danger and some kid-
heroism. If kids had airport books, this would be a good one. DS
ROCHE, DENIS 
Brave Georgie Goat: 3 Little Stories about Growing Up; written
and illus. by Denis Roche. 
Crown, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-70965-1 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-70964-3 
$15.00 
R 
2-4 yrs
In three pithy tales, Georgie Goat conquers a trio of toddler crises. The first tale,
"Georgie Goat's Mommy Goes," deals with separation anxiety as Georgie worriedly
asks her mother, "But if you go without me, how do I know that you'll come
back?" Georgie observes that when she throws her ball in the air she catches it
when it comes down, she sees the sun get covered by clouds and feels the warmth
when it comes back, and "she watched the sun set behind the trees, and just as she
was waiting for the moon and the stars to come back to the night ... Mommy
Goat came back too." Georgie Goat is a spunky little kid who deals with outgrow-
ing her "Best Friend Coat" and her bedtime fears with pluck and some under-
standing help from her loving grownup goats. Roche has already demonstrated
his ability to reach those hard to reach toddlers where they live (see Ollie All Over
and Only One Ollie, BCCB 6/97), and he is right on the mark with these spare
little tales. The opaque acrylic paintings have a dense quality about them that is
258 
* 
THE BULLETIN
reassuringly solid, whether depicting Mommy Goat with Georgie in her arms,
Georgie building a snowman in her yard, or Grandpa Goat expressing his fear of
the dark (in order to be reassured by Georgie, of course). Full and half-page paint-
ings show the brightly dressed characters outlined in black against a cozy domestic
background of green easy chairs, blue walls, and yellow floors. This is going to
make preschool anxieties seem a lot more manageable, and the nannies and billies,
mommies and daddies, are going to be glad to have it. JMD
ROCHELLE, BELINDA 
Jewels; illus. by Cornelius Van Wright and Ying-Hwa
Hu. 
Lodestar, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-525-67502-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Lea Mae spends the summers with her great grandparents 'Ma dear and Pop Henry,
summers that are punctuated by the family stories 'Ma dear tells-of how her
great-great-great-grandfather and his family escaped from slavery with the aid of
Harriet Tubman, of how her first child died because the hospital "didn't take
colored people then," of how her grandfather was a Buffalo Soldier who fought in
the Civil War, of how she herself met Count Basie and Duke Ellington, "the roy-
alty of jazz." The family history described by 'Ma dear and Pop Henry is illus-
trated by nostalgic watercolors featuring an African-American extended family
bonded together by love and a common, remembered heritage. There is a great
deal of information crammed into the relatively small space of a picture book, with
the lengthy text becoming a veritable timeline of African-American history but
giving only brief, unsatisfying glimpses of potentially dramatic events. While the
sentimental illustrations show an attractive family dynamic, the physiognomy of
the figures is often awkwardly rendered. Lea Mae shows how moved she is by her
family history when she promises 'Ma dear to remember and tell the stories: "'Ma
dear smiles. 'With each tongue, with each telling, the stories are saved.' As proof,
she opens my mouth, and word for word, I remember: Like diamonds, sapphires,
and rubies, the stories are like jewels to treasure forever." Despite being over-
crowded with text and events, this book may motivate some family storytelling.
JMD
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Henry andMudge and the Sneaky Crackers: The Sixteenth Book
of Their Adventures; illus. by Sucie Stevenson. 
Simon, 1998 
40p
ISBN 0-689-81176-4 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 1-2
Henry and his big dog, Mudge, are no strangers to librarians or young readers, and
those raised on the earlier titles will be happy to see this one with its slightly more
sophisticated language and storyline. In three longer chapters (about ten pages
each) than the usual short four, Henry becomes enamored of spies because of a
television show called The Man in the Mask. He empties his piggy bank in order to
buy a spy kit from the toy store, and he and Mudge go spying. Henry discovers a
coded message, cracks the code, and meets another boy who also loves spying.
They form a club called "Crackers," "and for ID, they always carried some real
crackers in their pockets. Did Mudge ever love THAT!" This friendly familiar
pair move easily into the next reading level without sacrificing any of their charm.
Stevenson's watercolors show a slightly taller Henry happily wearing dark sun-
glasses and standing next to a fedora-sporting Mudge. Henry not only acquires a
spy kit, he acquires a friend, and all indications point to a whole slew of new
adventures. JMD
MARCH 1998 
* 
259
SABUDA, ROBERT 
Cookie Count: A Tasty Pop-Up; written and illus. by Robert
Sabuda. 
Little Simon, 1997 
20p
ISBN 0-689-91101-8 
$19.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Baking-mad mice are in a kitchen frenzy: first it's just one mouse with a single
cookie, but as the count mounts he's joined by a second mouse for the two coco-
nut kisses, a third for the three pinwheels, and so on, until there are eventually ten
mice in a gingerbread house with a window for each. Sweets and popups are a
seriously appealing combination, and Sabuda hasn't stinted on either: the mice
(whose flat planes and slightly graded tones are reminiscent of Eric Carle) frolic
amid a riot of ingredients and products with intricate structures lifting the story
above the pages (the five mice, for instance, all tug different fortunes out of the five
fortune cookies, and the Linzer cookies lie mouthwateringly on a shiny heart-
shaped rack). Between the eventful art and the elaborate popups, the visuals some-
times drown themselves out (it'll take kids awhile to realize that counting the mice
is worth doing); more problematically, the pages haven't surmounted the age-old
fragility problem of paper engineering, and it won't take many openings before the
pinwheel stops spinning and mice suffer structurally from their confinement (the
fortune cookie page, which must be opened completely in order to see the for-
tunes, looks likely to be the site of an early rodent fatality). At least the first time
through, while everything still works, kids are going to find the book irresistible.
DS
SAN SoucI, ROBERT D., ad. 
Two Bear Cubs: A Miwok Legend from California's
Yosemite Valley; illus. by Daniel San Souci. 
Yosemite Association, 1997 
[36p]
ISBN 0-939666-87-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
While Mother Grizzly Bear is fishing, her playful cubs wander away and fall asleep
on a flat rock that begins to grow toward the sky. Gray Fox, Badger, Mother Deer,
Mountain Lion, and White-footed Mouse help look for them until Red-Tailed
Hawk reports that they are napping atop a towering mountain. The cliffsides
prove too steep for all the animals except tiny Measuring Worm, who inches up-
"Tu'-tok! Tu'-tok!"-and guides the frightened cubs back to their frantic mother.
The story is dramatically told to hold young listeners despite the longish text-
there's nothing like a little separation anxiety to maintain suspense. The full-page
watercolor paintings have a pebbly texture, with dominant browns and grays sur-
prised by the sudden contrast of the red and green worm. Invertebrate heroes
seem to enthrall the popular preschool imagination, from Richard Scarry's Lowly
Worm in his many outings to Leo Lionni's Inch by Inch, which would make cre-
ative company for this in a storytime program. Drafted for soft appeal to younger
viewers, the characters are depicted as the legendary "animal people" of the Miwok
and are dressed in traditional garb; San Souci is careful to document his sources,
describe the context, and suggest related background readings (including Internet
resources). BH
SEAGO, KATE Matthew Unstrung. Dial, 1998 
[240p]
ISBN 0-8037-2230-3 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Seventeen-year-old Matthew is studying his heart out at bible college, but it doesn't
seem to get him anywhere; the more his marks plummet, the more he worries, and
260 
* THE BULLETIN
the more he worries, the worse his marks seem to get. His main fear is that he'll
disappoint his father, a stern preacher and Edwardian paterfamilias, and his fears
are well-grounded-when low grades lead to his expulsion, which then causes a
nervous breakdown, his father severs all contact and Matthew is incarcerated in an
asylum. After weeks of abuse, he's rescued by his black-sheep brother, Zack, who
takes him out west to his ranch; there Matthew gradually returns to the world
from his near-autistic withdrawal. Seago writes well of the intense pressure Mat-
thew feels and of the world of a student in 1910, and her description of Matthew's
incarceration (apparently based on her grandfather's experiences) is raw and hor-
rific. In the second half of the book, depicting Matthew's slow recovery, Matthew
is seen almost entirely through the eyes of others, which may distance some read-
ers. Many, however, will find the drama of his return and the careful portrayal of
complicated family relationships compelling (and they'll appreciate the budding
romance between Zack and the young woman who takes care of Matthew). Teens
will empathize with Matthew's parental trials, and fans of rescue dramas such as
Goodnight, Mr. Tom will relish Matthew's triumph. DS
SHANNON, 
DAVID 
A Bad Case of Stripes; written and illus. by David
Shannon. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-92997-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
Camilla Cream "was always worried about what other people thought of her." She
secretly loves lima beans and doesn't want her food fetish to ruin her popularity
with her lima-bean-hating friends. Things quickly take an odd turn when Camilla
gets a really weird disease. Initially she breaks out in rainbow stripes (but it gets
weirder) and finally ends up turning into whatever the people around her suggest
("An Environmental Therapist claimed she could cure Camilla. 'Close your eyes,'
she said. 'Breathe deeply, and become one with your room.' 'I wish you hadn't
said that,' Camilla groaned"). Kids will giggle and gasp at the story of peer pres-
sure run amok as one zany scene outdoes the other (Camilla's transformation into
her bedroom, with mattresses for lips, is uniquely strange and very funny). The
exaggerated, solid, puppet-like characters who encounter Camilla's chameleon ways
are comically appropriate to this droll take on being true to oneself, and the antici-
pated cure (lima beans) provides everyone with much-needed relief from Camilla's
Technicolor trauma. PM
STRASSER, TODD 
Kidnap Kids. 
Putnam, 1998 
[208p]
ISBN 0-399-23111-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Narrator Steven Marks and his younger brother Benjy have burned out the string
of nannies, baby-sitters, and assorted caregivers hired by their parents to tend them
at all hours of the day and night. Lawyer Mom promises the domestic turmoil will
end when her high-profile trial is over, and Dad swears he'll be finished with his
overseas project soon, but the boys have heard those lines once too often. On a
disappointing weekend at the family's new getaway cabin, they handcuff their
parents in place until they agree to leave work alone for the weekend. But family
bliss is not forthcoming, because they have been followed to their secluded retreat
by members of the terrorist gang Mom is prosecuting, and the "getaway" weekend
takes on a whole new meaning. Readers aware of the terrorist trials currently in
MARCH 1998 
* 
261
the news may find this serious theme sits uncomfortably alongside of the slight,
lighthearted discipline-the-parents plot. Still, the boys and their latest body-pierced,
junk-food-guzzling babysitter provide some laughs, and the workaholic parents
who throw promises and money at their children's loneliness and need are all too
eerily credible. EB
SUEN, ANASTASIA 
Man On The Moon; illus. by Benrei Huang. 
Viking,
1998 
32p
ISBN 0-670-87393-4 
$15.99 
R 4-6 yrs
This is an accessible, close-up look at the Apollo 11 moon landing with a graceful
and streamlined text: "It was 1969.... Astronauts Collins, Aldrin, and Armstrong
suited up. Each had flown in space, but no one had ever touched the moon. No
one. Some said it couldn't be done. Astronauts Collins, Aldrin, and Armstrong
were going to try." From liftoff to moon landing to splashdown, Suen's spare text
and Huang's spacious watercolors give viewers and listeners an astronaut's-eye view
of the history-making proceedings. The illustrations have a clarity that lends itself
to group viewing, with open, uncluttered yet dramatic compositions. This is sure
to be a hit with astronaut wannabes and could serve as early nonfiction indepen-
dent reading as well. An historical note is included. JMD
TABACK, SIMMs, ad. 
There Was an Old Lady Who Swallowed a Fly; ad. and illus.
by Simms Taback. 
Viking, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-670-86939-2 
$14.99 
R 4-7 yrs
Simms takes this familiar, oft-reillustrated rhyme/song and gooses it up with a
tipsy-looking old lady, some editorializing animals, and some well-placed cutouts.
The mixed-media and collage illustrations have rollicking compositions and eye-
catching details, with the old lady gulping down the domestic fauna (viewed through
a tummy cutout) while additional fauna make comic asides. The old lady's body
gets bigger and bigger and her expression becomes more and more maniacal, until
the final moment of truth: after she swallows a horse, "she died, of course!" (The
asides at this point include "I'm filled with remorse," "It was the last course," "It is
such a loss," "She had no time to floss," "She missed out on the sauce," and "What's
left to say. We'll miss her dearly. Even the artist is crying.") The final page
includes the moral "Never swallow a horse" above a tombstone simply inscribed
"Here lies an old lady." This old lady has a gleefully irreverent charm that is going
to make kids crow with laughter at the gluttonous silliness. JMD
TARSKY, SUE 
The Busy Building Book; illus. by Alex Ayliffe. 
Putnam,
1998 
[26p]
ISBN 0-399-23137-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
From putting up that fence thing with the peep holes in it (please call it a "site
hoarding") to hauling the junk away in that big garbage bin (it's really "rubble" in
the "skip"), many stages and a hefty lexicon of terms are involved in the construc-
tion of a high rise office building. Although Tarsky supplies a few brief para-
graphs, it is Ayliffe's bright, cartoon-style double spreads that trace the process step
by step-boarding off the site; excavating and laying the foundation; raising the
steel skeleton; laying floors and ceilings, insulation and cable; creating interior
spaces; decorating and furnishing; and finally admiring and celebrating. Me-
262 
* 
THE BULLETIN
chanical and architectural arcana are clearly labeled along the way, and children
who master the multitude of terms will have developed a copious vocabulary in-
deed. For that matter, children who simply master the construction vehicles on
the sunny yellow endpapers can smugly impress their less-informed elders. EB
TUNNELL, MICHAEL O. School Spirits. Holiday House, 1997 
201p
ISBN 0-8234-1310-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Patrick is less than pleased about moving to Waskasoo City and attending the
school where his father is the new principal. To complicate things, Craven Hill
School is a spooky old castle, Patrick hears the school bell tolling at midnight, and
a ghostly boy begins to appear to him at strange times and places. Nairen, the girl
next door, helps Patrick research the story of eight-year-old Barnaby Dawe, who
disappeared thirty-five years before, whose body was never found, and whose shade
is now, in 1958, haunting Patrick. This is pretty standard-issue ghost-story stuff,
and the additional plot about the misunderstood bully, relative of Barnaby's ac-
cused killer, is overly predictable and familiar. The traditional pleasures have their
satisfactions, however, and Tunnell does well with the creepy atmosphere of the
old school at night and especially the eventual discovery of Barnaby's hidden skel-
eton. Voracious readers of supernatural tales may enjoy this amiable entry. DS
WINTER, KATHRYN 
Katarina. Farrar, 1998 
[272p]
ISBN 0-374-33984-8 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Katarina is a buoyant, red-haired, Slovakian-Jewish orphan who has lived happily
with her loving aunt until World War II closes in on them in the form of the
Hlinka Guards deporting Jews to "work camps." We experience with this ten-
year-old the deepening restrictions of Aunt Lena's various survival tactics-a fake
scarlet-fever quarantine, several winter months hiding out in a barn, and finally
refuge with a Christian farm woman who conceals Katarina in a shed but must
finally send her away when villagers turn hostile from a combination of supersti-
tious anti-Semitism and fear of German reprisals. The first-person narration is
gripping, nuanced, and true to a child's fresh emotions of surprise and disappoint-
ment, with no trace of self-pity. Especially poignant are her constant attempts to
befriend the children whose parents prohibit any connection (especially a sequence
of unanswered letters to her erstwhile best friend), the deep Catholic fervor she
absorbs from their peasant maid (the saint cards are sometimes her only friends
besides a monkey puppet), and the resilience with which she responds to those
who show her kindness, especially in the orphanage that offers her refuge till the
war is over. The author has a way of doubling back on her narrative that both
varies the perspective and reinforces the impact of a situation, yet is never unclear.
This is an unusually effective fictionalization that reaches from a personal past to
current and future readers. BH
WOOD, AUDREY 
Sweet Dream Pie; illus. by Mark Teague. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
1998 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-590-96204-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Pa Brindle is "craving a piece of Sweet Dream Pie, just like the one you made me
long ago." Ma agrees to make it, "but if things get out of hand, don't blame me."
MARCH 1998 
* 263
This is obviously not your basic Sara Lee concoction: "When the dough was
ready, Ma rolled it out on the table, and when she did, all the people on Willobee
Street (including little Amy McPherson) rolled out of their beds and onto their
floors." After every imaginable sweet is baked in the huge pie (creating a heat wave
in the neighborhood), the oversized pastry is served to the neighbors along with
Ma's unheeded warning not to eat more than one piece. Overindulgence has a
price, giving the townspeople wild dreams that depart their dreamers for a life of
their own; flying rabbits, cavorting reptiles, and assorted monsters run amok in the
streets until Ma Brindle's broom action returns the neighborhood back to normal.
Wood has created a fantastical yarn challenging the notion of "sweet dreams" and
gently admonishing us to remember that too much of a good thing usually isn't.
The entertaining nonsense is extended in the mildly exaggerated images ofWillobee
Street and its occupants where contorted viewpoints and an intense color spec-
trum unleash the strangeness quite effectively. Steam from the gargantuan dessert
seems to waft off the page, and the notion of such a baking phenomena creating
such hilarious results should prove a mouthwatering temptation. PM
YASHINSKY, DAN, comp. 
Ghostwise: A Book ofMidnight Stories. August House,
1997 
223p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87483-499-6 
$11.95 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Yashinsky has collected thirty-five tales of the supernatural from practising story-
tellers and gathered them in this deliciously creepy collection. The book is divided
into five sections: Heart and Horror, Shhh ...
, Reaching Across, Maximum
Nightmare, and Bonestories. From monsters to spirits, from the benevolent to the
malevolent, there is something to sate each reader's appetite for horror. Johnny
Moses opens the collection with his "The Story of the Boogey Woman," from the
Northwest Coast Indians; Helen Carmichael Porter tells a humorous to spooky
tale of a newspaper delivery boy in "The Dead Don't Pay"; Brother Mouse makes
sure a bad boy comes to a bad end in "Brother Mouse and Badboy," contributed
by Sharon Shorty. Family stories alternate with traditional tales as Jim Meeks
relates a touching tale of personal loss, grief, and redemption in "Will the Circle
Be Unbroken" and the elegant Alice Kane presents an elegant version of "The
Corpse Watchers," in which a brave young woman saves a bewitched young man
from certain doom. Each tale has its own voice, individualized by its teller. An
introduction gives Yashinsky's personal viewpoint on tales of the supernatural; a
closing section gives background and source information. This is going to be a
boon to those kids who come in looking for more sophisticated scary stuff; it will
also be eminently useful to readers aloud and storytellers looking for unusual ma-
terial. JMD
264 
* 
THE BULLETIN
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 1998
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Karen Hesse for Out ofthe Dust (Scholas-
tic). The Newbery Honor Books are Ella Enchanted by Gail Carson Levine (Har-
perCollins), Lily's Crossing by Patricia Reilly Giff (Delacorte), and Wringer by
Jerry Spinelli (HarperCollins).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to Paul O. Zelinsky for Rapunzel (Dutton).
The Caldecott Honor Books are The Gardener, written by Sarah Stewart and illus-
trated by David Small (Farrar), Harlem, written by Walter Dean Myers and illus-
trated by Christopher Myers (Scholastic), and There Was an Old Lady Who
Swallowed a Fly, adapted and illustrated by Simms Taback (Viking).
The Coretta Scott King Award will be presented to Sharon M. Draper, author of
Forged by Fire (Atheneum), for writing and to In Daddy's Arms IAm Tall: African
Americans Celebrating Fathers, illustrated by Javaka Steptoe and compiled by Alan
Schroeder (Lee & Low) for illustration. The King Honor Books for writing are
James Haskins' Bayard Rustin: Behind the Scenes ofthe Civil Rights Movement (Hy-
perion) and Joyce Hansen's I Thought My Soul Would Rise and Fly: The Diary of
Patsy, a Freed Girl (Scholastic). 
King Honor Books for illustration are The
Hunterman andthe Crocodile, adapted and illustrated by Baba Wagud Diakit6 (Scho-
lastic), Ashley Bryan's ABC ofAfrican Poetry, compiled and illustrated by Ashley
Bryan (Karl/Atheneum), and Harlem, written by Walter Dean Myers and illus-
trated by Christopher Myers (Scholastic).
The Pura Belprd Award will be presented to Victor Martinez, author of Parrot in
the Oven: mi vida (Cotler/HarperCollins) for writing and to Stephanie Garcia for
Snapshotsfrom the Wedding, written by Gary Soto (Putnam) for illustration. Honor
books for writing are Francisco Alarc6n's Laughing Tomatoes and Other Spring
Poems/Jitomates Risuefios y otros poemas de primavera (Children's Book Press)
and Floyd Martinez' Spirits of the High Mesa (Pifiata/Arte Publico); honor books
for illustration are In My Family/En mi familia, written and illustrated by Carmen
Lomas Garza (Children's Book Press), The Golden Flower: A Taino Myth from
Puerto Rico, written by Nina Jaffe and illustrated by Enrique O. Sinchez (Simon),
and Gathering the Sun: An Alphabet in Spanish and English, written by Alma Flor
Ada and illustrated by Sim6n Silva (Lothrop).
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is
MARCH 1998 
* 
265
Henry Holt for Joseph Holub's The Robber and Me; honors go to Scholastic for
Tatjana Wassiljewa's Hostage to War: A True Story and to Viking for Elke
Heidenreich's Nero Corleone: A Cat's Story.
The Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal for a substantial and lasting contribution to lit-
erature for children goes to Russell Freedman.
The 1999 May Hill Arbuthnot Honor Lecture will be delivered by Lillian Gerhardt.
Madeleine L'Engle is the 1998 winner of the Margaret A. Edwards Award for
Outstanding Literature For Young Adults honoring an author's lifetime contribu-
tion in writing books for teenagers.
The ALSC Distinguished Service Award goes to Spencer Shaw.
The Scott O'Dell Award for Historical Fiction goes to Karen Hesse's Out of the
Dust (Lodestar).
The Canadian Library Association's Best Book of the Year for children is Uncle
Ronald by Brian Doyle (Groundwood). The Best Book of the Year for Young
Adults is Takes: Stories for YoungAdults edited by R.P. MacIntyre (Thistledown).
The Amelia Frances Howard-Gibbon Illustrator's Award goes to Harvey Chan for
Ghost Train, written by Paul Yee (Groundwood).
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Melvin Burgess for Junk, published in the
U.S. as Smack (Henry Holt).
The Kate Greenaway Medal was awarded to Helen Cooper for The Baby Who
Wouldn't Go To Bed (Doubleday).
*^13
266 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African Americans-fiction: Miller
African Americans-stories:
Hoffman; Rochelle
African Americans: Lucas
American Indians-fiction:
Ackerman; Panagopoulos
American Indians-folklore: San
Souci
American Indians: Bruchac
Bowman; Bruchac Lasting
Angels-stories: Hoffman
Animals-stories: Davenier; Duke;
Radcliffe; San Souci
Architecture: Tarsky
Arithmetic: Duke
ARTS AND CRAFTS: Carreiro
Astronauts: Suen
Baseball-stories: Cooper
BEDTIME STORIES: Asch;
Boynton; Mullins
BIBLE STORIES: Gelman
BIOGRAPHIES: Boitano;
Bruchac Bowman; Lipinski;
Paulsen; Rabinovici
Birds-stories: Martin, R.
Birthdays-stories: Hughes
Cats-stories: Hughes
Child abuse-fiction: Grove
Christmas-stories: Hoffman
Civics: Bare
Civil rights: Lucas
Civil War: Beller
Commerce: Appelbaum
Computers-fiction: Keller
CONCEPT BOOKS: Tarsky
COUNTING BOOKS: Duke;
Mullins; Sabuda
Crime and criminals-fiction:
DeFelice; Grove; Harrison;
Roberts; Strasser
Death and dying-fiction: Murphy
Death and dying-stories: Hughes
Dogs-fiction: Rylant
Dogs-stories: Jackson
Dogs: Bare; Paulsen
Dreams-stories: Wood
Ecology: Pringle
Elephants-stories: Radcliffe
Elephants: Pringle
Ethics and values: Evans; Klass
Families-fiction: Strasser
Families-stories: Hughes; Roche;
Rochelle
FANTASY: Howarth
Farms-stories: Asch
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Harrison; Kimmel
Fathers and sons-fiction: Harrison
Fathers and sons-stories: Mahy
Fear-stories: Roche
Fires: Haas
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Ada; Martin,
R.; Nolan; Pearson; Peck; San
Souci; Taback
Food and eating-stories:
Appelbaum; Hall; Peck; Wood
Friendship-fiction: DeFelice;
Glassman; Grove; Howarth;
Keller; Rylant
Friendship-stories: Nolan
Frogs: Martin, J.
FUNNY STORIES: Shannon
Gardens-stories: Hall
MARCH 1998 
* 
267
Ghosts-fiction: DeFelice; Kimmel;
Tunnell
Gold Rush-fiction: Gregory
Grandfathers-stories: Inkpen
Grandparents: Bruchac Bowman
Grandparents-stories: Rochelle
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Ackerman; Gregory; Hest;
Murphy; Panagopoulos; Seago;
Tunnell; Winter
History, U.S.: Beller; Bruchac
Lasting; Harness; Lucas; Suen
History, world: McCully;
Rabinovici
Holocaust: Rabinovici
Holocaust-fiction: Winter
Homelessness-fiction: Evans
Homosexuality: Mastoon
Horses-fiction: Ackerman
Horses-stories: Mullins
Immigration-fiction: Hest
Industry: Tarsky
Irish Americans: Beller
Italian Americans-fiction: Murphy
Jews-fiction: Hest; Winter
Kidnapping-fiction: Harrison;
Panagopoulos
Language arts: Heller; Marshall
Latinos-music: Orozco
Lions-stories: Nolan
LOVE STORIES: Conford
Martial arts: McCully
Mental illness-fiction: Seago
Mice-stories: Sabuda
Mothers and sons-fiction:
Harrison
Movies and moviemaking-fiction:
Klass
Music: Orozco
MYSTERIES: Keller; Roberts
Nature study: Cole; Martin, J.;
Pringle
Neighbors-stories: Hughes
Orphans-fiction: Gregory
Pets-stories: Hughes
Physical education: McCully
Presidents: Harness
Princesses-stories: Ada
Racism-fiction: Miller
Reading aloud: Appelbaum; Haas;
Pearson
Reading, easy: Lucas; Rylant
Reading, family: Orozco
Reading, reluctant: Boitano; Lipinski;
Paulsen; Roberts
Religion-fiction: Seago
RHYMING STORIES: Fox; Taback
Safety education: Haas
School-fiction: Conford; Glassman;
Grove; Keller; Tunnell
SHORT STORIES: Conford; Yashinsky
Sisters-fiction: Murphy
Skating: Boitano; Lipinski
Space: Suen
Sports-stories: Cooper
Sports: Boitano; Lipinski
Storytelling: Gelman; Nolan; Pearson;
Peck; Yashinsky
Storytime: Asch; Davenier; Orozco; Peck;
Radcliffe; Shannon; Taback; Wood
SUPERNATURAL STORIES: DeFelice;
Kimmel; Tunnell; Yashinsky
Teachers-fiction: Evans; Wright
Toys-stories: Inkpen
Water-stories: Jackson
West, the-fiction: Murphy
Women's studies: Gelman; McCully
World War II-fiction: Winter
World War II: Rabinovici
Writers and writing: Bruchac Bowman
DK INK* SPRING 1998
February
PARSNIP
by Sue Porter
ISBN: 0-7894-2470-3
S11.95 * Grades PreK-K
March
AN MEI'S STRANGE AND
WONDROUS JOURNEY
by Stephan Molnar-Fenton
illustrated by Viienne Flesher
LC: 97-31001
ISBN: 0-7894-2477-0
$15.95 * Grades PreK-2
A Melanie Kroupa Book
HELLO TOES! HELLO FEET!
by Ann Whitford Paul
illustrated by Nadine
Bernard Westcott
LC: 97-31002
ISBN: 0-7894-2481-9
S15.95 * Grades PreK-2
A Melanie Kroupa Book
GREETINGS, SUN
by Phillis and David
Gershator * illustrated by
Synthia Saint James
LC: 
97-34108
ISBN: 0-7894-2482-7
$15,95 * Grades PreK-2
A Richard Jackson Book
LETTER TO THE LAKE
by Susan Marie Swanson
illustrated by
Peter Catalanotto
LC: 97-34107
ISBN: 0-7894-2483-5
S15.95 * Grades PreK-2
A Richard Jackson Book
COUNTING ON THE WOODS
a poem by George Ella Lyon
photographs by Ann W Olson
LC: 97-34117
ISBN: 0-7894-2480-0
$15.95 * Grades PreK-2
A Richard Jackson Book
ANNIE ATE APPLES
by Lynette Ruscbak
ilustrated by
Bonie Matthews
LC: 97-36200
ISBN: 0-7894-2478-9
$14.95 * Grades K-3
CHUCK CLOSE, UP CLOSE
by Jan Greenberg and
Sandra Jordan
LC: 97-31076
ISBN: 0-7894-2486-X
S18.95 * Grades 3-6
CIRCUS: AN ALBUM
by Linda Granfield
LC: 97-33523
ISBN: 0-7894-2453-3
$19.95 * Grades 3-6
A Melanie Kroupa Book
LOVE FROM 
YOUR FRIEND,
HANNAH
by Mindy Warshaw Skolsky
illustrated by Hannah herself
LC: 97-29819
ISBN: 0-7894-2492-4
$16.95 * Grades 3-6
A Richard Jackson Book
THE ISLANDER
by Cynthia Rylant
LC: 
97-36059
ISBN: 0-7894-2490-8
$15.95 * Grades 6 and up
A Richard Jackson Book
April
THE OLD WOMAN AND THE WAVE
by Shelley Jackson
LC: 97-34114
ISBN: 0-7894-2484-3
515.95 * Grades PreK-2
A Richard Jackson Book
BOSS OF THE PLAINS
The Hat That Won the West
by Laurie Carlson
illustrated by Holly Meade
LC: 97-30995
ISBN: 0-7894-2479-7
$16.95 * Grades 1-5
A Melanie Kroupa Book
THETHINK TANK
by Ivan Moscovich
ISBN: 0-7894-2429-0
$24.95 - Grades 3 and up
THE MILLY STORIES
by Janice Lindsay
LC: 97-36066
ISBN: 0-7894-2491-6
$15.95 * Grades 4 and up
A Melanie Kroupa Book
GO AND COME BACK
by Joan Abelove
LC: 97-36070
ISBN: 0-7894-2476-2
$16.95 * Grades 6 and up
A Richard Jackson Book
STEPHEN FAIR
by Tim Wynne-Jones
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2495-9
$15.95 * Grades 6 and up
A Melanie Kroupa Book
MAKING UP MEGABOY
by Virginia Walter
graphics by
Katrina Roeckelein
LC: 97-36073
ISBN: 0-7894-2488-6
$16.95 * Grades 6 and up
A Richard Jackson Book
May
THE GINGERBREAD MAN
retold hb Barbara
Baumgartner * illustrated
by Norman Messenger
LC: 97-33386
ISBN: 0-7894-2493-2
$8.95 * Grades PreK-K
THE THREE BEARS
adapted from Robert Southey's
"The Story of the Three Bears'
illustrated by NormanMessenger
LC: 97-40438
ISBN: 0-7894-2067-8
$8.95 * Grades PreK-K
an imprint of DK Publishing Inc.
95 Madison Avenue
New York, NY 10016
Available from your
regular supplier or call
1.888-DIAL-DKP.
Teaching {(8
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
Teichtn I8
Every issue of Teaching K-8
provides informative articles on
the cutting edge of education.
You'll also find insightful
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
Don't miss out on this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
Teachtng-K8
x 54808, Boulder, CO 803224808
-8793
iOne yeairI
(8 issues)
only
$19. 77*
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
*KIRKUS 
REVIEWS POINTER
Water Buffalo Days
Growins Up i Vietnam
by Huynh Quang Nhuong
pictures by Jean and MAou-sien Tseng
"Set in tranquil, prewar Vietnam, this elegiac memoir uses Huynh's
childhood adventures with the family water buffalo [Tank] as a
vehicle for conjuring a lost world. Huynh's pared-down, expressive
prose relays his affection for Tank and hamlet life so warmly that
readers will easily be transported into the foreign setting."
-Publishers Weekly
"Delicate pencil drawings accompany the first-person narrative...
written from the heart. -KirWs Reviews
"With fascinating details about culture and custom ... a book
that may be a springboard to Asian history."-ALA Booklist
Ages 7-10. $13.95 TR (0-06-024957-9)
Also by Huyh Quang Nhuong
The Land Lost
Adventures of a Boy in Vietnam
Ages 9-12.
$14.89 LB (0-397-32448-0)
$3.95 PB (04-6-440183-9)
Univerity of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA
RETuiN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
***********S-DIGIT 61820 
48#
40590 BC 5107 REM=44 PO:CKM 3
CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
51 E ARMORY AVE
CHAMPAIGN IL 61820-6601
1111
0008-9036(199803)51:7*;1-8
A9
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
18
40;; el
