I LL INOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
j
i
~·::'"·: 
:::':d
"":~;;*
4= School Library Journal and Publishers Weekly star
After a harmless prank goes too far and Pauline and an older
boy drown in the Blackwater River, 13-year-old Brodie must
decide between confessing that he may have caused their
deaths or living with secret shame for the rest of his life.
;-
"An exciting blend of physical and psychological action and
conflict as Brodie is caught in a web of deceit, as guilt and
fear overcome his desire to tell the truth. An engrossing
tale." -
Starred review / School Library Journal
A' 
"Eve Bunting's thought-provoking theme, solid characterization
and skillful juggling of suspense and pathos make this a
top-notch choice for both boys and girls."
-
Starred review / Publishers Weekly
Ages 10 up. $15.95TR (0-06-027838-2); $15.89LB (0-06-027843-9)
Joanna Cotler Books
IM HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 
www.harperchildrens.com
THE
BUL L E TIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
January 2000
Vol. 53 No. 5
A LOOK INSIDE
161 
THE BIG PICTURE
Through My Eyes by Ruby Bridges
162 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
163 * Boxing in Black and White by Peter Bacho
169 
* Jump Back, Honey: The Poems of Paul Laurence Dunbar comp. by
Ashley Bryan and Andrea Davis Pinkney; illus. by Ashley Bryan, Carole
Byard, Jan Spivey Gilchrist, et al.
173 * Happy to Be Nappy written by bell hooks; illus. by Chris Raschka
184 * David Goes to School written and illus. by David Shannon
188 * Sector 7 written and illus. by David Wiesner
193 
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1999
195 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (MD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Janice N. Harrington, Reviewer (JNH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Jeannette Hulick
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2000 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration from Through My Eyes ©1999. Used by permission of Scholastic Press.
JANUARY 2000 
* 
161
THE BIG PICTURE
Through My Eyes
by Ruby Bridges
The importance of viewpoint to history is a well-acknowledged fact these days.
Books such as Jim Murphy's The Great Fire (BCCB 5/95) address the issue di-
rectly by examining different, sometimes conflicting views, leaving us wiser about
how history is made, and recorded, and remembered. Through My Eyes takes a
historic event that we've seen from the outside and shows us the inside, allowing
Ruby Bridges, who was the cynosure of media eyes at six years old when she inte-
grated a New Orleans grade school in 1960, to tell her own story from an adult
perspective.
We saw this story a few years ago in Robert Coles' picture book The Story
ofRuby Bridges (BCCB 3/95), but this approach is deeper and richer without be-
ing remotely abstruse or forbidding. The style is simple and matter-of-fact, and
it's astonishingly successful in bringing the first-grader's historic experience to life
and rescuing it from becoming purely a symbol fraught with more meaning than
reality. The author's unique perspective allows her to expand and complicate the
chronicle with details, such as the fact that representatives from the NAACP "pres-
sured my parents," that the gathering of policemen and protesters gave an air of
importance to the school that made her think that she was going to college, that
her adoration for her white Bostonian teacher left her with a Northern accent, that
when a white boy refused to play with her because of his mother's proscription, she
understood ("I would have done the same thing. If my mama told me not to do
something, I didn't do it").
The book doesn't stop at the famous photographs (which will be unfa-
miliar to many young readers anyway) but also gives readers a picture of what it
was like to move from being the target of frenzied anger outside the school to
being the cherished single student of a dedicated teacher once over the threshold.
Bridges' restrained narration of her experience undercuts all the romanticization:
eschewing any tendency to make herself heroic, she instead makes it clear that she
acted as a dutiful child and bright student with little awareness of larger political
implications (she recalls skipping rope to anti-integration chants, completely oblivi-
ous to their meaning). The book also fills in the chronicle with context of which
Ruby was unaware at the time: the legal and social underpinnings of this dramatic
moment (a timeline is included), the toll this action took on her family, the battle
fought by the few white parents who kept their children in the integrated schools,
and the celebrity attention from people such as John Steinbeck and Norman
Rockwell.
Each spread sports a thematic title and provides relevant quotes (from
other people involved as well as from news accounts) and photographs, which
feature the events and principal players in rich brown tones that add a period
162 
* THE BULLETIN
flavor as well as contributing to the smooth integrity of the pages' appearance.
The images remain memorable, and the book uses them to great impact with
photographs on every page. Readers will get a first-hand look at both the jeering
crowds and the bandbox-neat Ruby in her white knee socks and tidy Mary Janes
towered over by somber men in dark suits.
It often seems like a sound-bite, flash-in-the-pan, fifteen-minutes-of-fame
world these days; kids might be forgiven for believing that, in some ironic reversal
of the secret life of animated toys, spotlighted people only have lives while one
looks at them, and their existences freeze the moment the camera turns away. One
of the most compelling aspects of this book is its clear demonstration that this
event was part of a larger history that is one individual's life. Dignified, devout,
and decorous-but never stiff-Bridges tells of her life beyond that historic mo-
ment, discussing how she was and wasn't changed, how she since then has rejoiced
in triumphs (a happy marriage and four children) and suffered sadnesses (the di-
vorce of her parents not long after-and a probable consequence of-her
groundbreaking school attendance; the death of her younger brother). The effect
is to weave a dramatic episode into a larger current of history, much of it privately
experienced (Bridges remarks that the distancing of time meant she didn't recog-
nize herself in documentary film footage of the event) but all of it valid, worthy,
and significant. No tired "Whatever happened to .. ." title, this is a compelling
look at history as a living thing, focusing on one memorable individual unknow-
ingly caught momentarily in the historical spotlight. (Imprint information ap-
pears on p. 167.)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AARDEMA, VERNA, ad. 
Koi and the Kola Nuts: A Tale from Liberia; illus. by Joe
Cepeda. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81760-6 
$16.95 
R 4-8 yrs
Youngest son Koi, away hunting when his father dies, inherits only one "scraggly
little kola tree." Deciding that "what sitting won't solve, travel will," Koi resolves
to see the world; he picks his kola nuts, loads them on his back, and sets out. He
meets a snake, a column of ants, and a crocodile, all of which he rescues from peril
with the help of his kola nuts. Upon arrival at a distant village, Koi completes
three tasks (with the help of the snake, ants, and crocodile) and wins the chiefs
JANUARY 2000 
* 
163
daughter in marriage and half the chiefdom. Aardema's crisp retelling of this
Liberian folktale is given additional humor by Cepeda's jauntily irreverent illustra-
tions. Oil paintings with backdrops of lime, apricot, and grape give a feeling of
spacious plains and skies, and Koi himself is depicted as a gallant, scrappy hero.
The palette is warm without being hot, and the paintings are uncluttered. Varying
perspectives give the horizontal (for the most part) compositions a sense of move-
ment that parallels the momentum of the tale towards its satisfying conclusion.
Detailed source notes are included. JMD
ALMOND, DAVID 
Kit's Wilderness. 
Delacorte, 2000 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-385-32665-3 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Upon the death of Kit's grandmother, the family returns to care for Grandpa in
the town where generations of their ancestors had worked the coal mines. Here
Kit meets the dark-spirited John Askew and several of his friends-all descendants
of mining families-and becomes involved in their game called Death, which they
play in one of the abandoned mine shafts. It soon becomes clear that Kit and
Askew share the same troubling gift-the ability to see ghosts of children killed in
mining disasters; Grandpa sees them, too, and his increasingly frequent periods of
mental isolation (going "off with the fairies," as he terms it) reflects Kit's increas-
ingly dangerous flirtation with the ghosts. On the way to the inevitable show-
down between Kit and Askew deep within the collapsing tunnels, the pace slows
under the burden of subplots. There's Grandpa's mental lapses, Askew's alcoholic
father, a classmate's role in a school production of "The Snow Queen," and convo-
luted themes concerning a story Kit is writing (fictional) about a prehistoric family
(their ghosts, it turns out, actually prowl the mines) whose experiences parallel the
Askews'. Almond does, however, have the knack for infecting his audience with a
powerful case of the creeps, and readers who wade through the tangle oftangentials
will be rewarded with a satisfactory number of shudders. EB
BACHO, PETER 
Boxing in Black and White. Holt, 1999 
122p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-8050-5779-X 
$18.95 
R Gr. 6-10
The history of boxing in the United States and the economic opportunity the
boxing ring offered to minority males is succinctly presented in this absorbing
title. The opening chapter discusses the life and career of Filipino boxer Sammy
Santos, who insisted on fighting even when it meant losing his sight. Bacho links
Santos to his own life, describing the scene in his living room when his father and
various Filipino uncles would get together to watch the fights on television in
1957. From this very personal beginning Bacho segues into a close look at selected
championship fights, those bouts that proved to be turning points for the sport.
The fights between Sugar Ray Robinson and Gene Fullmer, Jack Johnson and Jim
Jeffries (aka "The Great White Hope"), Gene Tunney and Jack Dempsey are rec-
reated in prose that never loses sight of the issues of race and money that influ-
enced both the individual boxers and the sport itself. Portraits of more recent
boxing legends-Joe Louis, Muhammad Ali, Joe Frazier-include descriptions of
styles, strengths, and strategies that exhibit a solid knowledge of and passion for
the subject. Bacho communicates the beauty of this particular sport in startlingly
vivid language. The book is illustrated with black and white photographs, and it
164 
* THE BULLETIN
includes extensive source notes, a bibliography, and an index. Readers will eagerly
step into the ring with this one. JMD
BELLER, SusAN PROVOST 
Confederate Ladies of Richmond. Twenty-First Cen-
tury, 1999 
9 6p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-1470-9 
$25.90 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Opening with an interest-grabbing anecdote concerning a young war widow whose
omen-beset nuptials foreshadowed tragedy to come, Beller retraces the course of
the Civil War through the experiences of the Confederate capital and particularly
through the eyes of its more privileged women citizens. The author draws liberally
from their letters and diaries to demonstrate the optimism and excitement of the
war's onset, the changes within the small city occasioned by the influx of soldiers
and politicians, the steadily rising prices resulting from the Union blockade, the
fearsome privations (and barely acknowledged bread riots) as the war drew to a
close, and finally the steel-jawed pride with which the women met defeat. Beller
rightly points out the bias of these elite witnesses and frequently presents quotes
that show how their experiences appeared from both within and without their
select circle. One indignant woman complains, "Why indeed! any man that wears
a stripe on his pantaloons thinks he can speak to any lady!" while a roguish gentle-
man remarked on their patriotic sewing circles that produced "deformed socks and
impossible gloves for the soldier boys." Ample illustrations, careful source notes, a
reader-friendly bibliography of print and electronic resources, and an index make
this an excellent choice for report writers seeking a fresh spin on a standard topic.
EB
BEST, CARI 
Three Cheers for Catherine the Great!; illus. by Giselle Potter. 
Kroupa/
DK Ink, 1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-7894-2622-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Sara's Russian grandmother, Catherine, wants gifts from the heart instead of the
pocket for her birthday. After much consideration, Sara determines that her gift
will be teaching her grandmother to read and write English. The relationship
between Sara and her grandmother and their relationship with the other tenants in
their building are at the core of this tale. The characters are defined by their tal-
ents-Mr. Minsky dances, Mrs. Caruso sings opera, Monica's dad is a hairdresser-
and their gifts reflect their activities. Sara, the narrator, is a poet and lover of
words, so her choice to give her grandmother language lessons is a logical one.
Love of words notwithstanding, this based-on-family-lore story is unfortunately
slow-moving and lengthy. Potter's watercolors, however, have the naive drafting
and the accompanying charm evident in her earlier artwork (in Manna and
Mitakidou's Mr. Semolina-Semolinus, BCCB 7/97, Fleming's When Agnes Caws,
BCCB 2/99, etc.) with an earthier palette and more urban-looking environs, both
interior and exterior. The compositions emphasize strong horizontal and vertical
lines along with a sharp angularity that mediates the sentimentality of the tale.
Despite the low-key external action, this book has an advantage: birthdays (anyone's
birthday) are one of kids' favorite topics, so this nostalgic tale may still win them
over. JMD
JANUARY 2000 
* 
165
BLISS, 
CORINNE DEMAS 
The Littlest Matryoshka; illus. by Kathryn
Brown. 
Hyperion, 1999 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2125-6 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0153-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Nina, the littlest matryoshka, was carved by Nikolai the dollmaker: "From one
piece of soft wood he shaped six nesting dolls, each one fitting inside the other.
They all opened in the middle and were hollow inside, except for the littlest. She
was the size of a bumblebee, and she was made of the heart of the sweet-smelling
wood." The dolls travel by ship to a toy shop in America where, unpacked and un-
nested, the "six sisters" are lined up in a row from biggest to smallest: Anna, Olga,
Varka, Vanda, Nadia, and Nina. Nina, the smallest, is mistakenly swept from the
shelf and out of the store, where she is buried in the snow and carted off. The
remaining re-nested sisters are put on the sale table and are purchased by a young
girl ("The littlest doll is missing," said the shopkeeper, "so I'll let you have that
matryoshka for half price") who takes them home and cherishes them. Nina has
series of adventures-a swim in a stream, an encounter with a heron, a quick
journey with a squirrel-and ultimately rejoins her sisters in a satisfying (if coin-
cidental) fashion. Bliss' storytelling style makes this an easy readaloud and a good
beginning readalone; the language is unaffected and there is real, if gentle, mo-
mentum. Brown's watercolors have the sensibility of old-fashioned illustrations
(adult readers may be reminded of The Poky Little Puppy), with uncluttered com-
positions, expressive characters, and a soothing palette. Classic elements (the ani-
mism of toys, the lost doll, adventure and rescue) winningly combined are going
to make this book an unpretentious favorite. JMD
Bo, BEN 
The Edge. LernerSports, 1999 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-8225-3307-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Alone and friendless in his new Vancouver home, Declan hooks up with a gang of
toughs; trouble comes immediately, however, when a graffiti-tagging escapade leads
to a building going up in flames from a carelessly discarded cigarette and all the
gang but Declan perishes in the tragedy. Declan is sent off for rehabilitation in a
new program that sees him working at a ski resort in the Canadian Rockies under
the tutelage of an old Indian, Big Foot. There he meets Manu, an attractive and
friendly girl who doesn't know about his past, and Mad Dog, a daredevil
snowboarder who resents Declan's budding talent. Just when it seems that he's
managed to prove himself in a dangerous avalanche, Declan's past rears its head
and threatens to rob him of his newfound respect. This is familiar material pulpily
written, with corny plot moves and stock characters (though there's life in Big
Foot, he's prone to utterances like "We must fly like the bird on the wind!" and "If
you believe in yourself, you will overcome any enemy and the truth will shine out
of you like the sun"; Mad Dog is a clichid hot dog). The real draw here, however
lies in the snowslope adventure, and Bo delivers with downhill sequences packed
with lingo and brand names and flying powder ("Snowboarders were going off in
a steady stream. Carving lines between the walls of snow that banked up on either
side like two parallel waves in a frozen sea. Blasting off the lip. Tumbling like
acrobats in the air"). Since the plot mostly serves as a peg for the boarding moves,
166 
* THE BULLETIN
readers looking for some literary action in the half-pipe probably won't mind its
deficiencies. DS
BRANFORD, HENRIETTA 
The Fated Sky. 
Candlewick, 1999 
156p
ISBN 0-7636-0775-4 
$16.99 
R Gr. 7-12
Sixteen-year-old Ran lives with her unaffectionate mother, Astrid, and loving grand-
mother, Amma, on a small farm in Viking Norway. When Astrid learns that her
husband and sons have been killed, she takes Ran and, in the company of former
suitor Vigut, goes to Sessing for the yearly sacrifice. Astrid is fatally injured in a
wolf attack; Ran's supposed sorcery is blamed for her mother's death, and she is
sentenced to die as part of the ritual. Instead she flees with blind bard Toki and
reaches haven in Iceland, where she and Toki marry and begin new lives. Vigut,
turned outlaw, descends on the community with intent to pillage. A cataclysmic
volcanic eruption and a flash flood disrupts the mayhem, and Ran is swept to
safety; her husband, however, is dead, and she fears for the lives of her children.
Branford easily evokes a time in history when death was considered proper pay-
ment for all kinds of debt; her ability to place her characters squarely within their
time while making their passions and desires understandable (as seen in her Fire,
Bed & Bone, BCCB 5/98) is an admirable one. The difficulty of day-to-day sur-
vival, the influence of religious beliefs, and the impact of power politics are woven
into Ran's narrative with fatalistic precision. Ran herself is a character well worth
knowing, blessed with a strong sense of self that lets her live despite emotional
losses and physical deprivation. Tightly plotted with strong characterizations and
an admirable sense of the period, this is an unusual and meaty offering. JMD
BRIDGES, RUBY 
Through My Eyes. 
Scholastic, 1999 
64p 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-590-18923-9 
$16.95 
R* Gr. 4up
See this month's Big Picture, p. 161, for review.
BROWN, DON 
Rare Treasure: MaryAnningand Her Remarkable Discoveries; written
and illus. by Don Brown. 
Houghton, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-395-92286-0 
$15.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Brown brings his talent for succinct biography to this picture book about amateur
geologist Anning. Born in 1799, Anning learned a love of fossil hunting from her
father; after his death, Mary and her brother would search for fossils to sell to
tourists to supplement the family's meager income. Unlike Anholt's Stone Girl,
Bone Girl (BCCB 2/99), which concentrates on the events ofAnning's life, Brown
dwells on Mary's self-determination, focusing on her adventurous spirit (fossil
hunting on the cliffs of Lyme was not without peril) and lifelong quest for knowl-
edge in her chosen field of study. The weaving together of action (hunting fossils,
rescuing amateur fossil hunters, narrowly escaping death from falling rocks, etc.)
and personality description makes this a vibrant piece of nonfiction. While the
drafting is a bit off and the characters' faces more Anglund-ish than expressive, the
understated watercolors suit the mood. Their subdued palette (ocean blues, sand
browns) and simple compositions are undistracting, and they permit the reader to
focus on Brown's no-nonsense representation of Anning's formidable life. There
are unfortunately no notes or suggestions for further reading. JMD
JANUARY 2000 
* 
167
BROWN, 
MARGARET WISE 
Another Important Book; illus. by Chris
Raschka. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 1999 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026283-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026282-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
An unpublished manuscript intended as a companion to Brown's An Important
Book (BCCB 7/49), illustrated by Leonard Weisgard, is buoyed by the strength of
Raschka's mixed-media illustrations. Brown's rhyming text ("The important thing/
about being One/ is that life/ has just begun") is reminiscent of A. A. Milne's
poem "Now We Are Six" ("When I was one/ I was just begun") in its enumeration
of aspects of ages one through six, but it lacks the controlled grace of that concisely
rendered verse and of Brown's more successful writing. The text tends to run on
(and arrhythmically, at that), slipping into list-making as it notes the acquisition
of skills at and the joys of each age. Raschka's watercolor-and-oil paintings feature
an energetic bunch of tots of various ages and demeanors engaged in a variety of
activities. His use of bold curves in flowing lines of black ink to emphasize his
figures gives them a sense of motion that makes them look as if they're dancing in
space, effervescent with discovery; geometric shapes (circles, stars, squares, triangles)
in an assortment of colors serve both as props and background. The art carries the
book, but this is still a cozy if slight little paean to the joys of growing up. JMD
BUNTING, EVE 
Rudis Pond; illus. by Ronald Himler. 
Clarion, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-395-89067-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The Rudi of the title is the narrator's classmate, a friend from down the street
who's a good companion even though he's "sick a lot." Rudi's heart problems
worsen, however, and he eventually dies ("I never did get to talk to Rudi again
because he died in that hospital"), leaving the narrator and her classmates strug-
gling with a way to commemorate their friend; a hummingbird that turns up near
Rudi's memorial pond seems to offer her a connection to Rudi's spirit. While the
book is unsubtly purposive, it's much quieter and more straightforwardly written
than many on the subject. Bunting doesn't sink the young viewpoint under excess
philosophy, medicine, or theology; though the hummingbird aspect is on the sweet
side, the book mostly just allows the permanent departure of Rudi to make its
impact. Himler's watercolors, though sometimes awkward, have a self-contained
peacefulness to them that makes their simple realism emotionally effective. Smooth
and understated, this is a look at mortality that will reach even younger audiences
than Smith's A Taste ofBlackberries (BCCB 11/73). DS
CALDWELL, V. M. 
The Ocean Within; illus. by Erica Magnus. 
Milkweed,
1999 
275p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-57131-623-X 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57131-624-8 
$6.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
In this exploration of the interior life of a longtime foster child struggling to accept
a permanent placement, eleven-year-old Elizabeth's defenses ("Never let them know
what's important to you") are broken down during a summer stay with the family
clan headed by the woman Elizabeth privately labels "Iron Woman" but comes to
call "Grandma." The pacing lags, and the characterizations of the family are un-
subtle and adulatory (Elizabeth's cheery articulate new cousins sound like the Box-
168 
* THE BULLETIN
car Children and Grandma is described by one of them as "sort of a storybook
grandmother, but real"). The emotional realities of Elizabeth's situation are pa-
tiently and evocatively explored, however, and Caldwell is perceptive both about
Elizabeth's guardedness and her genuine discomfort with her boisterous new fam-
ily. There's definitely some romanticization of old-school family practices (in-
cluding clear rules and corporal punishment for violation thereof), but doubtless
many readers will appreciate the evenhandedness with which praise and blame as
well as rights and responsibilities are meted out in a story that is simultaneously
high-minded and intensely emotional. FK
CARTER, ALDEN R. 
Crescent Moon. * Holiday House, 1999 
[208p]
ISBN 0-8234-1521-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
The logging country of northern Wisconsin is starting to see times change with
the advent of the twentieth century, and Jeremy is caught in the thick of it. He
loses his best school chums to the lumber mills when an accident incapacitates
their father, he becomes embroiled in the rising labor movement when friends in
the IWW are targeted by management goons, and most importantly he helps his
woodcarver great-uncle create a tribute to ways now past: with the help of an old
Chippewa man, Uncle Mac wants to carve a Chippewa maiden "to honor his
people and my craft before both are forgotten." This doesn't have the compelling
flow of Carter's other novels; there's too much social studies pressed into a small
space and too much foreshadowing of impending history, and the changes are
more described than brought home to the reader. This is a fascinating period that
rarely gets its due in children's literature, however, and the book manages to com-
press the economic changes and the forward-looking spirit into credible local phe-
nomena. Readers interested in offbeat historical fiction might find this satisfying,
and it might also make an intriguing comparison with Natalie Honeycutt's Twi-
light in Grace Falls (BCCB 6/97), which takes a contemporary look at the effect of
a changing lumber economy on a small town. DS
CARTER, DAVID A. 
The Elements of Pop-Up: A Pop-Up Book for Aspiring Paper
Engineers; written and illus. by David A. Carter and James Diaz. 
Little Simon,
1999 
18p
ISBN 0-689-82224-3 
$35.00 
R* 
Gr. 6-12
Like magicians sharing their most arcane secrets, paper engineers Carter and Diaz
reveal the mysteries behind movable books-from the simplest parallel-fold pop-
ups to shapes that saw, spin, flip, rock, and ride the crests and troughs of paper
grooves. It will quickly become obvious to crafters who have dabbled with some
fundamental paper cuts that they're in the big league here; of the forty-two tech-
niques covered, only a half dozen are graded as "easy." (Even the glossary moves
far beyond "score," "fold," and "tab" to "tip-in," "nesting," "rocker arm," and
"cam.") All techniques, however, are clearly and cleverly presented in working
form and mounted on fold-out stock so that they can be viewed and studied from
different angles. Crafters guided by observation and "feel" can learn by example;
those of a more mathematical turn can refer to the accompanying printed explana-
tions and the summaries of angles, length proportions, and placements. Bright
colored base pages are not only attractive; they also make the white sample pop-
ups and devices easy to view. A brief history of the movable book and steps for
JANUARY 2000 
* 
169
preparing a pop-up for production/publication are included. Drawn by the com-
plexity of the bug-eyed pop-up creature of the opening spread, serious Papermeisters
as well as more adventurous beginners will find themselves on the cutting edge
here. EB
CRIMI, CAROLYN 
Don't Need Friends; illus. by Lynn Munsinger. 
Doubleday,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-385-32643-2 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Disconsolate when his best friend Possum moves to another junkyard, Rat decides
"Don't need friends, don't need 'em at all." The reckless rodent rejects all at-
tempts at friendship by other junkyard beasts, until "one day a dog moved in. He
was big. He was dirty. And he was a real grouch." Dog and Rat watch each other
from opposite sides of the junk heap, hurling insults at one another and freezing
individually while the other animals huddle together for warmth. When Dog gets
sick, though, Rat comes to the rescue with a foot-long salami sandwich, and the
two become curmudgeonly friends: "'Don't need many friends,' thought Rat each
night as he lay next to Dog. 'Just need one.'" Munsinger is about the only illustra-
tor who can make rats and junkyards appealing, and here she effectively puts aside
cute for a slightly rougher environment. Friendship and community flourish
amongst the debris, and the various junkyard denizens exhibit touchingly human
traits (the picture of a reluctantly sympathetic Rat observing lonely Dog as he
howls at the full moon is an image with which young and old will empathize).
Crimi's story has a certain outlaw appeal, and young listeners will recognize the
hurt feelings and desire for self-protection that motivate both Rat and Dog. JMD
DUNBAR, PAUL LAURENCE 
Jump Back, Honey: The Poems ofPaul Laurence Dunbar;
comp. by Ashley Bryan and Andrea Davis Pinkney; illus. by Ashley Bryan, Carole
Byard, Jan Spivey Gilchrist, et al. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2406-9 
$17.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0464-5 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 4-8
In the brief biography of Dunbar that prefaces this illustrated collection of his
poems, Ashley Bryan and Andrea Davis Pinkney point out that during his lifetime
Dunbar "was both praised and criticized for his poems written in Black dialect."
This collection centers on four of the best known of these lively poems, with their
driving rhythms and engaging stories, while also offering others written in the
more conventionally poetic English typical of turn-of-the-century verse. Each of
these fourteen poems is accompanied by a striking illustration by one of five dis-
tinguished African-American illustrators (each of whom also contributes a brief
personal comment on their relationship to Dunbar's poetry in an "About the Art-
ists" section). The eclectic illustrations include two Faith Ringgold story quilts as
well as works in tempera and gouache (Bryan), oils (Byard), acrylic and oils
(Gilchrist), pencil and watercolor (Jerry Pinkney), and scratchboard, luma dyes
and acrylics (Brian Pinkney). They successfully capture the drama of the moment
"W'en de colo'ed ban' comes ma'chin' down de street," the more tranquil mo-
ments "when sparkling eyes/ Troop sleepywise" or when "the dew-drops shine like
fairy rain," and the color of a mythic moment when "an angel, robed in spotless
white,/ Bent down and kissed the sleeping Night." While both dialect and the use
of archaic/poetic diction can present some difficulties for young readers and for
readers aloud, the individuality and mastery each artist brings to the task of inter-
170 
* THE BULLETIN
preting the culturally significant texts in this child-friendly sampler offer a rich
experience to readers, listeners, and gazers. Jump back and get it. FK
FARMER, NANCY 
Casey Jones's Fireman: The Story of Sim Webb; illus. by James
Bernardin. 
Fogelman, 1999 
33p
ISBN 0-8037-1929-9 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Sim Webb, Casey Jones's African-American fireman, knows that the train whistle
that Casey acquired from a rather devilish gentleman is really Gabriel's trumpet
and that when it blows the world will end. Speeding along with Casey and the
new whistle, Sim sees that their train is going too fast. Casey refuses to slow down,
and his fate is sealed when his engine collides with an oncoming train. Sim jumps
from the train and escapes, hence tale, whistle, and world are saved. Lacking the
rapid pace and precise form of the oral tales it emulates, Sim's story still contains
some attractive elements: trains, speed, and dangerous races have a romantic charm
that will easily draw young readers. Dramatic play of light and shadow, unusual
perspectives, and romanticized images of the period illustrate Sim's life and Casey's
final journey. The characters are expressive and heroically handsome, except the
devil, who can't quite hide his horn-like curls or long, sharp nails. Although Sim
questions Casey's orders and reveals his moral backbone, this is, despite the title,
still Casey's story (he orders Sim to jump and then heroically sacrifices himself).
Contemporary listeners will want to know more about the historical Sim, whose
autobiography is mentioned in an endnote. JNH
FERRIE, RICHARD 
The World Turned Upside Down: George Washington and the
Battle of Yorktown. 
Holiday House, 1999 
168p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1402-7 
$18.95 
R Gr. 6-10
Military history buffs will be delighted with this carefully crafted and engrossing
account of the naval and land operations that led to Cornwallis' surrender at
Yorktown, and the improbable victory of a tattered band of colonists over the
disciplined forces of a world power. For Ferrie, America owed its success largely to
Washington's bullheaded determination, willingness to take risks, and faith in his
French allies-not to any innate brilliance as a military strategist. Although he
acknowledges that historians continue to debate the culpability of various British
officers, Ferrie traces their defeat to professional rivalries and jealousies that im-
peded any efforts at concerted action. A remarkably helpful collection of addenda
and supporting material enhance this presentation-from the timeline and thumb-
nail sketches of "The Key Players" (complete with portraits) that open the vol-
ume, to the period engravings and well-placed maps throughout the text, to the
appendices that offer information on battleships, weaponry, and uniforms of the
Revolutionary War. Of course, most readers come for the battles, and chapters on
the French victory in Chesapeake Bay and the Americans' audacious ground at-
tack at Yorktown deliver all the bang, boom, and bloodshed military history fans
could desire. EB
FRADIN, 
DENNIS 
BRINDELL 
Is There Life on Mars? McElderry,
1999 
136p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-82048-8 
$19.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Several years of scientific debate over the significance of the chunk of green Mar-
tian rock discovered in Antarctica has been distilled into children's science books
JANUARY 2000 
* 
171
(see, for example, Bortz' Martian Fossils on Earth?, BCCB 4/98), but here Fradin
places that debate into the broader context of our ongoing fascination (obsession?)
with locating extraterrestrial life. Retracing the history of scientific understanding
of Mars, Fradin demonstrates how earlier astronomers argued as passionately over
their telescopic observations as astrogeologists now haggle over rock sample
ALH84001, and how a popular speculation such as manmade Martian canals,
once raised, is mighty difficult to lay to rest. Readers are led to consider how
science reporting influenced fiction that embraced the possibility of Martian life
and that, in turn, created a popular predisposition to view new scientific discover-
ies as "evidence" of that life. Fradin's discussion is both cogent and thought-
provoking, and if his closing chapters on the future colonization of Mars might be
considered, well . . . fanciful, readers will nonetheless be engaged by his vision.
Color and black-and-white illustrations, an index, and a bibliography with a list of
websites are included. EB
FRASER, MARY ANN 
Vicksburg: The Battle That Won the Civil War. 
Holt,
1999 
104 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-6106-1 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
One might contest the subtitle's claim, but certainly the siege of Vicksburg was at
the very least a pivotal event on the road to Northern victory-not to mention
General Grant's career--deserving of a share of the attention that children's histo-
ries lavish on the Virginia campaigns. Fraser concisely explains the strategic im-
portance of the Mississippi city to the South's defense and details the Union's
string of failed strategies for approaching its formidably guarded and armed pe-
rimeter. Likewise, she conveys a clear sense of the wearying length of the siege and
the growing tension and, finally, desperation among the civilians blockaded within
their city. Little background information on the Civil War is offered, and al-
though the brevity, tight focus, and generous period photos and illustrations may
attract younger readers, some previous knowledge of the battle's larger context is
desirable. Endnotes, a bibliography, glossary, and list ofwebsites are appended. EB
GUARNIERI, PAOLO 
A Boy Named Giotto; tr. by Jonathan Galassi; illus. by Bimba
Landmann. 
Farrar, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-374-30931-0 
$17.00 
R* 
Gr. 2-5
Eight-year-old Giotto, a shepherd boy in medieval Italy, angers his father by his
constant "scribbling": "He draws pictures of sheep, trees, and birds on everything
he finds: on light-colored stones with a piece of charcoal, on dark stones with a
piece of chalk, in the sand with a stick." Sent back to the hills to find a lost lamb,
Giotto is captivated by a religious procession featuring a painting of the Madonna
and Child. The painter, Cimabue, welcomes the art-struck boy and explains how
to mix pigment into paint, eventually taking the boy on as his apprentice. Giotto
becomes a great artist, surpassing his teacher, creating "frescoes that even time will
not erase." Guarnieri, an art critic, has succeeded in making artistic inspiration
understandable to young readers. The story of Giotto, his relationship with his
father, and his longing to make art is told simply and understandably and is superbly
reflected in the paintings ofBimba Landmann. Landmann employs triptych-style
compositions and frames that give the illustrations iconographic impact; gold
detailing adds the sparkle often seen in religious paintings of the period, while rich
pigments in earth tones of deep greens and ochres add depth and energy. A masterful
172 
* THE BULLETIN
conjunction of illustration and text, this title combines history, art, and biography
in a tribute even the very young reader will find inspiring. JMD
HASKINS, JIM 
The Geography of Hope: Black Exodus from the South after Recon-
struction; illus. by Stephen Alcorn and with photographs. 
Twenty-First Century,
1999 
137p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-0323-5 
$22.90 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Eleven well-organized chapters describe the exodus of southern slaves to the fron-
tier and the leaders who inspired it. With chapter openings that hook the reader's
attention ("Benjamin Singleton was born a slave in Davidson County, near Nash-
ville, Tennessee, in 1809. Trained as a carpenter and cabinet maker, he probably
had a life easier than that of most slaves, for he had a skill and was not forced to do
the backbreaking agricultural work of field slaves") and chapter endings that pro-
vide bridges to the next topic, the work takes an in-depth look at a frequently
overlooked side of black history. Haskins reveals information that will be new to
many readers: that Frederick Douglass initially opposed the exodus movement,
that western communities found themselves overwhelmed by the immigrating
"Exodusters," and that all-black towns were established in several states. Stephen
Alcorn's orange and black, Art Deco-style chapter illustrations on creamy paper
join with the book's inviting design to create a rhythmic balance of text, negative
space, and illustrations. Historical documents, lithographic reproductions, and
clearly captioned black-and-white photographs accompany the text. An informa-
tive timeline is provided along with a bibliography of sources, source notes, a three-
page index, and endpapers mapping locations in the text. Teachers attempting an
exodus from dry, textbooky histories will happily travel this road. JNH
HAUSMAN, BONNIE 
A to Z Do You Ever Feel Like Me?: A Guessing Alphabet of
Feelings, Words, and Other Cool Stuff; illus. with photographs by Sandi
Fellman. 
Dutton, 1999 
4 8p
ISBN 0-525-46216-3 
$15.99 
R 5-7 yrs
This alphabet book couples a brief, fill-in-the-blank narrative with color photo-
graphs of children demonstrating selected emotions: "When my sister takes my
stuff without asking first, I could just scream. This morning I found my bow on
her teddy bear. I know she's little, but sometimes she makes me so a 
." The
paragraphs are more descriptive than inspired, but the energized layout and design
override textual flaws. Photographed borders reminiscent ofWick's canny arrange-
ments for Marzollo's ISpy series include objects that begin with the featured letter
(for the letter "H," observant readers will see a horse, heart, hanger, hat, hose, hot
dog, etc.). Glossily reproduced technicolor portraits and candy-store colors com-
bine to make this a slick visual treat. The result of an alphabet project Hausman (a
first grade teacher) does with her classes, this title offers a number of possibilities
for children working on letter and word recognition and retrieval. An answer key
and explanation of the book's origin are included. JMD
HEGEDUS, ALANNAH 
Shooting Hoops and Skating Loops: Great Inventions in Sports;
byAlannah Hegedus and Kaitlin Rainey, illus. by Bill Slavin. 
Tundra, 1999 
80p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-88776-453-3 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Sports history has a loyal following among recreational readers as well as report
JANUARY 2000 
* 
173
writers, and this Canadian import highlights not only games of multinational popu-
larity such as basketball and hockey but a host of other competitive sports and
recreational pursuits less familiar to kids south of the border. How many U.S.
readers know about competitive snowshoeing, the rules for snowsnake pitching,
the origins of five-pin bowling, or the genesis of the snowmobile? On more famil-
iar turf, are they aware of the early use of frozen horse dung for hockey pucks, or
that a bad case of sinusitis led to the first hockey goalie mask, or how James
Naismith's adherence to "muscular Christianity" influenced his invention of bas-
ketball? Hegedus and Rainey present their ten entries in lively prose, interspersed
with did-ya-know sidebar information closely coordinated with the text. Line-and
watercolor vignettes in subtle earth tones, a glossary, and an index round out the
volume. All that's missing is a bibliography or set of source notes for readers who
are bound to want more. EB
HOOKS, BELL 
Happy to Be Nappy; illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Jump at the Sun/
Hyperion, 1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2377-1 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0427-0 
$14.99 
R 4-8 yrs
hooks' happy homage to "girlpie hair . . . soft like cotton. . . . full of frizz and
fuzz. .. . pulled tight, cut close/ or just let go/ so wind can carry it/ all over the
place" has a freewheeling joy that is admirably captured by illustrator Raschka.
The verse celebrates nappy hair in all its forms, exuberantly extolling its virtues as
"hair to take the gloom away" and seeing it as "a halo-a crown." Aimed at a
younger audience than Herron's Nappy Hair (BCCB 2/97) this volume showcases
not only hooks' playful poem but Raschka's watercolor wondergirls, who appear
in an astonishing array of hairstyles, colors, and moods. Spatters of color on white
pages give the compositions the feeling of a party room splashed with confetti and
occupied by a group of very energetic girl-guests-of-honor. The text runs on just a
touch, and hooks avoids any references to boys' having nappy hair; still, the rhythm
of words and images here is pretty irresistible. All it needs is a melody to make it
music-the dancing words and pictures are already there. JMD
HOPKINSON, DEBORAH 
Maria's Comet; illus. by Deborah Lanino. 
Schwartz/
Atheneum, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81501-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Inspired by the life of Maria Mitchell, America's first woman astronomer,
Hopkinson has created a fictional story of one young girl's quest for knowledge
about the night sky in an era that did not support that quest. Narrator Maria
describes her family life, her astronomer father, her brother's restless longing for
adventure, and her own longing for the stars in spare but imagistic prose. The
accompanying acrylic paintings teeter on the edge of sentimentality; the charac-
ters' big-eyed faces are more than a bit sweet, and the drafting of the figures is
sometimes clumsy. Still, viewers will find the cobalt-blue nights, lit with constel-
lations that make imaginary (and actual) pictures in the sky, every bit as attractive
as Maria does. Hopkinson's text, with its inherent emotionality and family drama,
will carry readers and listeners to the promising conclusion. Biographical infor-
mation about the real Maria Mitchell is included in an author's note, and there is
a brief section on "More about Astronomy Terms in This Story." JMD
174 
* THE BULLETIN
INGOLD, JEANETTE 
Airfield. Harcourt, 1999 
14 8p
ISBN 0-15-202053-5 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Beatty revels in her peripatetic existence, moving seasonally from aunt to aunt as
her father ekes out a living as a pilot in the Depression. Now in Texas, she finds
herself getting involved in life at the local airfield where her uncle works; she makes
herself useful in the manager's office while yearning for a trip aloft with her father.
Her interest in flight is sharpened when she discovers that her late mother was
herself a famous and daring pilot, and Beatty determines not only to fly but also to
find out more about the past of which her distant father never speaks. Ingold
writes a solid story that's old-fashioned in the good sense of the word, and the
multiple final resolutions (Beatty steers her father down in a bad-weather landing
and stays happily with the current aunt) have a fictional validity if not a genuine
reality. Beatty herself is a heroine of vim and vigor, and the book's provision of an
incipient boyfriend, in the form of a nice young Okie who stays around to work, is
obliging and pleasing. It's also refreshing to see a book interested in early flight
that gives the ground crew its due; young barnstormers might want to touch down
on this before soaring on to the Flambards trilogy. DS
JENKINS, MARTIN 
The Emperor's Egg; illus. by Jane Chapman. 
Candlewick,
1999 
30p
ISBN 0-7636-0557-3 
$16.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Nonfiction can tell more than just facts, it can tell a story, and that is just what
Jenkins (a conservation biologist) does in this thoroughly enjoyable look (reminis-
cent of the publisher's successful Read and Wonder series) at the fatherly duties of
the male Emperor Penguin. The presentation will elicit giggles from the intended
audience even as it opens the door to the ingestion of some painless natural sci-
ence: "Down at the very bottom of the world, there's a huge island that's almost
completely covered in snow and ice. It's called Antarctica, and it's the coldest,
windiest place on earth. The weather's bad enough in summer, but in winter it is
really terrible. It's hard to imagine anything living there. But wait... what's that
shape over there? It can't be. YES! It's a penguin!" Chapman's acrylics reflect the
gleeful tone of the text without anthropomorphizing the subject, relying on the
odd perspective and occasional close-up of the penguins' naturally comic visage to
do the trick. The primary text is supplemented by text in italics that gives addi-
tional details about penguin lifestyles. Parents and teachers of primary schoolers
are going to flock to this one, and beginning readers will get a charge out of some-
thing that's interesting, accurate, and theirs. A short index is included. JMD
JENNINGS, LINDA 
Nine Naughty Kittens; illus. by Caroline Jayne Church. 
Little
Tiger, 1999 
[20p]
ISBN 1-888444-62-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
1-3 yrs
This self-described "rhyming, counting, lift-the-flap book" has an appealing sim-
plicity that is going to engage the very little ones with very little effort. As the
viewer lifts the flaps to count from one to nine, the kittens chase yarn, jump on
fences, and follow the fish wagon, until "Nine naughty kittens find a cozy den....
'Come to me,' says Mother Cat, and then there are... TEN!" The cartoon felines
do indeed have a kittenish allure, although describing their actions as "naughty" is
JANUARY 2000 
* 
175
a bit of a stretch. The scansion of the rhyme is occasionally forced, the extrapola-
tion of the theme is unimaginative, and Mother Cat is not, technically, a kitten
despite her inclusion in the final quota. Still, the lift-the-flap action and eye-
catching colors will make this an agreeable bit of fluff for individual or group
sharing. JMD
JUKES, MAVIS 
Cinderella 2000. Delacorte, 1999 
197p
ISBN 0-385-32711-0 
$8.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Life with her stepmother and bratty twin stepsisters is not all that Ashley would
desire. The final straw is when stepmother Phyllis begins to recant her permission
for Ashley to go to the fabulous millennium party at the Ocean Crest Country
Club. To Ashley's horror, permission is reinstated only because Phyllis wangles an
invitation for the twins as well; Ashley boycotts out of humiliation and spite until
Phyllis' Grammie sends Ashley off in the limo with a new dress and shoes. The
book wavers uncertainly between cartoon (the twins are caricatured preteen mon-
sters), justification (Ashley really is being asked to give up a lot), and undercutting
(her constant embarrassment at Phyllis' behavior is clearly adolescent oversensitivity),
so it's not always clear what readers are expected to make of the proceedings.
However, it's diverting to see the blend of the teen social whirl with fairy-tale
archetypes (Jukes tosses in a few other nods to folktales, such as Ashley's beloved
stuffed frog). The author is particularly good at a Judy Blume-ish froth of adoles-
cent speech that makes the whole account so easily readable it might well be maga-
zine fare. Like "Cinderella," this is a glossy little outing, and readers will get a kick
out of seeing Ashley spared of her ashes and whisked off to the ball. DS
KENNEDY, X. J. 
Elympics; illus. by Graham Percy. 
Philomel, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23249-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Predictable rhymes, alliteration, concrete images, and ludicrously delightful in-
congruities (an elephant high jumper?) fill poems describing the winter and sum-
mer Olympics of fourteen elephant athletes: "Big Elmo gobbled down a ton/ Of
peanuts and grew snoozy,/ So when he came to make his jump/ He felt a wee bit
woozy./ He took off smoothly through the air,/ But-oh-oh-when he landed/
He hit a snowbank upside down./ He'll end up empty handed." Bold watercolor
and pencil illustrations pose the ele-athletes against intensely blue skies, ice, and
water; despite the cuteness of the cartoons, Percy's pachyderms display solid physi-
cality and grace. This isn't Kennedy at his best-the verse here depends more on
rhyme scheme than inspiration-but readers will enjoy the silliness of elephant
divers, gymnasts, and figure skaters with names like Elfantina, Trelawney,
Trumpette, and Trinket. JNH
KESELMAN, 
GABRIELA 
The Gift; tr. by Laura McKenna; illus. by Pep
Montserrat. 
Kane/Miller, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-916291-91-X 
$15.95 
R 3-6 yrs
Mikie's birthday is just around the corner, and Mr. and Mrs. Goodparent take to
the "Thinking Chair" for gift ideas. After discovering that the chair evokes "a pain
in their bottoms,/ A pain in their heads,/ And still not a single idea," they decide to
ask Mikie what he wants. The enthusiastic youngster replies, "I want a very special
present... And I want it to be very... BIG!" After a shared glance, Mr. and Mrs.
176 
* THE BULLETIN
Goodparent reply, "He wants an elephant!" 
The demands progress, while Mr.
and Mrs. Goodparent continue their charades to figure out what he wants. Fold-
out pages reveal the parents' greatest fears ("He wants a weight lifter!... He wants
a smokestack!") and assumptions ("He wants a teddy bear! ... 
He wants a big
bowl of candy!"). Mom and Dad are baffled, "and since they didn't know what
else to say, they gave him a BIG, STRONG, SOFT, SWEET, WARM hug. Then
they ROCKED him from side to side, TOSSED him up in the air and made him
LAUGH, for a loooong time." Boldly colored figures with thick black outlines are
highlighted on silver background to assist the telling of this spirited family anec-
dote. The minimalist style echoes William Steig's Pete's a Pizza (BCCB 12/98),
but in this case, the joke's on Mr. and Mrs. Goodparents, because, as Mikie's final
wink conveys, a hug is what he wanted all along. EAB
KLINE, LISA WILLIAMS 
Eleanor Hill. Front Street/Cricket, 1999 
[2 56p]
ISBN 0-8126-2715-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Spending the rest of her life in her North Carolina fishing village holds no charm
for Eleanor; she pines for adventure after the fashion of her older brother Frank,
who incurred the wrath of their dour papa by setting out on his own and earning
a fair living on the construction of the Panama Canal. Eleanor jumps at the chance
to live with her aunt in bustling New Bern, where Pepsi Cola, high school, auto-
mobiles, and fashionable clothing are not considered luxuries. Aunt Velma pulls
strings to arrange Eleanor a "good" marriage with a charming but weak-willed
society scion; Eleanor's affections turn to an "unsuitable" Italian immigrant, and
her aunt's autocratic decrees regarding proper social behavior eventually lead the
young woman to wonder whether she's much better off than at home. There's no
real doubt that Eleanor's road will lead straight to happily-ever-after with the dark
and dashing Niccolo Garibaldi, and pampered rival Ray Hamilton never rises
enough beyond a stock figure to generate much romantic intrigue. Kline is, how-
ever, effective at illuminating the life Eleanor most fears: the transformation from
glowing bride at fifteen to work-worn, impoverished mother at twenty, which is
the lot of her older sisters. Readers may find that their sympathies linger with
those worthy young matrons rather than the sister who made such an easy escape.
EB
LEUZZI, LINDA 
A Creative Life: The Young Person's Guide. Watts, 1999 144p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-11527-5 
$24.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Basic self-help information and interviews provide an overview of and role models
for creativity in this three-part examination. In the first part, Leuzzi draws on
secondary sources to explain creativity's importance, interweaves anecdotes from
the lives of contemporary and historical figures, and suggests ways to become more
creative. The second part presents an eclectic, gender-balanced selection of inter-
views with creative adults: e.g. an actor, an artist, a scientist-educator, a chef-
restaurateur, and a conductor. Part III recognizes people who have never appeared
on front pages or in history books: a paraplegic cab driver, a student activist, a
sixth-grade teacher. The advice is generic and the dense text is more exhortatory
than helpful. The book is nonetheless upbeat and encouraging, and the author's
obvious good intentions and chatty style are still inviting. Endnotes, a bibliogra-
phy, a list of Internet sites, an index, and an author's note are included. JNH
JANUARY 2000 
* 
177
LONDON, JONATHAN 
Who Bop?; illus. by Henry Cole. 
HarperCollins,
2000 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027918-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027917-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
The animals arrive at the sock hop, and Jazz-Bo the cat unpacks his sax to lead his
combo into the swingin' night. The canine keyboardist makes "black and white/
light up the night"; the doggy drummer tosses his sticks in the air; Jazz-Bo himself
"squeezes them blues/ right out of his shoes." Cole's lively pastel-hued lions, sheep,
frogs, rabbits, and snakes kick up their heels (or whatever they've got to kick)
against simple matte backgrounds, generating a lot of visual energy. There are
some oddly discordant notes, however: "sock hop" has more to do with fifties rock
'n' roll than with be-bop, and frequent changes of rhythm and tongue twisters
around every corner will trip up the unwary and the unpracticed: "Hip de-dip/
and hop hop hop,/ we like to bo-bip/ and do-wop the bop." Still, the musically
inclined animals have a loony humor that is contagious. When pandemonium is
the order of the day, run this past the story rug crowd and let 'em bop til they drop.
EB
LUNGE-LARSEN, LISE, ad. 
The Troll With No Heart in His Body and Other Tales of
Trolls from Norway; illus. by Betsy Bowen. 
Houghton, 1999 
96p
ISBN 0-395-91371-3 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Lunge-Larsen presents nine Norwegian tales about the greed and foolishness of
trolls in a casual style that makes these stories ripe for reading aloud and storytell-
ing. Her liveliness of language and easy turn of phrase give these retellings a com-
forting tone despite the sometimes scary events. Bowen's colored-ink woodblock
prints, inspired by traditional Norwegian woodcarving and design, suit the monu-
mental nature of the subject in full-page, framed illustrations, while smaller spot
art and decorative motifs add graceful details. Lunge-Larsen includes notes for
each tale describing print sources as well as her own experiences with hearing the
tales as a child; an introduction explains her belief in the need for storytelling in
today's world. While folklore aficionados familiar with Asbjornsen and Moe will
know the majority of these tales ("The Three Billy Goats Gruff," "Butterball,"
etc.), younger readers will find them both unusual and refreshing. JMD
MARCELLINO, FRED 
I, Crocodile; written and illus. by Fred Marcellino. 
di Capua/
HarperCollins, 1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205199-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205168-7 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
A plump green crocodile lives happily and voraciously in Egypt until Napoleon
captures him as a novelty and takes him to Paris. There he's the toast of the town,
but he finds the meals disappointing; he's more than disappointed, when his nov-
elty has faded, to discover that the menu may soon feature him. Managing his
escape in the nick of time, he wends his way to that natural urban home of the
crocodile, the sewer, whereupon he finally satisfies his palate by snacking on el-
egantly attired French gentry seized from the streets. Flap copy attributes the plot
to "a nineteenth-century satire by an unknown French author," which may ac-
count for some of the otherwise unaccountable plot elements (what's the point of
178 
* 
THE BULLETIN
the tossed-off ballooning accident that distracts the chef and allows the croc to
flee?), and the resolution is probably more satisfying when underpinned with po-
litical implications. Nonetheless, the big reptile is an engaging and sympathetic
narrator whose simple desire to fill his belly will be completely understandable to
young viewers, and the twist on the alligators-in-the-sewer legend will give rise to
all manner of audience storytelling. Marcellino's watercolors give the snaggle-
toothed crocodile an expressive mien and googly eyes that contrast with the snooty
hauteur of the sharp-edged and narrow Parisiens; there's no question that the croc
would make better company than his prey, so audiences will resoundingly approve
of his choice to eat rather than be eaten (and he's not exactly racked with guilt as
he lolls comfortably in the sewer picking his teeth with the feather from a victim's
fashionable hat). Dish this one up to kids starting to find Lyle a little tame. DS
MARKUN, PATRICIA 
It's Panamd's Canal! Linnet, 1999 
[103p] 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-208-02499-9 
$22.50
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 6-9
A pair of intriguing opening chapters on a typical passage through the Panama
Canal and on its construction seem to promise a lively examination of the water-
way on the eve of its transfer to the Panama government. However, once Markun
reaches the heart of her topic-preparation of Panamanians for smooth operation
of the canal and its chance for financial success-the remaining chapters spiral
into a dry and often confusing discussion of the intricate political maneuvering
and outright corruption that mark both the history of the canal and, in Markun's
view, its probable future. Although these issues are undeniably germane to her
analysis, Markun's explanations of successive treaties and current leadership make
laborious reading, and it is doubtful that young readers' intrinsic interest in these
convoluted shenanigans will propel them through her murky text. Moreover, the
speculative phrasing of her predictions for the December 31, 1999 transfer will
make the prose sound quaintly obsolete after January 1, 2000. Only the most
determined report writers will cull what they're looking for here. EB
MAYNARD, THANE 
Working with Wildlife: A Guide to Careers in the Animal
World. Watts, 1999 
14 4 p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-11538-0 
$26.00 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Kids with a love of animals often don't see much alternative to veterinary medi-
cine, but Maynard, the director of the Cincinnati Zoo, offers a bookful of addi-
tional possibilities. He begins with insight into different aspects of veterinary
practice, ranging from research to veterinary technician, and he then goes into five
chapters about careers in research, education, conservation, and in institutions
such as zoos and aquariums. The book not only describes a variety of careers but
also offers a gallery of people pursuing paths of which readers may never have
dreamed: there are zookeepers and reproductive physiologists, spider behaviorists
and wildlife photographers, working all over the world. What's particularly useful
is the clear emphasis on how a variety of talents can be made to serve an interest in
animals; another utilitarian assist comes in the form of specific advice on educa-
tion and rough estimates about pay (a key provides scales for years of schooling
and for salaries). Maynard's familiarity with many of the professionals adds a
personal touch, and the "How to Get There from Here" chapter provides concrete
JANUARY 2000 
* 
179
suggestions for taking steps towards one's career goals. The black-and-white pho-
tographs are unfortunately dim and indistinct (the color inserts have better
viewability, but the captions are often odd and disjointed); the text is the real draw
here, and young people in search of assistance in realizing their dreams will find
this helpful indeed. A glossary, index, and list of sources (print and electronic) for
further information are included. DS
McNEAL, LAURA 
Crooked; by Laura and Tom McNeal. 
Knopf, 1999 
346p
ISBN 0-679-89300-8 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Clara Wilson is caught between disappointment and promise: she's been dumped
by her best friend and her parents' tense marriage is now in full unravel mode, but
she's also beginning to see genuine possibilities in her crush on Amos Mackenzie.
Amos has his own challenges: 
though he likes Clara, he's struggling with the
sudden death of his father, he's dealing with a rise in his social status following his
intervention in an act of vandalism and subsequent hospitalization, and the van-
dals, the notorious Charles and Eddie Tripp, have it in for him. As Amos and
Clara draw closer, the menace of the Tripp brothers looms larger, since Eddie has
taken a shine to Clara. The McNeals offer some insightful exploration of social
dynamics here, both among peers and between parents and children. It's believ-
able that even near-saintly Amos succumbs at times to cruelty and to betrayal (to
get his hand on a popular girl's breast, he fulfills her request to declare Clara a
"dink") and that Clara, ignorant of Eddie's role in Amos' attack, would be flat-
tered by his attentions and capable of using them against Amos. The book keeps
its protagonists admirable, however: Clara stands on her limits even with the
dangerous boy, and Amos manages both to defend Clara and to make reparations.
The final drama, in which Clara is held captive and threatened with rape by Charles
Tripp, seems to belong to a less subtle and more thrilleresque novel; it certainly
discharges the built-up tension, however, and provides the final push to bring
Amos and Clara satisfyingly and completely together. DS
MCPHERSON, STEPHANIE SAMMARTINO 
Sisters against Slavery: A Story about Sa-
rah andAngelina Grimkd; illus. by Karen Ritz. 
Lerner, 1999 
6 4p 
Creative
Minds Biographies
ISBN 1-57505-361-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Grimke is hardly the first name to surface in elementary school discussions of
abolitionism, but McPherson's thoughtful exposition should win these heroines a
following. A South Carolinian raised to a life of ease, elder sister Sarah expressed
her disapproval of slavery from an early age; when the path to a law career was
closed to her, she gravitated to the Society of Friends, among whom her anti-
slavery notions were not outlandish. The much younger Angelina found her own
way to the cause years later, and as the sisters' impulse to activism grew, their
affiliation with the Quakers began to dissolve. Much of their public lives as women's
rights and abolitionist speakers were spent together, but McPherson carefully traces
the different roads that led them to their life's work, their differences in tempera-
ment and often even in interests, and the different sacrifices and consolations that
shaped their experience. McPherson is particularly adept at demonstrating that
the abolitionist movement was no monolith, and that women in a public role were
so antithetical to much of the GrimkIs' society that their forward behavior even
threatened the cause. When procrastinating report writers find all the Harriet
180 
* THE BULLETIN
Tubman and Frederick Douglass books checked out, hand them a copy of Sisters
and promise them, despite the stodgy illustrations and layout, a rewarding read. A
bibliography and index are included. EB
MONCEAUX, MORGAN 
My Heroes, My People: African Americans andNativeAmeri-
cans in the West; written by Morgan Monceaux and Ruth Katcher; illus. by Mor-
gan Monceaux. 
Foster/Farrar, 1999 
6 4p
ISBN 0-374-30770-9 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Although the title suggests that these brief biographies feature historical heroes of
the American West, Monceaux includes individuals from South America, North
America, and the Caribbean. Beginning with Montezuma, Pocahontas, and
Toussaint L'Ouverture (whom the author lists under the heading "The Legends"),
the book describes historical figures under categories such as "The Fur Trade,"
"The Cowboys," "The Women," "Buffalo Soldiers," etc. Successful entries in-
clude human interest information, such as quotations, physical descriptions, and
anecdotes; the least successful entries resort to generalities to supplement a paucity
of information. Mixed-media portraits, outlined with text giving biographical
information about their subject, accompany each entry and vary in size from small
block inserts to full-page illustrations. Each portrait has a sense of tension, drama,
and dimension enhanced by backgrounds busy with irregular lines, energetic scor-
ing, and dynamic hues. This is essentially a captioned gallery, the point of the
book being the glossy portraits more than the shallow information. Students re-
quiring in-depth accounts will want to consult other works, but art teachers will
find this a good example of a visual approach to history. Source notes, suggestions
for further reading, and an index are included. JNH
NORMAN, HOWARD, comp. and ad. 
Trickster and the Fainting Birds; illus. by Tom
Pohrt. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1999 
82p
ISBN 0-15-200888-8 
$20.00 
R Gr. 4-8
Seven Algonquin tales of Trickster (or Wistchahik, Wichikapache, or Wesucechak,
as he is also called in Algonquin Cree) are retold here with style and wit. From the
opening tale, "Trickster and the Best Hermit," the personality of this complex
antihero (who appears in his many guises as fool, braggart, destroyer, and helper) is
humorously trotted out. What will appeal to younger readers about this character
and his adventures (besides the physical humor) is that Trickster is very childlike
in his naive resistance to considering the consequences of his actions. The el-
egantly spare language (arranged in brief paragraphs with ragged right margins)
gives the impression of rhythmic free verse. Pohrt's watercolor and pen and ink
illustrations have a modern solidity that easily makes these stories believable as
happening in the present and not in some distant past. The depiction of the natu-
ral world, from landscape to animals, has a formal stateliness that contrasts effec-
tively with the stories' humor. Norman collected these tales from individuals over
periods of time, and his notes for each tale and his introduction are clear and
specific on that process, evincing a laudable attention to cultural authority. JMD
PAK, SOYUNG 
DearJuno; illus. by Susan Kathleen Hartung. 
Viking, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-670-88252-6 
$15.99 
R 
4-7 yrs
A young boy misses his grandmother in Korea, but he alleviates his yearning through
their correspondence. Though he cannot read Korean, he knows what his
JANUARY 2000 
* 181
grandmother's letter says, because she has sent a picture of herself cuddling a new
cat and enclosed a dried flower: "'Grandmother has a new cat,' Juno said as he
handed the letter to his mother. 'And she's growing red and yellow flowers in her
garden."' Juno decides to send his grandmother a letter in return, so he sketches
his tree swing, picks her a leaf from the tree, and draws a picture of himself. The
love between boy and grandmother is touchingly depicted; Pak's language has a
lyrical lilt that quietly underscores the beauty of their relationship. Hartung uses
oil paint glazes to create delicate paintings that illuminate Juno's world in a gentle
play of dark and light: fireflies spot the evening, Juno and his dog, Sam, sit in the
yellow glow of the porch light or in the warm light of a bedside lamp. The final
illustration of Juno's grandmother ("whose gray hair sat on top of her head like a
powdered doughnut") sipping tea in her garden brings Pak's tale to a quiet close.
This is an elegantly understated yet effectively told story of a long-distance but still
important emotional bond. JMD
PULLMAN, PHILIP 
The Firework-Maker's Daughter; illus. by S. Saelig
Gallagher. 
Levine/Scholastic, 1999 
97p
ISBN 0-590-18719-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Lila, daughter of a master firework-maker, has been trained in the art of combus-
tibles by her father, and she wishes to become a master firework-maker herself.
Her father, on the other hand, thinks she should get married. This familial con-
flict spurs Lila's quest to Mount Merapi, to get royal sulfur from the Fire Fiend.
Hapless pirates, a talking sacred white elephant, and a crucial fireworks-display
contest punctuate a contrived plot. Pullman rushes the action somewhat, not
taking the time to give even the main character enough depth or motivation to
emotionally involve the reader. The setting ("a thousand miles ago, in a country
east of the jungle and south of the mountains") is sketchily evoked, and the humor
in the fireworks contest (with mildly satirical descriptions of German, Italian, and
American fireworks displays) may elude young readers. Still, there are moments
when Pullman's talent for imagery sparks to life ("little lotus flowers made of white
fire suddenly popped open on the water ... the flowers began to float across the
dark lake like little paper boats"), and the fast pace does guarantee a breathless
adventure. Gallagher's black and white illustrations add style to the plot, and the
elegant running borders enhance the classy book design. This fireworks fantasy
doesn't burn very brightly, but those individuals looking for a quick flashy read
may still appreciate it. JMD
RAPP, ADAM 
The Copper Elephant. Front Street, 1999 
247p
ISBN 1-886910-42-1 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Whensday is a Digit Kid, a child under twelve whose job it is to labor in the Pits
busting rocks, one of the many bleak existences in Rapp's postapocalyptic world of
chaos, Orwellian fascism, rampant disease, and radioactive rain. Saved by a kindly
coffinmaker, Whensday flees him upon discovering that he plans to sell her to a
rich lady who yearns for a child; she meets up with Honeycut, a mentally disabled
adult mourning the little brother who was taken away, and with Oakley
Brownhouse, who miraculously escaped from the Pits. The fellowship of three is
shattered when Honeycut is seized by the all-powerful Syndicate (for killing the
officer who raped Whensday), and Whensday and Oakley must struggle with the
high price and slim chance of survival in this nearly hopeless world. Rapp, whose
182 
* THE BULLETIN
ear for language was evident in The Buffalo Tree (BCCB 7/97), effectively con-
structs Whensday's narration to reflect an alien but credible society; in her voice,
naivete blends with bitter practicality, and she's sometimes densely poetic and
sometimes tartly direct. The book doesn't shirk from the requisite dystopian de-
spair (Oakley, with Whensday's help, eventually joins up with the Syndicate, and
Honeycut faces public stoning at the hands of his brother's fellow Pit workers) but
does provide Whensday with a more hopeful future with the Babymakers, a secret
enclave of women who defy the Syndicate by remaining fertile and reproducing
(Whensday carries a child as a result of her rape). This is deftly and convincingly
constructed, and young adults who read for the pleasures of darkness will find it
grimly satisfying. DS
RINALDI, ANN 
The Coffin Quilt: The Feud between the Hatfields and the
McCoys. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1999 
228p
ISBN 0-15-202015-2 
$16.00 
R Gr. 9-12
The infamous feud between the Hatfields and the McCoys is seen through the
eyes of Fanny, youngest McCoy daughter and favorite of older sister Roseanna,
who exacerbates the ill-feeling between the families by running off with Johnse
Hatfield. The historical events that surround this feud have been romanticized
into a tale of star-crossed lovers, but Rinaldi posits that the conflict was rooted in
the two families' being on different sides during the Civil War, the theft of McCoy
pigs by the Hatfields, and the refusal of Devil Anse, Hatfield patriarch, to allow
Johnse to marry a pregnant Roseanna. Fanny's voice is informed more by inno-
cence than anything else; it is only after much terror and death that her voice
becomes weighted with knowledge beyond her years. The relationships between
family members are the key to this tale, and Fanny's observations about those
relationships and what fuels them drive the breakneck momentum of the novel.
Violence, revenge, honor, love, and justice are forces that tower over the players,
inexorably moving them toward their fated ends. In the center of the tale is the
coffin quilt, made by the beautiful and doomed Roseanna, embroidered with the
names of both the Hatfields and the McCoys. Essentially a family genealogy, its
macabre design-coffins around the edges stitched with birth dates of individuals,
which are moved into the center "graveyard" with death dates added when the
time comes-becomes the symbol for the doomed destinies of both families. Bro-
ken vows, murder, and suicide are classic stuff, and this novel has a sensational
sweep that will carry readers pell-mell to the final tragic moments. JMD
RINGGOLD, FAITH 
Ifa Bus Could Talk: The Story ofRosa Parks; written and illus.
by Faith Ringgold. 
Simon, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81892-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
An animated bus pulls up to Marcie's stop, and, not wanting to be late for school,
she hops on. It turns out she is riding the "Rosa Parks bus," and the bus proceeds
to tell Marcie all about "the patron saint of the Civil Rights movement," the auto-
narrative punctuated by choruses of "Amen! Amen!" from the other passengers.
The bus ride ends with the arrival of Rosa Parks, a celebration of her birthday, the
singing of a spiritual, and the appearance of other legendary figures of the civil
rights movement. Ringgold's stylized acrylics feature sharp contrasts, an intense
palette, and hints of modern masters (Czanne, Matisse) in single and double-page
spreads depicting images of a segregated South and of Rosa Parks' life. The night-
JANUARY 2000 
* 
183
mare vision of the Ku Klux Klan is compelling, and the whites-only swimming
pool makes its own commentary as several of the white swimmers appear to be
drowning. The narration is text-heavy, however, and it encyclopedically cata-
logues Parks' life in the choppy rhythms of a student's oral report; Marcie's closing
statement ("When I got up this morning, little did I know that I would be attend-
ing Mrs. Parks' birthday party on the very bus she was arrested on. I can't wait to
tell my class about this!") pretty much exemplifies the pedantic nature of the text.
Still, Ringgold does provide some context for Parks' remarkable life, even if the
presentation is unnecessarily contrived and driven by myth (no, Mrs. Parks did
not just decide "right then and there ... to do something" about unfair segrega-
tion laws by not giving up her seat). Quotations from Parks are not attributed,
and the work provides no source notes. JNH
ROTTMAN, S. L. 
Head above Water. 
Peachtree, 1999 
196p
ISBN 1-56145-185-1 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Skye's plate is already pretty full: her single mother works two jobs, so Skye is
largely responsible for her older brother, Sunny, who has Down syndrome; she's
also a dedicated swimmer, hoping to make it to the state meet this year. She's
distracted from all this, however, by her new boyfriend, the handsome, sexy, and
demanding Mike, who wants more from her than she's sure she's ready to give. To
find time for Mike, Skye lies to her mother about giving swimming lessons to
Sunny, but soon things heat up on both the family and boyfriend fronts and Skye
is in hot water all around. The boyfriend who wants too much (Skye in fact fights
off a rape attempt) is a fairly stock character, and the plot here (Skye's family
loyalties win out over her own desires) is fairly predictable. Rottman paints effec-
tive portraits, though: of Skye, both a serious athlete and a starry-eyed girl flat-
tered by Mike's attentions, and especially of Sunny, worshipping his capable younger
sister and beginning to see the start of his own athletic dreams when his swimming
abilities lead him to the Special Olympics. While it's clear that some of Skye's
family obligations are unfair, it's also clear that there's no alternative, and that
Sunny is Skye's most loyal champion. Readers who don't mind the absence of
surprises will enjoy this examination of family life and loyalties. DS
SAN SoucI, ROBERT D., ad. 
The Secret of the Stones: A Folktale; illus. by James
Ransome. 
Fogelman, 1999 
40p
ISBN 0-8037-1640-0 
$16.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In this emotionally resonant African-American folktale set "back in the olden times,"
the childlessness of hard-working protagonists John and Clara is resolved through
the fantastic means of two little white stones, found by Clara, that "shone as pale
and round and smooth as twin moons in her cinnamon-colored palm." As pre-
dicted in wise Aunt Easter's "prophesyin' dreams," these stones turn into an "or-
phan boy an' girl. ... barefoot and raggedy, but beautiful" who clean house for the
couple while they are working in the field. So these children can live "happily ever
after with their new Pa and Ma," John and Clara must face down the cruel conjure
man who orphaned and bewitched them and take from him three ingredients for
Aunt Easter's magic charm. The standard English of the narration contrasts jar-
ringly with the imposed dialect of the dialogue ("Put de corn bread on de table,
den hide. When de chillen eat de bread, yo' say dese words") and the story itself is
unnecessarily lengthy. The somewhat romanticized oil paintings are rendered in a
184 
* 
THE BULLETIN
dark palette highlighted by intense primary colors; the warmth of the tale is rein-
forced by the emphasis on the characters' luminous faces. This story invites com-
parison with European folkloric motifs as well as other African and African-American
tales (a note sources the tale in the Congo and in Arkansas). FK
SCHACHNER, JUDITH BYRON 
The Grannyman; written and illus. by Judith Byron
Schachner. 
Dutton, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46122-1 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Simon is "a very old cat," lucky enough to have a family that adores him and does
all they can to "keep him comfy in his old age." The aged feline spends his time
baking his old bones on radiators and "staring into space while he shuffled through
a lifetime of old memories." But Simon is feeling pitiful, and "he felt so useless
that at ten o'clock on a Tuesday night, Simon stuck his bony old legs into the air
and breathed his last. Or so he thought-but then, in less than a minute, his
family plopped something soft right on top of their old cat's tummy." The new
kitten requires demonstrations of whisker-washing, litterbox using, and, finally,
grooming, and Simon happily obliges, until "a grumbly rumbly purr stirred deep
within his chest and he curled himself around his little pet," thus earning his new
name, Grannyman. The story neatly balances between sweetness and wry humor,
and the Siamese Simon and his kitten are depicted in typically catlike poses in
impressionistic watercolor and pencil illustrations that make the most of the un-
cluttered space. Whether playing the piano, curled up on a chair, or stretched out
on top of the stove, Simon is a memorable purr-sonality, and cat lovers, old and
new, are going to appreciate him as much as his kitten does. JMD
SCOTT, C. ANNE 
LizardMeetsIvana the Terrible; illus. by Stephanie Roth. 
Holt,
1999 
115p
ISBN 0-8050-6093-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Third-grader Lizzy Gardner is the new girl in school, and more than anything else
she wants a best friend. Taken under the collective wings of classmates Tiffy and
Crystal, Lizzy avoids Ivana ("the Terrible"), an outspoken, sometimes alarming
individual. Assigned to one another as "journal buddies," however, shy Lizzie and
tempestuous Ivana begin a tentative relationship. Misunderstandings, miscom-
munication, and the usual grade-school angst interfere, but the girls come out on
the right side of camaraderie in the end. Earth-shattering this isn't, but it is emi-
nently readable lower-grade fiction with plot and characterizations that ring true.
Scott's language is unassuming but effective, with a natural cadence that will easily
draw in readers. Her descriptions of classroom politics, interpersonal dynamics,
and social hierarchy are right on the money, and her adults, while not overwhelm-
ingly intrusive, are present and loving. Roth's black-and-white drawings have a
masterful ease that adds to the ambiance. Young readers will see themselves in
Ivana and Lizzie and perhaps be heartened in their own search for best-friendship.
JMD
SHANNON, 
DAVID 
David Goes to School; written and illus. by David
Shannon. 
Scholastic, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-590-48087-1 
$14.95 
R 3-6 yrs
Those familiar with No, David (BCCB 9/98) will realize that David's encounter
with school will not be all gold stars and smiley faces. He starts off late ("David!
JANUARY 2000 
* 
185
You're tardy!"), goofs off at the chalkboard ("Sit down, David!"), gazes out the
window ("PAY ATTENTION, David!"), and eventually lands himself in after-
school detention, wherein his desk-cleaning labors earn him teacherly approval.
As in the previous book, David is clearly not a bad kid, just one who has difficulty
reconciling his energetic impulses with the constraints of adult demands. The text
(here childishly scrawled on scraps of penmanship-lined paper), which in most
spreads is all we know of David's teacher, operates largely as captions or punch
lines for the illustrations, and the art is independently eloquent enough to carry
the weight. Round-headed David has a surreal yet friendly and child-drawn look,
with his grin of randomly placed teeth, his shiny face, and his round, sneakered
feet. His antics such as his cheerful drum solo in the library--and especially his
pleading cross-legged squirm as the teacher sighs, "Again?"-will be recognizable
(and perhaps inspiring) to viewers, who are unlikely ever to say "No" to David.
DS
SONENKLAR, CAROL 
Mighty Boy. 
Orchard, 1999 
118p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33203-9 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30203-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Howard Weinstein is having a hard time in his new fourth-grade class; he's in
trouble with his teachers for not paying attention, and Eddie, the class bully, has
chosen him as the object of his hostilities. Howard gets through it all by con-
stantly daydreaming about Mighty Boy, a television superhero who has become
his only (and imaginary) friend. Howard wins a chance to play a bit part in an
episode of Mighty Boy, and, lost in the woods with the TV hero, discovers his own
self-worth by saving Mighty Boy (real name Seymour) from a black bear, poison
berries, and hungry mosquitoes. Howard's fifteen minutes of fame makes him
more popular at school with everyone but Eddie, who he ultimately (and unbeliev-
ably) finesses with a swarm of bees. Sonenklar has a good ear for school-age dia-
logue, but unfortunately the sketchy plot is more farfetched than credibility will
allow. Characterizations are shallow and convenience drives transition. Still, this
title has cover art that should attract readers along with a facile story that won't tax
them. JMD
ST. GEORGE, JUDITH 
In the Line of Fire: Presidents' Lives at Stake. 
Holiday
House, 1999 
142p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1428-0 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Four presidential assassinations and a host of near-tragedies are analyzed in this
serviceable but erratically organized volume. The murders are covered first, and
each episode includes information on the victim, the assassin, policies within the
administration that bore on the president's death, and the impact of the killing
upon the nation. A final chapter focuses on the near-misses, offering abridged
treatments of attempts on F. Roosevelt, Truman, Ford, and Reagan. Topical shifts
within the major accounts and the break with chronological order in the closing
chapter somewhat impair the readability of this tide. Covering the same ground as
Rebecca C. Jones' The President Has Been Shot! (BCCB 9/96), St. George scores
points for detail about the political aftermath of the murders and attempted mur-
ders, but comes in a far second to Jones' smoother storytelling. 
Although The
President will be the preferred choice for casual readers, students researching a
186 
* 
THE BULLETIN
particular episode would do well to consult both accounts to cull complementary
information. An index and black-and-white photos are included. EB
TORRES, LAURA 
November Ever After. 
Holiday House, 1999 
[208p]
ISBN 0-8234-1464-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Amy is still reeling from her mother's death; while the congrega-
tion is eager to minister to her and her pastor father, Amy really relies on her
vivacious best friend, Sara. Her relationship with Sara takes a new turn, however,
when she realizes that Sara's interest in Anita isn't just a secondary friendship but
a romance. The preacher's-kid aspect gives an interesting slant to the changes
Amy's undergoing (she's concerned with Sara's lesbianism theologically as well as
socially, and it bothers her that the boy she really likes is a serious churchgoer
approved of by her father just as she herself is drifting away from the church).
Though the book glides past some questions (it never seems to occur to Amy that
Sara might be attracted to her), it's open about others: it's clear, for instance, that
Amy is so dependent on Sara that she'd have trouble with anyone who might start
to take up Sara's time. Teens not up to the complexities of Yamanaka's similarly
themed Name Me Nobody (BCCB 12/99) will warm to this treatment of a friend-
ship surviving change. DS
VALGARDSON,W. D. 
The Divorced Kids Club and Other Stories. 
Groundwood/
Douglas & McIntyre, 1999 
184p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88899-369-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
This collection of seven stories covers a wide variety of topics (ranging from an
ambitious summer money-maker finding romance in the arms of a competitor in
"The Entertainer and the Entrepreneur" to an understated but creepy ghost story
in "Cabin Fever"), but a recurring theme is that of young people defining them-
selves. Often this new understanding is in light of their parents ("When you're
little you think the giants know everything. Then you get older and the world gets
real scary because you realize they may be bigger but they aren't always using a
compass that works") but sometimes it's in response to a neighbor ("Mrs. Galoshers"
provides a new view of the world when city-boy Jeremy moves to the country) or
even a friend (the narrator of "The Sand Sifter" realizes that he missed his friend's
distress signals). Throughout, Valgardson has a smooth perceptivity and an easily
inventive turn of phrase that's reminiscent of the short stories of his fellow Cana-
dian Tim Wynne-Jones (Lord of the Fries, BCCB 3/99, etc.); these stories are less
whimsical and more grounded, however, and therefore likelier to strike a chord
with kids looking for compact insight into the young human condition. DS
VANDE 
GRIEK, 
SUSAN 
A Gift for Ampato; illus. by Mary Jane
Gerber. 
Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 1999 
109p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88899-358-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
The apus (spirits) of the Andean mountain Ampato have not been kind to their
Incan worshippers; smoke and ash have shrouded the sun's light and drought has
been a continual plague. So desperate are the priests to appease the apus that they
decide to send Timta, one of the chosen maidens of their temple, to deliver their
prayers personally, an act that requires her sacrifice. Vande Griek gracefully blends
genuine tension over the sacrifice with reverent respect for religious beliefs into an
JANUARY 2000 
* 
187
imaginative speculation about the Ice Maiden, the teenage girl sacrificed some five
hundred years ago, whose frozen remains were found on Ampato in 1995. Itali-
cized introductions to each chapter contrast the archeological find with the fic-
tional tale, and readers with even passing familiarity with the Ice Maiden will
understand that the story's sad conclusion is inevitable. Instead of bringing her
heroine Timta to this logical end, however, Vande Griek springs an awkward twist
in which Timta switches places with a more zealously religious maiden and thus
cheats fate. The abrupt, strained climax, together with Timta's modern sensibili-
ties, strikes a false note in an otherwise engaging tale. Still, readers intrigued by
Johan Reinhard's Discovering the Inca Ice Maiden (BCCB 5/98) will want to join
Vande Griek in her musings. Stylized but effective pencil drawings punctuate the
text. EB
VARRIALE, JIM 
Kids Dance: The Students of Ballet Tech; written and illus. with
photographs by Jim Varriale. 
Dutton, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45536-1 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Drawing its young pupils from New York City public schools, Ballet Tech pro-
vides many kids with their first introduction to dance. Varriale describes the pro-
gram and the classes, making clear that while "the school hopes to introduce many
children to ballet, its real purpose is to train professional ballet dancers, young
people who will make a career of dancing onstage." Whether they be short-timers
or lifers, however, the young dancers' enthusiasm is clear (the book includes a
multitude of quotes from the students); it's also clear that for those who accept the
special offer to attend full-time, the work in both academics and dance is rigorous.
The photographs are vivid, memorable, and elegant: artistically grainy, they rely
on both color and black-and-white images, emphasizing the art of ballet (an enfi-
lade of spread legs en pointe is positively architectural) as well as the students them-
selves (the serious faces seem filled with destiny). Unfortunately, there's little
connection between the quotes, the text, and the pictures; it's often clear that the
pictured dancer isn't the one who's quoted nearby (and the quotes sometimes have
visual contrast problems that make them difficult to read), and the placement in
the book seems to relate more to aesthetic than conceptual effect, which will frus-
trate readers who want to know which of these kids said what. The magnificent
photography offers an alluring look at a focused and unusual life, however; pair
this with Barboza's IFeelLike Dancing (BCCB 6/92) for an overall introduction to
dance. DS
WALDMAN, NEIL 
The Starry Night; written and illus. by Neil Waldman. 
Boyds
Mills, 1999 
32 p
ISBN 1-56397-736-2 $15.95 
Ad 
6-9yrs
Bernard is transfixed by the painting of the stranger named Vincent, whom he
happens upon in Central Park; the boy guides Vincent through New York, taking
him "north to Harlem, south to the Statue of Liberty, and east to the Brooklyn
Bridge," watching as the artist paints the city "in bright and beautiful colors." In
return, Vincent takes Bernard to the Museum of Modern Art and a painting called
Starry Night, whereupon he disappears-and Bernard himself begins to draw. The
story is gossamer thin, existing mainly to hang the artwork on and lacking any
independent narrative drive. The plot's events are illustrated in black and brown
sketchwork on beige backgrounds, with effects that vary from workmanlike to
188 
* THE BULLETIN
awkward. The real achievement is the imagined art of Van Gogh in New York,
where scenes offer homages to the artist in subject (there's a Greenwich Village
version of Night Cafe) as well as in style. While no one's going to mistake the art
for Van Gogh, no one's going to mistake it for an evocation of another artist,
either; the Vincent Van Waldman composite is both compellingly contemporary
(the strong contrasts evoke not only the postimpressionists but also John Steptoe)
and true to its influence, providing a gaudy and memorable look at New York.
Artistic "what if's tend to be limited to satire these days; it's invigorating to see the
old tradition of working in the style of the masters given new life, and young art
students might find some inspiration here. DS
WEST, DELNO C. 
Uncle Sam and Old Glory: Symbols ofAmerica; by Delno C.
and Jean M. West; illus. by Christopher Manson. 
Atheneum, 2000 
[40p]
ISBN 0-689-82043-7 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-5
Fifteen images that have come to symbolize patriotic values within the United
States are examined here in an attractive, clearly-presented format that will be
welcomed with open arms by both primary school teachers and their primary stu-
dent researchers. Each entry features a full page, intricately detailed tinted wood-
cut and a single page of concise information that covers the genesis of the symbol
(at least, as far as it can be known), how it has evolved over time, and how it has
come to resonate on an emotional level among American citizens. Although the
Wests keep the youth of their intended audience ever in mind, they do not neglect
the controversies or darker sides of the symbols. They acknowledge, for example,
that "sometimes people use the flag to protest when they disagree with govern-
ment actions ... each group uses the American flag to symbolize its own beliefs."
Discussing the images on the buffalo nickel, they wryly observe, "It is interesting
to note that these two symbols of America-the buffalo and the Indian-were
only used after both had almost been eradicated from the American scene." (Smokey
the Bear seems a bit out of place here, however, and there's no indication that his
official name is actually "Smokey Bear.") Teachers will be sorely tempted to keep
the school copy of this title as a year-round reference, so it might be wise to pur-
chase an extra copy for the kids. EB
WIESNER, DAVID 
Sector 7; written and illus. by David Wiesner. 
Clarion,
1999 
48p
ISBN 0-395-74656-6 
$16.00 
R* 
6-10 yrs
In Wiesner's newest wordless outing, a boy travels with his class to the Observa-
tion Deck of the Empire State Building, where he meets a playful and friendly
cloud. Boy and cloud soar together to the Cloud Dispatch Center for Sector 7,
where the assembled clouds grumble over the relentless sameness of their assigned
appearances; our human hero assists by providing the delighted clouds with sug-
gestions for alternative shapes (with an emphasis on fish). Management objects
and the boy is summarily sent back, but a veritable aquarium of clouds now glides
fluidly through the skies. While there's a sweet edge to this fantasy (the friendly
cloud has a distinctly marshmallowy look), it never cloys, and Wiesner drafts the
figures and landscape (skyscape?) with a poker-faced literalness that makes things
more adventurous than dreamy. The details of the Cloud Dispatch process are
inventive and absorbing, ranging from the Grand-Central-worthy architecture to
the organizationally necessary arrival and departure board that lets the clouds know
JANUARY 2000 
* 
189
whose turn it is to go out which tube. There's also something of Raymond Briggs'
The Snowman in the appeal of a fluffy white friend who flies you through a word-
less fantasia, and the fish clouds (ichthyonimbi?) offer up a magnificent display
that understandably sends cats thunderstruck and yearning to their windows and
fish leaping from the bay in an attempt to swim along. Aside from creating an
alluring fantasy outing, Wiesner may have spawned a new genre here: the picture
book for in-flight reading. DS
WILLIAMS, LAURA E. 
The Ghost Stallion. Holt, 1999 
104 p
ISBN 0-8050-6193-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Mary Elizabeth lives with her father and little sister, Nellie, since the departure of
her mother months ago. Her heightened awareness of family tensions makes her
realize that she wasn't actually Pa's daughter in the first place, and she begins to
believe that she might really be the daughter of a newly arrived stranger. The
stranger has come to shoot the wild stallion that's wrecking local ranchers' fences
and stealing mares; Mary Elizabeth, a defiant champion of the stallion, believes the
stranger to be on her side in secretly wanting to keep him free, and thinks perhaps
the man will be the agent of her own freedom. The lawless stallion targeted by
callous ranchers and defended by a headstrong young girl is a romantic and hoary
plot, and the book lays the motifs on thickly with the nameless stranger, Mary
Elizabeth's mother's locket, and Mary Elizabeth's own namelessness until the last
page when her father addresses her with her-and her mother's-name. Williams
is a capable and restrained writer, however, and the story flows smoothly if pre-
dictably; the revelations are carefully paced, the understated narration effective,
and the story concise without being telegrammatic. If you thought they didn't
make 'em like this any more and you've been avoiding breaking that news to the
Thoroughbred series fans, give thanks and hand them this. DS
WOLF, BERNARD 
Cuba: After the Revolution; written and illus. with photographs
by Bernard Wolf. Dutton, 1999 
48p
ISBN 0-525-46058-6 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Starting with a general assessment and then focusing on the life of a particular
family, Wolf's photoessay provides a look at a country U.S. kids don't get to hear
much about firsthand. Despite the country-inclusive title, the text focuses entirely
on the city of Havana, taking as its main subject Ana Moreira, a twelve-year-old
girl with dreams of being a ballerina, whose parents are "among Cuba's foremost
artists." The book details Ana's daily life, explaining her schedule for school and
ballet, and discusses her parents' careers as well, giving an idea of at least one
family's life in contemporary Cuba. It's hard, however, to imagine that this is
supposed to be an account of a typical family, engaging though it is. The national
extrapolations are often vaguely phrased ("Since the revolution, artists have been
given every possible encouragement and support") or simply elusive, and the prose
tends towards traveloguish generalities whether discussing difficulties or benefits
("While the future of this troubled island appears clouded with uncertainty, for
Ana the future seems bright with hope and expectation"). The photography is the
book's most inviting characteristic: Ana's family is an appealing group, and the
portraits of various Cubans and historic Havana have an allure that may send kids
agitating for an unusual vacation destination. Though this doesn't effectively ad-
dress the vacuum of information about Cuba for young readers, it will at least
provide a personable introduction. DS
190 
* THE BULLETIN
WOLFE, GILLIAN 
Oxford First Book of Art. 
Oxford, 1999 
4 8p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-19-521556-7 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
This introduction to fine art takes a usefully thematic approach, with each spread
featuring two or three works of art and addressing topics such as figures, imagined
creatures, patterns, and letters. In addition to brief discussion of each work, the
spreads include a "Look Closer" section that prompts further lines of inquiry ("In
which season was Holiday painted? How can you tell?") and an Activity section
("Listen to a piece of music. What sort of ideas and pictures come into your head?
Make a picture of the music") that move the experience beyond merely gazing.
The book occasionally slips into problematic assumptions ("You can see the fear
on this animal's face"), and the end Picture List oddly omits countries from infor-
mation about the museums housing the featured art, but this is generally a refresh-
ingly undogmatic introduction. There's a piquant variety in the included works,
and the questions genuinely provide occasions for further examination of the art (a
final Art Detective Quiz provides additional seek-and-find fun); the activities are
both plausible and relevant, as well as being appropriately messy. A few of the
images are a bit small for careful viewing, but most are sizeable and clearly repro-
duced. This will be a useful baptism of paint for readers not yet ready for Rose-
mary Davidson's Take a Look (BCCB 2/94). An index is included. DS
WONG, JANET S. 
Behind the Wheel: Poems about Driving. McElderry,
1999 
4 4 p
ISBN 0-689-82531-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Thirty-six free-verse poems describe a teenager's driving experiences: "Ask a friend/
to give you a ride,/ to help you out,/ to get you home./ When you've found some
better times,/ you won't forget, you'll pay him back./ Let your friends be good to
you./ Go along for the ride,/ face in the wind." The poems are simple and con-
crete, and readers may enjoy the wordplay ("Crackety-crack/ crackety-crack/
Grandmother's knuckles/ begin their attack"-"Crash") and the humor (after teens'
third traffic violation, they will be forced to "direct traffic,/ head shaved bald,/
singing in a microphone,/ flanked by parents/ dressed in pajamas"-"Insurance
for Teenage Drivers: A New Plan"). Several poems hint at the poet's Chinese
heritage ("After the war with the Japanese/ the money markets crashed/ and
Grandmother's Chinese paper dollars were worth nothing-"), and teens will con-
nect to the poet's growing sense of independence ("You've got to believe/ there's a
place for you / in this amazing world-/ and you owe it to yourself"). The lan-
guage is unfortunately lackluster and Wong's depiction of a teen's inner world is
shallow; it's not off the mark, though, and the poems address matters dear to the
young-adult heart. This is appropriate for teens who enjoy Mel Glenn's books or
have a driving interest in poems about kids like themselves. JNH
WONG, JANET S. 
Night Garden: Poems from the World of Dreams; illus. by Julie
Paschkis. 
McElderry, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-82617-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
These fifteen poems explore the psychic deeps where "a tangle of roots/ sends up/
green shoots/ and dreams grow/ wild." The unselfconsciously multicultural cast
of dreamers depicted in the striking gouache on paper illustrations provide diverse
JANUARY 2000 
* 
191
voices for poems about the terrible reality of a "news-at-seven true nightmare," the
fluid fantasy of "swimming free,/ water washing/ over me,/ seeing clear/ through
eyes like glass," and the more down-to-earth dreams of the child who doesn't want
to fly but instead likes "to go to sleep at nine/ curled up round/ in my safe bed,/
dreaming soft and fuzzy/ things." The combination of the impressionistic and the
prosaic in these vivid poems invites rereading just as the fabulous images of the
illustrations and the dreamy monochromatic backgrounds invite re-viewing. Even
wide-awake readers will find something they can relate to in this collection. FK
WOODRUFF, ELVIRA 
The Ghost ofLizard Light; illus. by Elaine Clayton. 
Knopf,
1999 
176 p
ISBN 0-679-89281-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Jack Carlton unwittingly invites ghost Nathaniel Witherspoon into his life when
he brings home an old lighthouse lamp purchased from a garage sale for two dol-
lars. The ghost materializes in Jack's bedroom (Mr. Carlton has moved the family
1500 miles from Ames, Iowa to Minty, Maine), and, after a rocky start, the two
become friends. They also become allies, as Nathaniel shares his seafaring experi-
ence with Jack, and Jack promises to clear Nathaniel's father of accusations of
cowardice in a past tragedy. Woodruffs simmering plot rolls to a boil with Jack's
heroic rescue of his mother after a sailboating accident (allowing Jack's perfection-
ist father to recognize Jack's gifts) and his accidental discovery of Mr. Witherspoon's
knife inside a museum display, which provides crucial evidence to prove Nathaniel's
father's heroism. Unfortunately things simmer for too long before the action heats
up, and some of the events seem to occur more for expedience or didacticism than
plot necessity. Nonetheless, kids will appreciate the idea of being chummy with a
ghost, and they'll revel in wondering, like Jack, if Nathaniel is real or not-until
the story turns up the obligatory brass button from the ghost's coat. EAB
YOLEN, JANE, comp. and ad. 
The Fairies' Ring: A Book ofFairy Stories & Poems;
illus. by Stephen Mackey. 
Dutton, 1999 
96p
ISBN 0-525-46045-4 
$24.99 
R 
Gr. 3-6
This elegantly appointed collection includes poems by Robert Graves, Ben Jonson,
Sir Walter Scott, Fiona MacLeod, Shakespeare, and others; the tales (adapted by
Yolen) include stories of fairy folk from Scotland, France, New Zealand, Greece,
and Africa. Retold with an ear for reading aloud or storytelling, the selections
include both the unfamiliar (the Maori "The Stolen Wife") and the classic
(Scotland's "Thomas the Rhymer"). While Mackey's drafting is sometimes awk-
ward, the full-page paintings and oval cameos framed with a thin line of gold have
an otherworldly air that suits the content of this anthology. The palette is earthy
and green, giving a sense of substance to creatures usually envisioned as gauzily
pink and overly sprightly. The text pages have a dusty gold edging that adds to the
careful design, resulting in a visual presentation that will greatly please lovers of
things magical and fey. Source notes and a bibliography are included. JMD
YOUNG, KAREN ROMANO 
Video. 
Greenwillow, 1999 
186p
ISBN 0-688-16517-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Eighth-grade semi-jockette Janine is being left behind by her longtime buddies
because of their interest in boys and cheerleading and because ofJanine's smart
mouth and bad attitude. When new kid Eric arrives (on crutches due to a skiing
192 
* THE BULLETIN
accident), Janine barely tolerates his presence at her bus stop. Their big eighth-
grade assignment is to observe someone from a distance and write their observa-
tions in their notebooks; Janine crossly chooses herself, and Eric finds himself
observing Janine. The novel alternates between entries in the two notebooks done
in two different typefaces, with a third text in italics. While the voice in italics is
omniscient, unfortunately the reader isn't, and the chronology of events gets con-
fused. Janine's notebook entries show her desperately trying to hold onto her old
friends and only alienating them further; they also include her encounter with a
masturbating flasher. Eric, videotaping Janine from a distance as he is hampered
by his broken leg, moves from believing Janine a bully to understanding her di-
lemma to realizing that she is in trouble and needs help. The plot here isn't nearly
as tight as in Young's previous novel The Beetle and Me (BCCB 3/99), and the
triadic narrative and the precipitating crisis of the flasher are clumsily contrived.
Janine and Eric's voices seem very naive for eighth graders; nonetheless, as charac-
ters, they are articulate and complex. Janine is heartbreakingly credible as a girl
who inadvertently sabotages her own success, and Eric, in a voice that echoes the
anger and confusion he feels due to changes in his own household (new school,
divorcing parents), is a sympathetic counterpoint. JMD
JANUARY 2000 
* 
193
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1999 
_
To become a Bulletin Blue Ribbon a book must undergo severe trials, including
close scrutiny by the committee and competition with other strong works. The
titles that remain on the field after this qualitative tournament are awarded the
colors of honor. Blue Ribbon books are not a publishing year's worth of books
that all libraries should buy and all children should read (although they should),
nor is it a list of "best" books. Blue Ribbons are the knighthood of the literary
realm, the books that are noble, honest, and true. All in all, it was a good year.
Here's to the next one.
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
PICTURE BOOKS
Daly, Niki. The Boy on the Beach; written and illus. by Niki Daly. McElderry.
(July/August)
Dorrie, Doris. Lottie's Princess Dress; illus. by Julia Kaergel. Dial. (November)
Gay, Marie-Louise. Stella, Star ofthe Sea; written and illus. by Marie-Louise Gay.
Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre. (May)
Hesse, Karen. Come On, Rain!; illus. by Jon J Muth. Scholastic. (April)
Lester, Julius. Whata Truly Cool World; illus. byJoe Cepeda. Scholastic. (February)
Myers, Christopher. Black Cat; written and illus. by Christopher Myers. Scholastic.
(February)
Priceman, Marjorie. Emeline at the Circus; written and illus. by Marjorie Priceman.
Knopf. (July/August)
Sandburg, Carl. The Huckabuck Family: and How They Raised Popcorn in Nebraska
and Quit and Came Back; illus. by David Small. Farrar. (September)
Say, Allen. Tea with Milk; written and illus. by Allen Say. Lorraine/Houghton.
(June)
Sierra, Judy, ad. Tasty Baby Belly Buttons; illus. by Meilo So. Knopf. (June)
Thomas, Frances. What If?; illus. by Ross Collins. Hyperion. (September)
Tolstoy, Aleksei. The Gigantic Turnip; illus. by Niamh Sharkey. Barefoot Books.
(July/August)
Wiesner, David. Sector 7; written and illus. by David Wiesner. Clarion. (January
2000)
Zimmerman, Andrea. Trashy Town; by Andrea Zimmerman and David Clemesha;
illus. by Dan Yaccarino. HarperCollins. (May)
194 
* THE BULLETIN
FICTION
Anderson, Laurie Halse. Speak. Farrar. (October)
Barrett, Tracy. Anna ofByzantium. Delacorte. (July/August)
Billingsley, Franny. The Folk Keeper. Karl/Atheneum. (October)
Cooney, Caroline. Tune in Anytime. Delacorte. (October)
Hoobler, Dorothy. The Ghost in the Tokaido Inn; by Dorothy and Thomas Hoobler.
Philomel. (September)
Horvath, Polly. The Trolls. Farrar. (February)
Howe, Norma. The Adventures ofBlue Avenger: A Novel. Holt. (March)
Koss, Amy Goldman. The Ashwater Experiment. Dial. (June)
Lawrence, Iain. The Smugglers. Delacorte. (July/August)
Myers, Walter Dean. Monster. HarperCollins. (May)
Pennebaker, Ruth. Conditions ofLove. Holt. (March)
Perkins, Lynne Rae. All Alone in the Universe; written and illus. by Lynne Rae
Perkins. Greenwillow. (October)
Wittlinger, Ellen. Hard Love. Simon. (July/August)
NONFICTION
Armstrong, Jennifer. Shipwreck at the Bottom of the World: The True Story of the
Endurance Expedition. Crown, 1998. (February)
Bridges, Ruby. Through My Eyes. Scholastic. (January 2000)
Cowley, Joy. Red-Eyed Tree Frog; illus. with photographs by Nic Bishop. Scholastic.
(March)
Florian, Douglas. Winter Eyes; written and illus. by Douglas Florian. Greenwillow.
(October)
Freedman, Russell. Babe Didrikson Zaharias: The Making ofa Champion. Clarion.
(October)
Hamanaka, Sheila. In Search of the Spirit: The Living National Treasures ofJapan;
written and illus. by Sheila Hamanaka and Ayano Ohmi and with photographs.
Morrow. (April)
Montgomery, Sy. The Snake Scientist; illus. with photographs by Nic Bishop.
Houghton. (April)
Myers, Walter Dean. At Her Majesty's Request: An African Princess in Victorian
England. Scholastic. (February)
Robbins, Ken. Trucks: Giants ofthe Highway; written and illus. with photographs
by Ken Robbins. Atheneum. (December)
JANUARY 2000 
* 
195
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-stories: San Souci
African Americans: Bridges;
Haskins; Monceaux; Ringgold
African Americans-folklore: San
Souci
African Americans-poetry: Dunbar;
hooks
African Americans-stories: Farmer;
hooks
ALPHABET BOOKS: Hausman
American Indians: Monceaux
American Indians-fiction: Vande
Griek
American Indians-folklore: Norman
Animals: Maynard
Animals-stories: Crimi
Antarctica: Jenkins
Art: Carter; Guarnieri; Leuzzi;
Monceaux; Waldman; Wolfe
Art appreciation: Wolfe
Art history: Guarnieri
Assassinations: St. George
Astronomy: Fradin
Astronomy-stories: Hopkinson
Aunts and uncles-fiction: Ingold
Aviation-fiction: Ingold
Ballet: Varriale
BIOGRAPHIES: Bridges; Brown;
Guarnieri; McPherson; Ringgold
Birthdays-stories: Best; Keselman
Boxing: Bacho
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Rottman
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Hopkinson
Bullies-fiction: Sonenklar
Careers: Maynard
Cats-stories: Jennings; Schachner
Civil rights movement: Bridges;
Ringgold
Civil War: Beller; Fraser
Clouds-stories: Wiesner
Crafts: Carter
Crime and criminals: St. George
Crime and criminals-fiction: Bo;
McNeal; Young
Crocodiles-stories: Marcellino
Cuba: Wolf
Dancers and dancing: Varriale
Death and dying-fiction: McNeal;
Torres
Death and dying-stories: Bunting
Disabilities-fiction: Rottman
Dolls-stories: Bliss
Dreams-poetry: Wong Night
Driving-poetry: Wong Behind
Ethics and values: Torres; Vande
Griek
Fairies-poetry: Yolen
Fairies-fiction: Yolen
Families-fiction: Rinaldi; Rottman;
Williams
FANTASY: Pullman; Rapp;
Wiesner
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Ingold; Pullman; Williams
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Hopkinson
Fathers and sons-fiction: Woodruff
Fireworks-fiction: Pullman
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Aardema; Farmer; Jukes; Lunge-
196 
* THE BULLETIN
Larsen; Norman; San Souci;
Yolen
Food and eating-stories: Marcellino
Foster children-fiction: Caldwell
Friendship-fiction: Rapp; Scott;
Sonenklar; Torres; Young
Friendship-stories: Crimi
Gangs-fiction: Bo
Ghosts-fiction: Almond; Woodruff
Grandfathers-fiction: Almond
Grandmothers-stories: Best; Pak
Hair-stories: hooks
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Branford; Carter; Hopkinson;
Ingold; Kline; Rinaldi; Vande
Griek
History, U.S.: Beller; Bridges;
Ferrie; Fraser; Haskins;
McPherson; Ringgold; St.
George; West
History, world: Markun; Wolf
Homosexuality-fiction: Torres
Horses-fiction: Williams
Inventions: Hegedus
Italy-stories: Guarnieri
Labor unions-fiction: Carter
Letters-stories: Pak
Liberia-folklore: Aardema
Literature, American: Dunbar
Military history: Ferrie; Fraser
Music and musicians-stories:
London
Nature study: Jenkins
Norway-folklore: Lunge-Larsen
Panama Canal: Markun
Parents-stories: Keselman
Penguins: Jenkins
Pets-stories: Schachner
Physical education: Bacho;
Hegedus
Planets: Fradin
POETRY: Dunbar; hooks;
Kennedy; Wong Behind; Wong
Night; Yolen
Presidents: St. George
Racism: Bacho; Bridges; Ringgold
Reading aloud: Kennedy; Lunge-
Larsen; Norman; Wong Night;
Yolen
Reading, reluctant: Bo; Hegedus;
Wong Behind
Religion-fiction: Vande Griek
Revolutionary War: Ferrie
RHYMING BOOKS: Brown
Romance-fiction: Kline; McNeal
School-fiction: Scott; Sonenklar;
Young
School-stories: Shannon
Science: Jenkins
SCIENCE FICTION: Rapp
Segregation: Bridges
Self-esteem-fiction: Sonenklar
SHORT STORIES: Valgardson
Sisters-fiction: Kline; Rinaldi
Slavery: Haskins; McPherson
Snowboarding-fiction: Bo
Social studies: West; Wolf
Sports: Bacho; Hegedus
Sports-poetry: Kennedy
Stepmothers-fiction: Jukes
Stepsisters-fiction: Jukes
Storytelling: Aardema; Lunge-
Larsen; Norman; Yolen
Storytime: hooks; Jennings;
Keselman; Shannon
Television-fiction: Sonenklar
Transportation-poetry: Wong
Behind
Uncles-fiction: Carter
Vikings-fiction: Branford
Vocational guidance: Maynard
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Woodruff
Women's studies: Beller; Brown;
McPherson
WORDLESS BOOKS: Wiesner
pc d
* "A 1ehightrQ
Look 
o~ sciyence
espeiyimnewts
to do iT.
y~esC(~ 
'C~tsdwyc 
s 
c*
LACTC
Y
W4 kc..
^aa
wilwta,
Wlife You're Wcriting for
the Fooj to Come
by Frie Muller
illustrated by EldoT Do)ty
* "All manner of science facts are
taught in 30 simple activities.... The
book is organized like a menu, with
'Appetizers' that introduce basic conceý
'Main Cnllrses' that nrnvidp mnrp dPta
endeavors, and a 'Desserts' section that contains a glossary and
list for further reading.... A winner."
-
School Library Journal*,
starred review
"These tabletop demonstrations
elucidate scientific method and
principles relating to sensory
perception, matter, electricity,
and air pressure."
-
The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books
Ages 8 up
$15.95 TR 0-531-30199-0
$8.95 PB 0-531-07144-8
•J OOJs 
A Grolier Company www.grolier.com
&
0oe rd
Keppn nn 
'eaching.. 
w-
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
ý_REIL 
FTR
(8 issues) t lY $19.77
i- 
.
1
A Bird or Two
A Story about Henri Matisse
Written and illustrated by
BIJou LE TORD
ges * Full-color * I
4 0-8028-5184-3 - $
EDMANS BOOKS
or Young Readtes
./Grand Rapids, Michign 49503
EERDMAz 
N PUBLISHING CO.
wlolý&,ýýý
~8+91PI-'lll~aBB l~d--~ 
~a 
~c~ 
I~iP~-"BgSlpB^ 
--- P- 
-·s 
rs~ 
Is~ 
-glp
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(200001)53:5;1 -U
i~lI
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books
is online!
It is our great pleasure to announce that, beginning with the
1999-2000 volume year, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books will be available to our print subscribers as a searchable
online database. Print subscribers will be able to browse the
latest issue online, look through issues from the 1998-99 volume
year, and search for reviews by title, author, and reading level.
The staff of The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
cordially invites you to browse through the September 1998
sample issue at:
http://www.prairienet.org/cgi-bin/ccb/bulletin.cgi
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
The Best of Tradition and Technology
