I LLJ IN OI
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
S
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
4 
AT 
'.
*-,, ,y 
*>: 
<.**" 
,i 
,» 
,^ 
l-r 
,, 
.
* 
·- 
' 
* 
.»" 
* 
-
' 
* 
^.*/ 
'**
"Minna and her family are fictional characters, but their experiences are
representative of many African-Americans fom the mid-1500s to the
md-1800s. Johnson's moving artwork offers many details of African and
plantation life....[She] recounts the African American story with honesty
and sensitivity."- *Booklist
ik"In an author's note, Johnson writes that this 'is not a pleasant story,
nor does it have a happy ending. Ye it is a story that must be told.' On
all ponts, she is absolutely correct....Johnson's stately, slightly impression-
istic illustrations underscore the anguish and sadness of her story - and of
the entire slavery experience."-Starred, Publishers Weekly
"A compelling, elegantly composed narrative."-Kirkus Reviews
"Almost no historical fction (or nonfiction) about slavery has been pub-
lished for this age group, and Johnson...manages to be honest without
becoming brutal. The informational aspects alone make the book worth-
whil."-Bultin of the Centerfor Children's Books
$14.95 RSBE/Ages 5-10/0-02-747699-5
SRSBE 
indicaes a side sewn •inforced hadovr edition.
U
MA~~LAN CHILRN'S BOOKS
An mprint of the Macillan Children's Book Group
866 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022
_ I
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
February 1994
Vol. 47 No. 6
A LOOK INSIDE
179 THE BIG PICTURE
The Last Tales of Uncle Remus adapted by Julius Lester; illustrated by Jerry
Pinkney
180 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
181 
* A Question of Trust by Marion Dane Bauer
198 
* Flip-Flop Girl by Katherine Paterson
203 
* The Magic Purse adapted by Yoshiko Uchida; illus. by Keiko Narahashi
205 
* Rite ofPassage by Richard Wright
207 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
Still Got It: African-American Poetry for Children
209 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
aoo Po
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Carol Fox, Reviewer (CF)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1994 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Jerry Pinkney, from The Last Tales of Uncle Remus ©1994 by Jerry Pinkney
and used by permission of Dial Books.
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 
179
THE BIG PICTURE
The Last Tales of Uncle Remus
adapted by Julius Lester; illustrated by Jerry Pinkney
One way to hang onto a book you love is to slow down and read the last page over
and over to keep it from ending. Such is the reluctance with which I finished The
Last Tales of Uncle Remus, the final volume in a series of four collections celebrat-
ing the trickster who outflanked most of the animals around, be they big, little,
smart, or dumb. Brer Rabbit made no allowances for political correctness. This,
plus the fact that Lester updates the storytelling voice of Uncle Remus, has drawn
flack from African-American literati as notable as June Jordan (New York Time
Book Review, May 17, 1987). Alice Walker's not too crazy about Joel Chandler
Harris, either (see "The Dummy in the Window: Joel Chandler Harris and the
Invention of Uncle Remus" in Walker's Living by the Word). Uncle Remus was,
after all, an Uncle Tom who accepted the outrage of slavery and passed on his
priceless traditions to a little white boy. Or was he and did he? These stories are
the soul of subversive irreverence, and maybe Remus/Harris had a trick up his
sleeve in targeting a gullible white audience that dominated the marketplace and-
all unawares of being the butt of the joke-made sure the stories went public. A
more cultural point has to do with the commonality of tricksters to all societies.
Any psychologically attuned folklorist (or folklorically attuned psychologist) will
tell you the same thing Lester does in replying to Jordan, ". .. the trickster is in
each of us. He is created in our image. Our task is to receive him and thereby
uncover our humanity-if we dare." (Letters, NYT Book Review, June 14, 1987)
Lester, who has written a distinctive introduction to each of the other books,
specifically addresses the Uncle Remus controversy here, and then proceeds to
retell thirty-nine tales with the natural narrative flow that distinguished their pre-
decessors. Indeed, the narrator is one of the most vivid characters as he admon-
ishes with verve ("Nothing in this world will get you in trouble quicker than your
mouth") and expounds with pizazz. A brief passage from "Why the Earth Is Mostly
Water" exemplifies the casual style edged with satire: "I don't have to tell you that
when an Elephant steps on you, you have been stepped on. When the Elephant
lifted up his foot, there was not even a memory of the Crawfish left. To make
matters worse, the Elephant didn't even know he had done it. All the other Craw-
fish got mad. They had a caucus, which is a little meeting which nobody could
come to except crawfish." Will children ever forget that definition, or fail to ap-
preciate its irony as they get older?
Storytellers using the book as a resource will be happy to meet up with variants
of other familiar tale types. "The Adventures of Simon and Susanna" contains
motifs from Baba Yaga and several Jack tales. Both Wicked John and Big Sixteen
lurk in "The Blacksmith and the Devil." "The Little Boy and His Dogs" is a twin
180 
* 
THE BULLETIN
of "Wiley and the Hairy Man," and "How Tinktum Tidy Recruited an Army for
the King" recalls "Travels of a Fox." Folklore is one place where African and
European influences were integrated early on. Ghost stories vie with tales of trans-
formation. You're bound to find several suited to your own particular telling. The
humor ranges from sass to slapstick violence; take your pick. Everybody gets a fair
share of backhanded ridicule, including feminists, chauvinists, ageists, handicapists,
and racists. Sometimes the storyteller confines himself to sideswiping one group:
"that's how men can be-adding two and two and coming up with seventy-seven."
Sometimes he manages to insult two with one blow, as in his under-the-breath
indictment of both politicians and voters: "You don't have to be smart to be king
or president. (I could name presidents who didn't have any brains)." Ultimately,
like Brer Rabbit, he makes fun of just about anything on two, four, or seven legs.
Jerry Pinkney, as he has done for the other books (BCCB 7/87, 10/88, 5/90),
supplies realistically detailed watercolors to illustrate a rustic world of talking ani-
mals invaded by the occasional stray human. 
Pinkney's drafting has relaxed,
smoothed out, and mellowed just as a good story does over time, and he manages
to underscore Lester's sly tone by treating the cast of characters with seriously
deadpan respect. Respect is a key word here. That's what Lester shows for the
largest body of African-American folklore collected in this country. You can't get
any more respectful of a cultural tradition than recharging the elements that helped
it survive-and that affirm its kinship with other peoples of the world.
Betsy Hearne, Editor
NEw BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE 
-
Avi 
The Bird, the Frog, and the Light; illus. by Matthew Henry. 
Jackson/Or-
chard, 1994 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08658-5 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06808-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4 -7 yrs
A bird's sweet serenade to the rising sun is rudely interrupted by the Frog King,
puffed up with his own magnificence, who demands that the Bird follow him
underground to view-to feel, rather-his kingdom: marble palace, ancient throne,
world's greatest library, the whole bit. Tired of living in darkness, though, the
Frog King forces the Bird to ask the sun for one of his rays to take underground,
where it reveals the truth: the palace is a small rock, the throne a chicken roosting
box, the library but one page ripped from the telephone book. "Can't even read,"
whispers the ashamed king, who, now chastened, comes up into the light for tu-
toring. The fable is cleanly told and aptly structured, despite a bit of contriv-
ance-while birds do sing to the sun, frogs don't live underground-and
overcalculation of both story and moral. Illustrator Henry's colored-pencil por-
traits of the frog and bird are naturalistic, their postures expressive but their fea-
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 181
tures immobile; the sun is a rather conventionalized smiling yellow face and the
pastoral landscaping is bland. Airbrushed backgrounds and sleek borders recall
some of the Dillons' work, while the underground scenes have a savvy photorealistic
pointillism. Pair this one with Ed Young's Seven Blind Mice (BCCB 3/92) for a
consideration of pride and perception. RS
AXELROD, AMY 
Pigs WillBe Pigs; illus. by Sharon McGinley-Nally. 
Four Winds,
1994 
34 p
ISBN 0-02-765415-X 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"The Pigs were hungry... again," but there's no food in the house and Mr. and
Mrs. Pig have forgotten to go to the bank. "Hunt for Money!" carols a double-
page spread, and the parents and the two piglets root around the house for change-
in boxes and pockets, under beds, six dimes here, seventeen pennies there-coming
up with $34.67, enough to take them all to the Enchanted Enchilada for a filling
(vegetarian) meal. The loopy pictures of the pigs messing up the house in their
search are an attractive jumble, and kids will enjoy poring over the menu from
which the family makes its dining choices. All the math adds up, and you can
count the change as it's found, even the two hundred coins the piglets take from
their pennies collection. Although the unexplained (until the end) presence of
printed prices in some of the pictures adds a dispensable and confusing game ele-
ment, the book is a good domestic companion to Schwartz's How Much Is a Mil-
lion (BCCB 7/85) and may provoke a few money-hunts of its own. RS
BARRIE, BARBARA 
Adam Zigzag. 
Delacorte, 1994 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-31172-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
"I can't stand being not able to read! Being Adam Zigzag!" cries dyslexic Adam, to
whom written words look like meaningless zigzags. Diagnosed at seven, he's spent
the years since then trying various doctors and fighting to survive schoolwork; now
in high school, he can't seem to find the help he needs and his despair grows until
he begins to take refuge in rebellion, pot-smoking, and dangerous friends. The
narration, alternating between Adam and his older sister Caroline, depicts Adam's
pain at his constant failure and portrays the turmoil of a disrupted family with
sincerity and conviction, so much so that it's not quite clear why Adam's final
upswing happens (although it seems to be related to communicating with his fam-
ily and moving to a stricter, albeit more understanding, boarding school). The
repetition ofAdam's trials, while enhancing the emotional effect, lessens the book's
narrative impact. It's still an understanding story, rawer than predecessors such as
Jeanne Betancourt's My Name Is Brain Brian (BCCB 4/93), about a frustrating
and widespread problem. DS
BAUER, MARION DANE 
A Question of Trust. Scholastic, 1994 
[128p]
ISBN 0-590-47915-6 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Soon after their parents separate and their mother moves out, twelve-year-old Brad
and his eight-year-old brother Charlie find that a hostile stray cat has moved into
the boys' old backyard shed. The cat, named Cat by the boys, soon has two kit-
tens, and Brad, through some verbal sleight-of-hand ("Heads I win, tails you lose"),
appropriates the more attractive kitten as "his," leaving the drabber twin to Charlie.
182 
* THE BULLETIN
This is an intense exploration of sibling dynamics, the boys wrestling with their
mother's "desertion" as they try to take care of their feline family. There are some
tremendous fight scenes, especially when the boys discover that Cat has eaten Brad's
kitten, and the writing is a model of close focus: the boys and their father are the
only characters on the stage and almost all of the book takes place in the house or
backyard. As a result, the mood sometimes becomes claustrophobic and the theme
rather too thoroughly hewn to, but the vivid portrayals of angry, bullying Brad,
and Charlie-seemingly docile, but knowing more than he lets on-keep the book
centered on the action. RS
BENNETT, JAMES 
Dakota Dream. Scholastic, 1994 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-590-46680-1 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
A few days ago, Floyd Rayfield was living in a group home (he's lived with foster
families all his life), having trouble in school, and trying to adjust to a new social
worker; now he's on the Dakota reservation, where he's made a pilgrimage on a
stolen/borrowed motorcycle to fulfill what he views as his destiny: becoming a
Dakota. The chief, nonplussed but thoughtful, sends Floyd-or Charly Black
Crow, as he calls himself-on a hanblechaya, a four-day vision quest during which
Floyd contemplates in flashback the events that have led him to this point. Al-
though both the author and Floyd himself seem aware of how absurd the boy's
quest may sound, this is a measured, serious story and Floyd, not your stereotypical
problem kid, is admirable in his devotion and application. There's a refreshing
implication that Floyd in fact does have the power and right to define himself,
although he realizes that something other than destiny drew him to the Dakota
("Way back when, when I was just a kid, I felt real close to the Indians because
their situation seemed just like mine"); he's also found a connection there that will
shape his future. Readers puzzling out their own identities will empathize with
self-possessed Floyd, fighting to define himself in a difficult world. DS
BIBLE 
The Easter Story; ad. and illus. by Brian Wildsmith. 
Knopf, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-679-84727-8 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
While the nuns never were terribly convincing in their insistence that Easter was a
much more important holiday than Christmas, it remains true that the Easter story
is much more complicated, narratively and theologically, than is the story of the
Nativity. Wildsmith's retelling is straightforward enough, but lacks context. "Ju-
das had betrayed his friend," says the text, but we don't know why or for what or to
whom. The addition of a little donkey to the cast ("'If I only I could help him,'
thought the donkey sadly") seems meant to give the story an empathetic linchpin
for young listeners, but it also seems out of place against the otherwise scrupulous
adaptation. Gold-accented watercolor paintings are large and theatrical and give
both the human drama and the pageantry their due, with angels always watching
from above. RS
BROOME, ERROL 
Tangles; illus. by Ann James. 
Knopf, 1994 
[112p]
ISBN 0-679-85713-3 $13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Sophie's devastated after her beloved cat is killed, but she's thrilled to see kittens
for sale at the local fair. The only problem: Sophie's spent her money, so when she
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 183
finds her friend Mrs. Cochran's wallet she removes five dollars before returning it.
Tangles, the kitten purchased with the ill-gotten funds, is a delight but also a curse
that continually reminds Sophie of her breach of trust, until Sophie finally ac-
knowledges her crime to the understanding Mrs. Cochran. This is quite good as
junior Crime and Punishments go; Broome weights the sides evenly, with the mo-
tivation comprehensible and the temptation irresistible, but the crime an obvious
betrayal of a kind and loyal friend. Sophie's first-person narration is simple and
understandable (the print reassuringly large and interspersed with kittenish sketches),
and the feline slant on the subject will keep readers interested. DS
BROWNE, ANTHONY 
The Big Baby: A Little Joke; written and illus. by Anthony
Browne. 
Knopf, 1994 
26p
ISBN 0-679-84737-5 
$13.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
John Young's dad acts young for his age, with cool clothes, cool haircuts, "and a
whole den full of toys." One day he comes home with a suspiciously Perrier-styled
bottle of ELIXA DE YOOF, drinks it, and turns into a baby, frustrated and unable
to protest his fate save for inarticulate cries of"Boggaboggabogga." It all turns out
to be a dream, maybe; and while any picture book that ends, "and he saw his first
gray hair," puts you on notice that the audience might not be the usual story hour
crowd, there's nevertheless something here for both kids and their aging parents.
Grownups will appreciate the tweaking of their yuppie obsessions while the off-
spring can enjoy the opportunity of seeing the mighty brought low, dirty diapers
and all. As the subtitle says, it's a little joke, and it's also a slighter story than
Browne's equally pointed Piggybook (BCCB 11/86), but the moral is clear, and the
artist's fine-lined hyper-realism shows Baby Dad, with his do-wop hairstyle and
mouth spattered with muesli or plugged with a pacifier, at a baby's cranky worst.
Sweet little nursery-frieze endpapers add a joke of their own. RS
CARTER, JIMMY 
Talking Peace: A Vision for the Next Generation. Dutton,
1993 
192p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-44959-0 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 6-9
In this personal view of names and places that have splashed across our TV screens
and newspaper headlines for decades, the former president tells of his struggle to
secure a peace agreement between Anwar Sadat of Egypt and Menachem Begin of
Israel in the Camp David Accords and goes on to detail the establishment of the
Carter Center, a private not-for-profit organization established to address issues of
education, human rights, and global conflict. Carter's commitment to peace and
democracy is exemplified as he recounts his activities and feelings during the con-
flict-resolution process he uses with leaders of war-troubled countries and during
election day poll-watching trips to Panama, Haiti, Nicaragua, and Guyana. In a
dignified tone, he explains the Carter Center's commitment to solving problems
of food, health care, shelter, and the environment in other parts of the world as
well as the United States. He details the help the Carter Center has provided for
its home base of Atlanta and lists a number of ways that young people can become
involved in their own communities. If the book has a flaw, it is in its sweeping,
almost overwhelming discussion of world conflicts and concerns for which young
people may not have enough memory of places or problems. Regardless, the book
is such a genuine model of personal response to civic and global difficulties that it
is inspiring and could be used to unwrap history or provoke action. CF
184 
* 
THE BULLETIN
COOPER, SUSAN 
Danny and the Kings; illus. by Jos. A. Smith. 
McElderry,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-689-50577-9 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Okay, so it's February and you should have had this book before Christmas, but
some holiday books deserve year-around attention and not many of them feature
the elements that make this one so appealing. Danny lives in a trailer near the
highway that takes him to school and his mother to work as a truck-stop waitress.
They can't afford a Christmas tree this year, and the one Danny's schoolmate
donates from a garden gets smashed by a truck. In an old roadside tradition, the
truck driver saves the situation, and kids will find here a comforting sense that the
value of gifts is all in the giving. It's a down-to-earth story, simply told, that
projects feeling without getting too sentimental. The pictures, also, are unpreten-
tious-literal enough to extend the action in closeup interior scenes, but skillfully
varied with mysterious landscapes that leave room for magic of human or mythical
proportions. At the risk of sounding both sexist and classist, it's hard to find
working-class boy-books, so put this one on your Christmas list for next year. BH
DAVIDSON, 
ROSEMARY 
Take a Look: An Introduction to the Experience of
Art. Viking, 1994 
128p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-670-84478-0 
$18.99 
R* 
Gr. 5-9
First published in Britain, this comprehensive volume addresses not only the more
traditional aspects of art appreciation but also social and cultural forces that intro-
duction-to-art books rarely discuss. In the chapter "Looking and Seeing," for
example, Davidson uses optical illusions to discuss the complicated process of see-
ing and how our expectations shape that process; in "What's Art For?" she exam-
ines the varied purposes of art (including storytelling, recording events and images,
and just plain fun); in "Artists Earning a Living" she explores the changing notions
of professionalism in art. There are also chapters on the meaning and conventions
of faces and bodies in art, the decorative arts, and many other elements of art and
art history. The examples included derive from many cultures, including the popu-
lar. Oversized pages are spacious and attractive, and they're liberally packed with
line drawings and photos in both color and black-and-white; ample use of cutout
images superimposed on the white page helps reduce the rigid sense of geometry
that weighs down many a similar work. The language is straightforward, simple,
and engaging (if at times a bit overemotional or overdirective), and sections often
end with thought-provoking, clearly open-ended questions to the reader. A great
book for browsing as well as curricular use, this is full of the kind of accessible
detail that humanizes a sometimes dauntingly lofty subject. An index, a glossary,
a timeline, and suggestions for further reading are appended. DS
DUFFY, CAROL ANN, comp. 
I Wouldn't Thank You for a Valentine: Poems for
Young Feminists; illus. by Trisha Rafferty. 
Holt, 1994 
104 p
ISBN 0-8050-2756-4 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
This is a generous anthology of contemporary poems that young adults will find
suitably subversive in some cases (Fleur Adcock's "For Heidi with Blue Hair," for
instance) and surprisingly traditional in others, such as the title poem by Liz
Lochhead, who protests sentimental cliches only to succumb to one-ironically,
readers hope-in the last line ("I wouldn't thank you, I'd melt"). There's humor,
sadness, kids' crushes and cavils, grownups' advice and admonition, pride, poli-
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 
185
tics, and lots of Briticisms, with occasional American voices including Maya
Angelou's ("Phenomenal Woman"). The tonal range varies from slyly humorous
("Lovesick" by Carol Ann Duffy) to forthrightly obvious ("Unravelling" by Vicki
Feaver), with no preaching and plenty of ethnic variety among the selections.
Geometric pen-and-ink drawings are more decorative than reflective, but they lend
a kind of new-wave look to the format. BH
FARRIs, DIANE 
In Dolphin Time; written and illus. with photographs by Diane
Farris. 
Four Winds, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-02-734365-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
NR 
5-8 yrs
"The day you discover dolphins in your pocket is a day of wonder ... 
a day of
delight." Well, one could argue with the latter if not with the former, but in any
case the sentimental meanderings of this photo-picture book do lead one to the
intemperate conclusion that dolphins are fast becoming this era's unicorn, another
marvelous beast pummeled into whimsical soft-sculpture. Anyway, after the ellip-
sis-happy narrator finds the dolphins in her pocket, she puts them into a goldfish
bowl ("they looked content... but crowded") and then into the bathtub, and then
starts seeing them everywhere: in the mirror, in the soup, nuzzling the dog, and
swimming by an artichoke. Blue-gray, dim, duotone photographs superimpose
photos of dolphins onto the most unlikely places while the words ramble on about
"the stories they told, of cloud-dancing ... swimming free . . . of coming close ..
Sand wishing on an underwater moon." Kids might enjoy the trick photography,
but the inanely new-agey text ("the water was alive with light that began with us
and never ended") would be more at home on a poster than in a book. RS
FISHER, LEONARD EVERETT 
Kinderdike; written and illus. by Leonard Everett
Fisher. 
Macmillan, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-02-735365-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In 1421, a small village in Holland was swept away by a terrible storm, but left on
a lonely dike as the sea subsided was a small baby and a kitten. To the villagers this
was a sign of renewal, so they built their homes again and called the new town
Kinderdike after the found child. This is the legend that Fisher tells in fatuous
rhymed couplets ("A tiny Dutch village stood low near the sea, where a dike held
the tide for a people carefree") but illustrates in brilliant acrylics. He emphasizes
light and shadow and uses sea-level perspective to accentuate the flatness of the
land and the huge sky. His scenes are filled with people in motion to enliven a
time and place of windmills and wooden shoes. The compositions are striking and
the telling of the story, while it doesn't capture the emotions of devastation and
renewal, is clear enough to let the readers understand the drama. A comparison
with the works of Dutch masters might be interesting for older children. CF
GEISERT, 
ARTHUR 
After the Flood; written and illus. by Arthur
Geisert. 
Houghton, 1994 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-395-66611-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Geisert's Ark (BCCB 9/88) has landed; what happens next? After camping awhile
atop Mt. Ararat, Noah and his sons build an inimitably Geisertian slide to take the
186 
* THE BULLETIN
Ark down the mountain where birds and beasts and family settle, thrive and repro-
duce, until crowding forces the animals to go out and repopulate the world once
again. It's a plausible, child-logical scenario, and both the concise text and the
rustically elaborate pictures employ only the gentlest humor, such as Noah's turn-
ing the Ark over to make a house, where Mrs. Noah reads bedtime stories to the
ever-increasing children and animals. Geisert has here colored his familiar, obses-
sively detailed etchings with light spring greens, autumnal ochres, and an opulent
purple for the grapes. Animals, including lots of Geisert's famous pigs and piglets,
are everywhere, and while kids may wonder at the apparently herbivorous amity-
hey, maybe that's the real reason most of the animals had to leave. RS
GIBBONS, GAIL 
St. Patrick's Day; written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. 
Holiday
House, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1119-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
The indefatigable Gail Gibbons here adds another entry to her list of holiday books,
and while St. Patrick's Day may not have the larger appeal of, say, Christmas,
Gibbons again does an efficient job of summing up the holiday's history and tradi-
tions. In fact, while the folkways of Christmas, Thanksgiving, etc., are replete
with historical references, most people are content to leave St. Patrick's Day sim-
ply Irish and green, so this book is useful in that it gives some context for the
celebrating, even though Gibbons does seem to acknowledge that it's all things
Irish being saluted, not specifically the saint himself. The pictures are of course
very green, done in the illustrator's simple, school-pageant style; pair the book
with dePaola's Patrick (BCCB 4/92) and pass around the cupcakes. RS
GILCHRIST, JAN SPIVEY 
Indigo and Moonlight Gold; written and illus. by Jan Spivey
Gilchrist. 
Black Butterfly, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-86316-210-X 
$13.95 
Ad 
4 -7yrs
Autrie loves to go out on the front porch at night while her mother watches from
within, each "alone, and yet together." Autrie looks at the sky and stars, wanting
them to stay forever but knowing that "clouds must sometimes come and hide the
stars." Gilchrist's painterly evocation of a young African-American girl's evening
meditations is much more a mood piece than a story, but it has a dreamy and
mysterious atmosphere captured in the quiet text and swoony-if a little stiff-
pictures ofwhite-nightgowned Autrie against the night's starry sky. A good choice
for bedtime, when young sleepyheads like Autrie find themselves poised between
the cozy present and the call of dreams. RS
GILMAN, PHOEBE, ad. 
Something From Nothing; ad. and illus. by Phoebe
Gilman. 
Scholastic, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-590-47280-1 
$14.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
The baby blanket Joseph's grandfather makes for him gets worn out and then
remade successively into a jacket, a vest, a tie, a handkerchief, a button, and fi-
nally-with nothing left-a story. This favorite old Jewish folktale (no sources
acknowledged) gets fresh treatment that will have young story hour audiences chant-
ing along, "There's just enough material here to make ...
" The page flow en-
hances the suspense and the rhythm. Warm, brown-toned illustrations reflect a
good-humored family in an East European shtetl setting, with lots going on in
cutaway household scenes that include, under the floorboards, a mouse nest whose
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 
187
inhabitants make efficient use of the fabric snipped away by Grandpa's scissors.
It's one of those naturally happy stories which, accompanied as it is by lovingly
(and accurately) drawn pictures, bubbles over ethnic boundaries with pure popu-
lar appeal. BH
GINSBURG, MIRRA, ad. 
The King Who Tried to Fry an Egg on His Head; illus. by
Will Hillenbrand. 
Macmillan, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 
0-02-736242-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-7 yrs
When an impoverished king gives his daughters in marriage to the Sun, the Moon,
and the Raven in exchange for assistance in gathering the family's grain, the ar-
rangement works out well and the girls are happy with their new spouses. Unfor-
tunately the silly king tries to emulate the deeds of his new relations, but he can't
cook an egg on his head like the Sun, light up the bathhouse with his fingers like
the Moon, or sleep in a tree like the Raven; he eventually retires, bruised and
dismayed after falling out of the tree, to the arms of his long-suffering wife. This
story has an appealing blend of the noodlehead and the supernatural, with enough
repetition to involve young listeners, who may themselves have encountered the
pitfalls of imitation. Hillenbrand's pastel on rough paper illustrations have a pag-
eant of hues and some intriguing characters whose surreally enlarged heads cause
their tiny features to appear humorous and slightly mournful, although the cheer-
ful countenances of the magic sons-in-law are counterbalanced by some ethereal
night scenes and a distinct-if genial-sense of power. There's no source note for
the supposedly Russian tale, and the ending is a little flat, but the general happi-
ness, loony slapstick, and hints of majesty in the tale will satisfy all manner of
young eggheads. DS
GREENE, PATRICIA BAIRD 
The Sabbath Garden. Lodestar, 1993 
21 4 p
ISBN 0-525-67430-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-9
An ambitious first novel set in New York takes on the ethnic strains of a deteriorat-
ing Lower East Side neighborhood, in which hopeless poverty and family dissolu-
tion have created a breeding ground for violence. Having recovered from a previous
suicide attempt, graduating eighth-grade basketball star Opal Tyler is fighting
through another depression as her half-brother turns criminal, her mother be-
comes addicted to tranquilizers, and the girl she perceives as her best friend betrays
her. Into this unhappy mixture bungles Solomon Leshko, sometimes the victim of
racism and sometimes its perpetrator in decrying the loss of his Jewish community
to "them"-i.e. African Americans and Puerto Ricans. Opal and Sol are an in-
volving pair of main characters, and both of them develop convincingly; less cred-
ible is the melodramatic plotting that twice threatens Opal's life, once when her
brother burgles Sol's apartment while she's in it and nearly kills her, and later
when she's shot by a pawnbroker aiming at her brother. There are other imbal-
ances: 
the garden that Opal and Sol organize is a moving resolution, but the
subsequent telephone call from Opal's long-lost father is too pat; Opal's slowly
evolving relationship with a local boy is poignantly realized, but Sol's niece's ap-
pearance late in the book seems contrived for effect. Some of the observations are
sharply individualistic ("Down here the ones who don't bargain are either fools or
Christians"), some are thematically representative ("you keep wanting more from
life down here, you got to rob, rape, and maybe even kill to get it"). A social
worker for ten years, the author seems torn between telling a story about human
188 
* THE BULLETIN
beings and delivering a message about the human condition. It's promising to see
the story win out. BH
GRIMES, NIKK 
From a Child's Heart; illus. by Brenda Joysmith. 
Just Us Books,
1993 
2 6 p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-940975-44-2 
$15.95
Library ed. ISBN 0-940975-43-2 
$7.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
"Sis always says/ 'If you're gonna do something, do it right.'/ So when I do my
homework every night,/ I draw my letters straight and neat in my notebook./ I
know the teacher may not take the time to look,/ but Sis says do it anyway, even if
nobody else can see-/ except You, Lord, and me." That's the tone and tenor of
these thirteen poems reflecting inner conversations between African-American
children and the God whom they variously confide in and petition. There's a
modicum of rhyme, a conscious if informal sense of innocence, and more than a
little sentimentality, which is echoed in the soft, idealized pastels that face each
page of verse. The pictures are well drawn, with a kind of Norman Rockwell
nostalgia that will please fans of the poetic messages packaged here. BH
GUTHRIE, DONNA W. 
Nobiah's Well: A Modern African Folktale; illus. by Rob
Roth. 
Ideals, 1993 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8249-8631-8 
$15.00
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8249-8622-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
In an original story drawing on the simplest of folkloric elements, a young boy
goes to fetch water for his sick mother in their drought-stricken African land. On
the way back, he shares the water with a hedgehog, a family of hyenas, and an ant
bear, whereupon his enraged mother breaks the empty jar; but the animals appear
to him in a dream and urge him to dig a well "as deep as your heart and as wide as
your thirst." It is this well that provides for the entire village and turns the sur-
rounding desert green. Despite the overgeneralized picture of Africa suggested by
a vague geographical setting, this is effectively written and illustrated. The dark
watercolors, overlaid with translucent blocks of text, are subtly blended and the
compositions, like the words, limited to basic patterns. Human and animal fig-
ures are expressively stylized. Though it's cast in the form of a traditional tale, this
is one of the few picture books to reflect current conditions of famine that devas-
tate vast sections of the world, and it's a picture book well paced for sharing aloud
in context of children's discussing news they've heard or overheard. BH
HANSARD, PETER 
A Field Full of Horses; illus. by Kenneth Lilly. 
Candlewick,
1994 
26 p 
(Read and Wonder)
ISBN 1-56402-302-8 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
An unseen narrator approaches a pasture and watches a fetching herd of horses
graze. Hansard addresses small aspects of horse behavior ("one rolls on her back in
a dusty wallow"), horse care ("their owners groom them with tools like these"),
and equine information ("A horse is measured in HANDS, from the withers to the
ground") as Lilly's calmly realistic line-and-watercolor pictures display the expres-
sive charm of their subjects. The book is more general than other entries in the
Read and Wonder series (such as Think of an Eel, BCCB 5/93), with a slightly
British flavor (and the not-found-anywhere use of "snicker" to describe an equine
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 
189
sound); but it's a gentle introduction with respect and affection both for real fly-
swishing, soft-nosed horses and for children's fascination with them. DS
HENEGHAN, JAMES 
Torn Away. 
Viking, 1994 
[192p]
ISBN 0-670-85180-9 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Forced to go live with his Uncle Matthew in Canada after his mother and sister are
killed in an Ulster terrorist bombing, thirteen-year-old Declan, intent upon join-
ing up with the IRA, does everything he can to return to Northern Ireland. Only
handcuffs and an armed guard get him on the plane to Canada in the first place;
once at Matthew's home in coastal British Columbia, he steals a series of boats to
get back to Vancouver, where he almost manages to smuggle himself aboard a
plane bound for Scotland. While the action-adventure qualities of the novel are
never quite convincing, Declan's rage is, as he swears revenge for his mother's and
sister's deaths as well as for the death of his father some years before at the hands-
Declan thinks--of Protestant loyalists. Realizing he cannot escape the kindly min-
istrations of Matthew and his family, Declan strikes a deal: he will stay until after
Christmas, four months hence, and then, if he still insists, Matthew will send him
back. Given how saintly Matthew and his family are, there's little suspense as to
Declan's decision, even though the author drags it out until the last page; what will
hold readers is the vivid drama of the scenes in Belfast and Declan's halting, grudg-
ing acceptance of Matthew's love. Declan seems older than thirteen; on the other
hand, we get a sobering, immediate picture of a country and civil war that would
quickly make kids grow up too fast. RS
HUSAIN, SHAHRUKH 
Mecca. 
Dillon, 1993 
4 6p 
illus. with photographs 
(Holy
Cities)
ISBN 0-87518-572-X 
$13.95 
R Gr. 5-9
As well as being a travelogue and history of Islam's most sacred city, this is a cogent
and uncontroversial explanation of the religion and its people. Husain's survey is
chronological, tracing the history of Mecca from Ibrahim's discovery of the mi-
raculous Zam-zam spring, through Muhammad's revelation from God that his
followers should pray in the direction of the Kaaba, to the contemporary, stream-
lined focus of the pilgrimage (the hajj) that Mecca is today. Throughout, color
photographs link the present with the past, and while the design is typical of the
double-columned, slightly crammed, nonfiction series English import, the photos
and the clearly outlined information give the book a browsably accessible format.
Unfamiliar words are defined in the text proper or in "Key word" boxes; a timeline,
a six-title reading list, and an index are appended. RS
HYDE, MARGARET O. 
Know about Gays and Lesbians; written by Margaret O.
Hyde and Elizabeth H. Forsyth. 
Millbrook, 1994 
96p
ISBN 1-56294-298-0 
$15.90 
M 
Gr. 7-12
As with many other young people's books about homosexuality, this one assumes
that its readers are heterosexual, beginning in the first chapter with "A gay or
lesbian may be your best friend and you may not even know that person is homo-
sexual." In fact, the core audience for this book may be gay teens themselves,
seeking information and emotional support even as they tell you that "it's for a
report." What they will find here are some mixed messages. The attitude is en-
190 
* 
THE BULLETIN
tirely pro-gay, but while the book is thoroughly footnoted, it is careless in its han-
dling of statistics and theories. At first, for example, Hyde and Forsyth state that
"estimates of the incidence of homosexuality range from 1 percent to 10 percent of
the population"; then they go on to accept the 10 percent figure throughout the
rest of the book, even though this figure is a subject of great controversy. They
also cite a very peculiar scale of the seven types of male homosexuals-from "trade
homosexuals" to "gay guys"-that is self-contradictory and ill-informed, more
benevolent than Morton Hunt's "queer gays" and "straight gays" (BCCB 3/88)
but confusing nonetheless. The writing is sometimes slapdash: "Although many
heterosexuals grow up in families with single parents, the boy-girl tradition con-
tinues." What does that mean? "Others claim that it [a butch and femme lesbian
relationship] is one form of relationship to be explored as long as it does not ex-
ploit the female partner." Which one would that be? Several first-names-only
anecdotal case studies are included, but there is no indication of whether these are
fictional or taken from real people. There's a comprehensive overview of biology,
social science, and history here that's often lacking in other YA books on the topic,
but it is too often difficult to discern. Notes, a reading list with nineteen nonfic-
tion books and one Norma Klein novel, a directory of gay and AIDS organizations
and hotlines, and an index are appended. Susan and Daniel Cohen's When Some-
one You Know Is Gay (BCCB 6/89) remains the best YA nonfiction on the topic,
particularly in its acknowledgment that the "someone you know" may be you. RS
JASPERSOHN, WILLIAM 
My Hometown Library; written and illus. with photographs
by William Jaspersohn. 
Houghton, 1994 
[4 8 p]
ISBN 0-395-55723-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Although one double-page spread features pictures of some of the country's most
famous libraries, such as the Library of Congress, the rest of the book is, as the title
says, devoted to Jaspersohn's own local library, the Guilford Free Library in Con-
necticut. This library seems a comfortable blend of the traditional (card catalog,
flannel boards, and a pencil-tallied accessions book) and the modern (automated
checkout system, videos, Infotrac), with Jaspersohn's camera focused closely on all
the specific objects, procedures, and services that comprise a busy library of today.
The color photos are a crisp survey of all the departments, including their tools
and staff, and while there's an appropriate emphasis on the children's department,
Jaspersohn doesn't neglect the historical room, technical processing, or adult ser-
vices. Most every public library will offer some version of the services offered at
Guilford, so the book could be used as an introduction to your place as well, and
the libraries-are-great theme that runs throughout is a welcome tonic: "The li-
brary is part of a community. Its job is to nourish that community with flavorful
food for the mind." Well said, and well-shown. RS
KRENSKY, STEPHEN 
Lionel in the Winter; illus. by Susanna Natti. 
Dial,
1994 
[4 8p] 
(Dial Easy-to-Read)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1334-7 
$11.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1333-9 
$11.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Cheerful, imaginative Lionel (Lionel at Large, BCCB 4/86, etc.) is back with four
easy-to-read stories that will invite warm smiles on any day, cold or not. Lionel
delights in winter weather without realizing that his family doesn't share his en-
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 
191
thusiasm, explores the "Arctic" in his backyard, learns more quickly about New
Year's resolutions than his sister Louise expects, and keeps a potato-nosed snowman
from becoming lonely. The dialogue is natural and the language flows smoothly.
These gently funny stories have sprightly watercolor illustrations that match their
mood and develop the characters. Lionel readers won't be disappointed with his
new adventures. CF
KROLL, STEVEN 
By the Dawn s Early Light: The Story ofthe Star-Spangled Banner;
illus. by Dan Andreasen. 
Scholastic, 1994 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-590-45054-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
The war with the British has been going on for over two years when, on the last
day of August in 1814, a young Washington lawyer learns that a friend has been
arrested by the British and taken to one of their ships. In an effort to rescue him,
Francis Scott Key seeks and secures President Madison's permission to visit the
British fleet under a flag of truce. A day later, Key and a federal agent bravely set
sail in a small cartel boat looking for the enemy. Handsome full-page oil paintings
in warm golden tones blend nineteenth-century romance with twentieth-century
realism in this story of how the American national anthem came to be written.
The paintings' compositions are reminiscent of the art of the period, while the
strained emotions on the faces of the men remind us that even a heroic war is
harrowing. Kroll's details of this dramatic story match those told at Fort McHenry
today; judicious use of dialogue moves the story along while remaining true to the
facts. The author sets the context for the story with an introductory page on the
War of 1812, and a note at the end of the book provides a few more details about
the flag, the song, and its author. Song, music, maps, pictures, bibliography for
children, and index round out a well-planned book that revives a story nearly
fossilized by hyperbolic retellings; the rather formal quality of the storytelling,
along with the advanced vocabulary, indicate that the book is best suited for inde-
pendent readers. CF
LANDAU, ELAINE The Beauty Trap. New Discovery, 1994 
[128p] 
(An Open
Door Book)
ISBN 0-02-751389-0 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
"The beauty trap," says Elaine Landau, "is actually a way of thinking that asserts
that a woman's true value and desirability are essentially tied to the way she looks."
First-person accounts of pain from trying to meet an impossible ideal (ranging
from a girl whose mother desperately wants her to be thin to a brunette who fried
her hair off in an effort to be blonde) alternate with chapters about the cultural
emphasis on female beauty, the obsession with female weight, and the prevalence
of plastic surgery. There are some telling anecdotes, ranging from a discussion of
the Christine Craft case to a recounting of a slender woman who went "under-
cover" as a fat one, and the medical facts on eating disorders and ruptured breast
implants are certainly alarming. The book is a little superficial, however, never
addressing some important questions (Are men's reactions to their bodies different
from women's?) and relating sad but unsurprising stories rather than demonstrat-
ing the quirky and individual response to self-image displayed by Jill Dawson's
How Do I Look? (BCCB 9/91); it also strays occasionally from its chosen subject
(the importance of the appearance issue to feminism doesn't quite explain why
192 
* THE BULLETIN
Landau moves so frequently to more general discussions of women and their role).
Nevertheless, for girls not ready for Naomi Wolfs The Beauty Myth-to which
Landau's book owes a great deal-this will make sobering and thoughtful reading.
Endnotes, suggestions for further reading, a listing of organizations concerned about
the status of women, and an index are included. DS
LAVIES, BIANCA 
A Gathering of Garter Snakes; written and illus. by Bianca
Lavies. 
Dutton, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45099-8 
$14.99 
R* 
Gr. 3-5
If snakes send you shrieking, beware: "a wriggling, writhing carpet of snakes cov-
ers the bottom of a large pit" on the first double-page spread here, but if you
persevere you'll begin to see, as Lavies does, the fascination inherent in what at first
appears to be a vat of scaly green spaghetti. Thousands of red-sided garter snakes
spend the winter in pits like these in Manitoba, and this book documents their
habitat and habits as they hibernate, mate, eat, shed their skins, and interact with
local residents. As usual, Lavies combines her ability to write clear and informative
prose with a boundless curiosity about the natural world; this text is made particu-
larly lively by accounts of the nearby town, where snakes fall from the inhabitants'
ceilings, Kelly the snake-retrieving dog lovingly brings herpetological gifts to his
mistress, and Mrs. Lillequist happily shares a kitchen with handsome serpentine
George and occasionally her living room with his friends ("We sit very still at night
as the snakes come into the living room and play with each other on the carpet").
Photographs include images of patterned and gleaming scales, stop-action shots of
lithe exploring tongues, an informative yet gruesomely fascinating picture of a
frog, his hands extended in apparent supplication, disappearing down a snake's
throat, and human-interaction photos in which the tiny snakes are downright cute.
Don't miss the final page, where Lavies sprawls comfortably, like an unrepentant
but clothed Eve, among her snaky subjects; it may well prompt requests for "that
snake lady book." DS
LESTER, JULIUS, ad. 
The Last Tales of Uncle Remus; ad. by Julius Lester; illus. by
Jerry Pinkney. 
Dial, 1994 
[17 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1304-5 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1303-7 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5 up
See this month's Big Picture, p. 179.
LEVINE, ARTHUR A., ad. 
The Boy Who Drew Cats: A Japanese Folktale; illus. by
Frid6ric Clement. 
Dial, 1994 
26 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1173-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1172-7 
$16.00 
R* 
5-9 yrs
With the controlled surrealism that characterized his illustrations for Claude
Clement's The Voice ofthe Wood(BCCB 6/89), Fred&ric Clement has illustrated a
Japanese tale familiar from Lafcadio Hearn's earlier adaptation. Many storytellers
already know what a great ghost story this makes for Halloween sessions: an artis-
tically talented little boy, trapped in an abandoned temple, paints screen after screen
of cats that come alive to defeat the giant rat haunting the place. It's an eerie
legend which, according to an informative author's note, grew around a well-known
fifteenth-century artist, and these acrylic paintings heighten the suspense at a sym-
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 
193
bolic level without sensationalizing it. They have the flat perspective and spare
composition of traditional Japanese prints, with somber hues that warn of danger
and with a well-integrated page design incorporating calligraphy of Japanese char-
acters whose pronunciation and meaning is indicated at the end of the book. Try
this with the older picture-book crowd; sophisticates who've progressed beyond
Harold and the Purple Crayon will be on the edge of their seats. BH
LEWIS, J. PATRICK 
July Is a Mad Mosquito; illus. by Melanie Hall. 
Atheneum,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31813-8 
$14.95 
R 
4 -7 yrs
Illustrated with jaunty pastel art, Lewis's latest collection offers twelve poems, one
for each month, along with a concluding reprise that brings them all together.
The rhythms are catchy and the imagery ever-crisp, from "January" ("Great days
of ice!/ Refrigerated/ Paradise") through "December" (Two carolers on the green,/
Who just became a trio/ With my snowman in between"). Hall's pictures dance
right along with the verses, which convey surprising sounds in formal meters. You've
got twelve story-hour starters right here, and the collection as a whole would also
make a nicely unpedantic introduction to the shifting seasons; in any case, the
poems are fun to read aloud. RS
LIMB, SUE 
Come Back, Grandma; illus. by Claudio Mufioz. 
Knopf, 1994 
28p
ISBN 0-679-84720-0 
$13.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Bessie's best friend and playmate has been her grandmother, "who had speckled
eyes like birds' eggs, bendy thumbs, and a crinkle at the top of her nose." They do
card tricks, tame birds, and play hopscotch, but suddenly Grandma dies, and the
little girl wonders where she went. Heaven, says Mommy; "Grandma was now a
part of nature," says Daddy; "born again as an animal or a bird," offers next-door
neighbor Krishna. It turns out Krishna was closest to the mark, for many years
later, Bessie marries and has a baby, complete with speckled eyes, bendy thumbs,
nose-crinkle and bird-taming ability. The story, illustrated with suitably tender,
simple line-and-watercolor paintings, seems meant to be a gentle reflection on
time, memory, and cycles, though literal children may be left thinking that Grandma
has actually come back as a baby, "just like grandma, only a little girl ... it was as
if Grandma had never been away." RS
LOWELL, SUSAN 
IAm Lavina Cumming. Milkweed Editions, 1993 
200p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-91543-39-5 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-915943-77-8 
$6.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Lavina loves her home in the Arizona Territory, but her father worries that she'll
grow up wild, so he sends her to live with his cultured sister in Santa Cruz, Califor-
nia. There Lavina meets spoiled cousin Aggie, sturdy hired girl Bridget, and digni-
fied yet strong-willed Aunt Agnes, who begins to teach Lavina how to be a lady
and makes her realize that there is a wider world beyond Lavina's beloved ranch.
Based on the life of the author's grandmother, the book rings true although it
never really rises above the mundane despite the historical setting and events such
as the 1906 earthquake. The story of turn-of-the-century daily life is smoothly
written and the historical details appealing, but there's little surprise or develop-
ment outside of Lavina's rather sudden decision at the end to pursue her educa-
tion. DS
194 
* 
THE BULLETIN
McKISSACK, PATRICIA 
The Royal Kingdoms of Ghana, Mali, and Songhay: Life in
Medieval Africa; written by Patricia and Fredrick McKissack. 
Holt,
1994 
14 1p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-1670-8 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
An ambitious introductory survey, this is much needed to counter the persistent
under-representation of African history in U.S. children's literature, but it has
some of the problems of an encyclopedia article in trying to organize huge amounts
of material under general headings such as "Ghana's Government," "Ghana's
Kings," "The Military," "Ghanaian Justice," etc. In a section called "Daily Life,"
for instance, the text leaps from a paragraph describing family relationships among
the Mande to an example of poetry that seems unrelated except for broad connec-
tions of time and place. What stands out most clearly from the names, dates, and
political complexities are leaders such as Sundiata, whose stories have an unforget-
table epic quality. Indeed, the authors make a point of balancing Arabic and
European accounts with the oral narrative of griots, whose records they strongly
credit and whom they say still function importantly in West African society today.
Despite the textbook tone, this will be extremely useful as a springboard to books
and articles that offer more depth but are less accessible to students. Maps, black-
and-white photographs, and clearly marked sections open up the format, while a
time line, notes, a bibliography, and an index will prove helpful to readers in-
volved in researching specific topics. BH
MACLACHLAN, PATRICIA 
Skylark. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
[80p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023333-8 
$11.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023328-1 
$12.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
This sequel to the author's award-winning Sarah, Plain and Tall (BCCB 5/85)
tells of a drought that threatens Anna's new family situation as the fields dry up
and neighbors abandon their homesteads. When the barn burns down, Sarah
takes Anna and Caleb back to her old home in Maine. After a yearning exchange
of letters and a rainfall, Papa comes to bring them back to the prairie, where Sarah
finally writes her name in the dirt as a sign that the skylark has "come to earth" to
make her home. This has less impact than the first book, partly because the
children's concern that Sarah may not stay with them is repetitive and partly be-
cause the drought as a plot device is less dynamic than it is simply looming. How-
ever, MacLachlan's writing is still lyrical, and the story's continuation and happy
ending will be a must for fans of both the first book and its television special. This
one seems tailor-made for filming as well (apparently it was, with the movie of
Skylark shown last year on TV): "There will be flowers in the spring, and the river
will run again. And in the spring there will be the new baby, Papa and Sarah's
baby." BH
McNuLTY, FAITH 
A Snake in the House; illus. by Ted Rand. 
Scholastic,
1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-44758-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. K-3
A small snake and a young boy meet on a summer afternoon, and the snake sud-
denly finds itself far away from the sunny pond. Escaping from its glass jar prison,
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 
195
the snake spends days in the boy's house searching for a way out. Rand's richly
colored, realistic watercolors, drawn from the snake's perspective, give pots and
pans, the vacuum cleaner, and the household cat dramatic size and importance
and emphasize both the smallness of the snake and the enormity of its task in
trying to leave the house. Faith McNulty succeeds in telling the story of the snake
without slipping into sentimentality or anthropomorphism. She gently reminds
readers to treat animals with care while affirming that a child's natural curiosity
and the creatures of nature can meet and, with a little luck or thought, both will
survive. CF
MATHEWS, JUDITH 
Nathaniel Willy, Scared Silly; written by Judith Mathews and
Fay Robinson; illus. by Alexi Natchev. 
Bradbury, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-02-765285-8 
$14.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
The creaky door scares Nathaniel Willy silly, so his grandmother piles his bed
ever-higher with barnyard friends, each of whom, of course, adds its own warff
(dog), snoink (pig), moo (guess) to the cacophony when the boy squeezes the cat-
scrowll-for comfort. The sound effects encourage chanting along, as does
Gramma's repeated rhyme: "She pulled up the blanket and tucked them all in,/
Then kissed them resoundingly-smack! on the chin." Watercolor illustrations
have a rustic, folksy feel, tumbling the boy and the animals about the pages until
Gramma, in despair, consults a neighbor and finds the answer: oil on the hinges.
A natural companion to The Napping House, this folktale-no source cited-has a
similarly cumulating appeal and surprise. RS
MELTZER, MILTON 
Cheap Raw Material: How Our Youngest Workers Are Ex-
ploited and Abused. Viking, 1994 
[19 2 p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-670-83128-X 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
"Children have always worked," begins Milton Meltzer in this discourse on child
labor which starts with a history of practices including slavery, servitude, appren-
ticeship, and the early period of industrialization. He moves next to the recent
child labor abuses cited in fast-food chains, farming, and industrial home work.
Comparing incidents before and after labor laws were enacted in this country indi-
cates that current cases are more likely to represent neglect and irresponsibility on
the part of a minority rather than reflecting widespread injustice. The exceptions
are farm workers, both children and adults, who were excluded from labor legisla-
tion as a part of the compromise to get the legislation passed in the first place.
Although Meltzer tries to prove, through example, systemic and systematic abuse
and exploitation of child workers in this country and worldwide, he succeeds pri-
marily when he talks of farm laborers and children in less regulated countries such
as India and Mexico. What Meltzer does show is how closely children's issues are
tied to the problems of their parents. The last decade or more has seen a rise in
poverty, homelessness, unemployment, political instability, war, and loosened gov-
ernment regulation; the rise in child labor, and thus in the abuses of child labor, is
a symptom of these larger social problems. Keenly aware of this, Meltzer takes
indignant swipes at a system that appears to be slipping, even charging, in the
wrong direction. His broad coverage sometimes compromises the book's focus,
but does allow the reader to select details for building a case of his or her own.
Meltzer's research is commendable and his sources are well documented. CF
196 
* THE BULLETIN
MoRI, HANA Jirohattan; tr. by Tamiko Kurosaki and Elizabeth Crowe; illus. by
Elizabeth Crowe. 
Bess Press, 1993 
76 p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-880188-69-4 
$5.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
This brief novel from Japan gives a quietly told and accessible picture of rural
wartime life in that country, as focused on the "gentle giant" figure of Jirohattan,
a mentally retarded young man beloved by his entire village. When Jirohattan's
best friend, Shinyan, is drafted, Jirohattan can't understand why he cannot accom-
pany him and tries to count the days until his return-nor can Jirohattan under-
stand the news that Shinyan's transport ship has been torpedoed and all hands
drowned. When the village takes in refugee children sent from Kobe, Jirohattan
becomes a leader in making them welcome, finding them food, and protecting
them from the taunts of other children. The portrait ofJirohattan is spare enough
to counter sentimentality, and the story, told in retrospect by a retired village school-
teacher to her grandson, has the feeling of a nonfiction memoir, beginning with
her coming to the remote village in 1928 and ending with Jirohattan's death in
1950. The war itself is offstage here, but it's a distinct presence that shapes the
destinies of all the characters. RS
MOUTOUSSAMY-ASHE, JEANNE 
Daddy and Me: A Photo Story ofArthur Ashe and
His Daughter, Camera; written and illus. with photographs by Jeanne Moutoussamy-
Ashe. 
Knopf, 1993 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-95096-6 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-85096-1 
$13.00 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Moutoussamy-Ashe's photographs of her late husband Arthur and their daughter
Camera are technically adept and undeniably moving: we see father and daughter
playing and praying together, helping each other out when one of them is sick,
hugging and comforting each other. But as an introduction for young children
about what it's like when a parent has AIDS, Daddy and Me will probably prove
vague and confusing. "Do you know what having AIDS means? I do," says Cam-
era, and goes on to explain that "it means that sometimes Daddy runs a fever and
feels very tired." This is true for many illnesses, of course, and when Camera
further reports that, like her daddy, she has "good days and bad days too," young
listeners will probably misunderstand the comparison, particularly the girl's asser-
tion that "on my good days I like to hang upside down." What the book does
exceptionally well is to show the easy physical affection between Camera and her
father and the love that keeps them both going. Only in the prefatory note to
parents does Moutoussamy-Ashe say that Ashe is dead; the narrative proper nei-
ther states nor implicitly acknowledges that AIDS is a fatal disease, an omission
that one could read as evasion or protection, or simply as acknowledgment that
some hard facts are best left to parents. RS
NICHOL, BARBARA 
Beethoven Lives Upstairs; illus. by Scott Cameron. 
Orchard,
1994 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-531-06828-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 3-5
"I write, Uncle, because something terrible has happened. A madman has moved
into our house." The new lodger about whom Christoph writes to his Uncle Karl
is Ludwig van Beethoven. Beethoven is disrupting the whole household with his
noise (four pianos), his parties, and his eccentric personal habits, such as sluicing
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 
197
water over his head while stamping on the floor, and causing a leak in the down-
stairs ceiling. What Christoph learns from Uncle Karl's letters in return is that
Beethoven, now deaf, is in the midst of composing his Ninth Symphony, and the
epistolary story culminates with one of music's most famous-and poignant-
events, when Beethoven had to be turned around to view the ovation for what
would be his last completed symphonic work. Illustrated with thickly textured,
candlelit oil paintings that are realistically rumpled more than they are Romanti-
cized, the book (based upon an audio recording) moves from a picture of Beethoven
as growling nuisance to a deeper understanding of his genius. "To feel so much
inside, even so much joy, must be almost more than he can bear," realizes Christoph
at the end. It's a pleasure to see a children's book about classical music take its
subject seriously, communicating successfully the passion of artistic creation. RS
OSBORNE, MARY POPE, ad. 
Mermaid Tales from Around the World; illus. by Troy
Howell. 
Scholastic, 1993 
84 p
ISBN 0-590-44377-1 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Fans of Disney's Little Mermaid should know there's more to the story, and this
anthology of a dozen tales will entertain them without sentimentalizing the leg-
endary creatures, who in fact show a variety of characteristics that often include
quirks of magical power. Melusine of France, the Native American Menana, the
Greek nymph Galatea, an African fish husband, and several Asian, European, and
British Isle variants are included for cultural balance. In general the texts are smooth,
though retelling Hans Christian Andersen's version always seems unnecessary, given
its cadenced wit. Osborne's style occasionally flattens out, as in the exchange
between the fantastical princess of Tung Lake and her human friend Chen: "The
beautiful princess lowered her eyes. 'I would like to be your friend forever,' she
said. 'Oh, how wonderful,' he said." Kids will swim right by this, however, enjoy-
ing the unusual, subtly feminist power of the cast along with Howell's illustra-
tions, tastefully lyrical and aesthetically tailored to traditional art modes of the
various societies represented. An author's note gives brief background and specific
sources for each story. BH
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
What Good Is a Tail?; illus. with photographs by
William Mufioz. 
Cobblehill, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-525-65148-9 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
What good is a tail? Well, "some tails are beautiful ... tails show feelings ... tails
are handy for getting around," points out Dorothy Hinshaw Patent in describing
the function of this particular appendage. Separate sections examine the importance
of tails in steering (birds and fish, for example), balancing (many tree climbers),
communication (creatures ranging from predators such as wolves to prey such as
deer), and defense (snakes and porcupines). The topic has inherent appeal, since
tails are fairly mysterious to tail-free humans, but Patent's writing here lacks her
usual precision-she defines tails rather vaguely as "the part of the body that sticks
out beyond the end of the digestive system" and doesn't really explain why lobster
tails or tailfeathers on birds aren't "real tails." Photographs of varied wildlife have
a surprising amount of charm considering the tail's location on the anatomy, and
they drive home the message of diversity and usefulness of this particular creature
feature; some of the captions, unfortunately, are poorly written to the point of
being misleading ("Rattlesnakes warn potential enemies that they might strike by
198 
* THE BULLETIN
rattling their tails"). The anatomical approach to zoology (used with more success
for younger readers in Hana Machotka's Breathtaking Noses, BCCB 7/92) makes
for a nice change, and this could be informative pre-zoo reading. An index is
included. DS
PATERSON, KATHERINE 
Flip-Flop Girl. Lodestar, 1994 
[128p]
ISBN 0-525-67480-2 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 4-6
Paterson's signature and most memorable characters are almost anti-heroines ...
almost but not quite. Even Gilly Hopkins found redemption, while Vinnie, the
protagonist of Flip-Flop Girl finds a friend. It's not much, by the standards of the
rest of the fourth-grade class in the small Virginia community to which Vinnie and
her mother and little brother move after her father's death from cancer, for Vinnie's
friend Lupe is also an outcast whose father is in prison, falsely accused (perhaps) of
murdering his wife. What's developed here is a complex situation in which Vinnie
callously behaves to others-including her little brother, mute since their father's
funeral-as others do to her; Paterson never oversimplifies in the name of faith.
Especially effective is the crush Vinnie develops on her teacher, as well as the feroc-
ity with which she wreaks vengeance after feeling betrayed and the dread with
which she awaits punishment. This is a child with an adult-size problem, and
readers will immediately recognize her in and around themselves. BH
PAULSEN, GARY 
Mr. Tucket. 
Delacorte, 1994 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-385-31169-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
"Mr. Tucket" is actually fourteen-year Francis Alphonse Tucket, kidnaped from
his wagon train by Pawnee but liberated with the aid of mountain man Jason
Grimes. Francis hooks up with Mr. Grimes, who calls him "Mr. Tucket," and
from whom he learns much about survival and the frontier. Western lore abounds
as Francis learns to ride, shoot, trade with Indians, and trap beavers, as well as
getting to meet Jim Bridger and fight Pawnee (one of whom has a particular ven-
detta against both Francis and Mr. Grimes). Unfortunately there's not a great deal
of characterization, and some of the story is perplexing: it's not clear why Francis
never thinks to send word to his family that he's still alive, and his final epiphany
("He was not and did not want to be a 'mountain man'") seems rather surprising.
There are more subtle takes on the frontier experience, but adventure fans will
enjoy the whoopin' and hollerin' action here. DS
POGORELSKY, ANTONY 
The Black Hen, or the Underground Inhabitants; ad. by
Morse Hamilton; illus. by Tatyana Yuditskaya. 
Cobblehill, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-525-65133-0- 
$14.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When Alyosha saves a black hen from the chopping block, he discovers that the
hen is really chief minister of a kingdom of magical little people who live under
Alyosha's St. Petersburg boarding school. His reward is a wish, and he foolishly
asks for the ability to memorize his schoolwork without even reading it; while the
magic king tut-tuts his choice, he grants the wish but cautions Alyosha never to tell
anyone about the wondrous underground kingdom. Based on a famous Russian
children's story from 1829, this picture book is somewhat oppressively didactic as
Alyosha not only smugly neglects his studying but eventually spills the beans about
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 
199
the little people, who are then forced to flee, taking Alyosha's amazing ability with
them. (We're never sure exactly from whom they are fleeing, nor why the chief
minister is led off in chains.) Old-world watercolors combine fine-lined back-
grounds with some smudgy figure drawing for a total effect that is sometimes
crowded but that often conveys the ornate magic of the story. Kids will probably
ignore the sermon, content to enjoy the fantasy world that-who knows?--could
lie under their own school or bed. RS
PRICEMAN, MARJORIE 
How to Make an Apple Pie and See the World; written and
illus. by Marjorie Priceman. 
Knopf, 1994 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-93705-6 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-83705-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Apple pies are generally as easy as-well, pie, but this one demands some effort:
the poker-faced instructions tell the reader to "get all the ingredients at the mar-
ket. .... 
Unless, of course, the market is closed," whereupon you must show some
initiative and take a steamship to Italy to gather semolina wheat for the flour, hop
a train to France to acquire a chicken for its eggs, travel to Sri Lanka so you can
peel a piece of cinnamon bark for seasoning, head to England to pick up a cow for
the necessary butter, stow away on a banana boat to Jamaica (scooping up some
salty seawater on the way) so you can get some sugar cane, soar by balloon to
Vermont to collect some apples, then go home, refine all your ingredients, and
finally bake them into a pie! A delightful contrast to more sober-sided narratives
of food origins, this offers an entertaining adventure, complete with a free-spir-
ited, straw-hatted young heroine who's clearly happy to circumnavigate the globe
while brushing up her languages and making new friends. The illustrations show
slightly Provensenesque pointy-toed figures capering, with more motion than de-
tail, across verdant landscapes, golden wheatfields, and azure skies (check out the
parachuting cow on the back cover). For those with a literal mind, a recipe for
apple pie and a map showing the places visited are included; others can simply
contemplate the lengths necessary to obtain a complementary scoop of ice
cream.... DS
PULLMAN, PHILIP 
The Tin Princess. Knopf, 1994 
[30 4 p]
ISBN 0-679-84757-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9 up
After two forays into contemporary "problem" fiction (The Broken Bridge, BCCB
4/92; The White Mercedes, 6/93), Pullman here returns to the Victorian sweep and
setting of his three Sally Lockhart books (5/87, 4/88, 10/90). Sally makes a cameo
appearance here, but the focus is on a young language tutor named Becky and on
her student Adelaide, who will be remembered from The Ruby in the Smoke and
who has married into the royal family ofRazkavia, a Mitteleuropa hotbed of politi-
cal intrigue. The plot is far too complicated both for its own good and to go into
here; readers who appreciated the twists and turns of the Sally Lockhart stories, as
well as their large measure of feminist heroics, will find plenty to keep them turn-
ing the pages. While Pullman appreciates the excesses of Victorian melodrama, he
is never seduced by them, and the book has a dark, unsentimental core that ban-
ishes any sense of pastiche. The sophisticated writing and labyrinthine narrative
make this a book for the more adult end of young adult; Pullman fans of any age
200 
* THE BULLETIN
shouldn't hesitate, but those new to the author will be better served by a first
encounter with the more straightforward adventure of The Ruby in the Smoke. RS
ROTH-HANO, RENtE 
Safe Harbors. Four Winds, 1993 
21 4p
ISBN 0-02-777795-2 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 7-10
A sequel to Roth-Hano's Touch Wood (BCCB 5/88), in which she described her
survival as a Jewish child in a Catholic convent school during the Germans' World
War II occupation of France, this autobiographical novel takes the form of diary
entries during the author's first seventeen-month visit to the United States in 1951-
52. As a memoir, the book has historical interest, but as fiction, it proves unfo-
cused. What may have been factual becomes fragmentary as the protagonist exclaims
over newly discovered interests tangential to the plot ("The whole subject of the
early settlers and the pioneer spirit is just fascinating to me. It must have been an
exciting period!") or meets old friends whom we don't know and meet here only
briefly ("How heartwarming to see the white-haired, tired-faced Mrs. Barth I re-
member smile a genuine, carefree smile, and the wiry, always-worried Mr. Barth of
my youth rush to me and hug me"). Even the observations of New York are
sometimes oddly out of sync with the book's main theme, as when the protago-
nist, who frequently recalls the fear of hiding from Nazis, suddenly exclaims "Two
women pass me, conversing in German. I get a heartwarming sense of being in
Europe." The pace picks up when the book concentrates on development of main
characters, such as the complex woman who sponsors Renee and hires her as house-
keeper/baby-sitter, or on the realization of primary situations, such as Rende's yearn-
ing for her French boyfriend and resolution of guilt over her father's death. Tonally
uneven, this may nevertheless hold the attention of those who want to follow what
happened after the first book. BH
SANDLER, MARTIN W. 
Pioneers. HarperCollins, 1994 
(A Library of Congress
Book) 
[94p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023024-X 
$20.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023023-1 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
The time is somewhere between 1820 and 1890 and the place is the West, i.e.
anywhere from Kentucky to California. The topic is pioneers, who are variously
identified as mountainmen, cowboys, gold miners, frontier families, frontier women,
and loggers. Here is "a story larger than fiction, filled with real people with real
dreams facing and overcoming enormous challenges," according to the author.
The real people are pictured in archival material from the Library of Congress but
none of the photographs, lithographs, paintings, engravings, line drawings, or posters
is captioned, dated, or referenced. Sandler writes, sometimes confusingly, in the
present tense, and more than once strays into generalities bordering on the grandi-
ose, as in his description of the pioneer woman: "She is mother, wife, nurse, cook,
doctor, comforter, teacher, and farm laborer ... She will be regarded as a true
heroine, and she will earn a proud nickname-the Madonna of the Plains." A
vague chronology guides the work, moving back and forth whenever the need
arises to discuss first the mountainmen (identified as Daniel Boone and Kit Carson),
then the California Gold Rush, the prairie schooners, the railroads and the cow-
boy, and finally the settling of farm families on the prairies and plains. Song lyrics,
song-sheet covers, and broadsides have such identifying treatments as "From song,
'Greer County.'" The page layout is attractive and the print is inviting, but the
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 201
book is useful for browsing only and won't serve as documentation of a period in
American history. CF
SCHENKER, DONA 
Fearsome's Hero. Knopf, 1994 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-679-85424-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Poor Tully-last year Honey "Fearsome" Kotcher was his bullying enemy, but
now in sixth grade he's become the object of her ferocious affection. She beats up
Tully's opponents and scares the girl whom Tully really likes until his response
finally becomes cruel enough to drive the message home, after which a more dip-
lomatic and platonic friendship seems to be arising. Characterization isn't deep
and the story takes at least one extraneous turn, but Schenker's understanding of
the raw agony of preteen embarrassment will win empathy from readers. The
setting, Texas' Matagorda Island, provides some unusual southwestern atmosphere
that's enhanced by the zesty and earthy writing ("If God was to listen to the prayers
of buzzards," says one character philosophically, "there'd be dead cows all over the
dunes"). The downhome yet exotic flavor spices up a familiar story that kids will
relish. DS
SCHROEDER, ALAN 
The Stone Lion; illus. by Todd L. W. Doney. 
Scribner's,
1994 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-684-19578-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When the greedy goldsmith Jarlo forces his honest brother Drashi and their mother
out of the village, the two outcasts go into the mountains, barely surviving until
Drashi meets a stone lion who rewards his goodness with a shower of gold. Jarlo
hears of the lion and also tries to get the gold, but his greediness turns on him and
instead the lion takes Jarlo's hand into his mouth and doesn't let go until Jarlo sees
the error of his selfish ways. Folktales rarely allow for such repentance, and the
Tibetan customs seem viewed from the outside, rather than naturally arising from
the tale itself: "Once a week [Drashi] watched his mother patiently braid her hair
into one hundred and eight strands. In Tibet this was a holy number, and to keep
the braids in place, Tsomo would smear her hair with yak butter." It's an interest-
ing detail, but irrelevant to the story. Still, the book does give a picture of a culture
not well known in the West, and Doney's dramatically lit pictures, backgrounded
with the vistas of the Himalayas, are well composed and visually absorbing. While
jacket copy calls this a "retelling of a traditional tale," there's no source note. RS
SCHUR, MAXINE ROSE 
The Circlemaker. Dial, 1994 
[192p]
ISBN 0-8037-1354-1 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Like Matas' Sworn Enemies (BCCB 4/93), this is a historical novel about two boys
who have fought throughout their village childhood but who must cooperate to
escape being caught in nineteenth century Czarist Russia's conscription of Jewish
youth. The two books will make intriguing companions for discussion, since
Circlemaker provides the thorough background detail lacking in Enemies, while
Enemies suggests more ambiguous moral issues. Schur's first-person narrative is
well plotted and paced; she has an ear for Yiddish inflection ("If things don't get
better, depend on it, they will get worse!") and suspenseful narrative ("I heard tree
202 
* 
THE BULLETIN
trunks creak with the sound of bones cracking"). She's especially good at crises,
and the hero and anti-hero's border-crossing from the Ukraine into Hungary is
harrowing. Except for a few longwinded conversations, information is inserted
without fictional disruption, and the characters, both primary and secondary, are
memorable. In fact, readers may well find themselves remembering them in a
sequel, for which the ending here certainly leaves room. BH
SHULEVITZ, URI 
The Secret Room; written and illus. by Uri Shulevitz. 
Farrar,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-374-34169-9 
$15.00 
R 
4 -7 yrs
Traveling through the desert, a king asks a stranger, "Why is your head gray and
your beard black?" "Because my head is older than my beard," comes the reply.
"You must not tell this to anyone until you have seen my face ninety-nine times,"
orders the king so he can go home and riddle his chief counselor. The stranger
does tell the answer-after accepting payment of ninety-nine copper coins stamped
with the king's face-and eventually replaces the jealous counselor after showing
wisdom equal to his cleverness. Shulevitz has laced together folkloric motifs with
an admirable simplicity that matches his clean compositions. The tempera paint-
ings are intensely focused, with plenty of white space to offset sharply contrasting
hues and angular shapes. There's an especially sly humor of expression-or
expressionlessness-in the royal entourage and a certain kinship of features be-
tween the supercilious camel and the bad-tempered counselor. Despite its flaring
color patterns, this is an understated book that will give young listeners solid satis-
faction. The setting and costumes appear to be Russian-influenced Muslim, but
there's nary a hint of the story's source. BH
STOLZ, MARY 
Cezanne Pinto: A Memoir. Knopf, 1994 
[30 4 p]
ISBN 0-679-84917-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Even as accomplished a novelist as Stolz must be ambitious to write, for children,
a fictional memoir of a slave who escapes to Canada, returns to the U.S. to fight in
the Civil War, becomes a cowboy in Texas so he can look for his long-lost mother,
and-as an old man-intermingles accounts of his life story with philosophical
asides about the racism that shaped it. Some of this works and some of it doesn't.
The characters are vividly realized; the events are believable except for instances of
deus ex machina rescue (as when a wealthy Canadian plucks Cezanne and his men-
tor from two villains bent on reclaiming them in the name of the Fugitive Slave
Act); the historical explanations are sometimes integrated naturally into the narrator's
asides but at other times seem intrusive; the details are a mixture of careful research
and odd anachronism, including the terms black, African-American, and Negro all
applied at different points by the narrator in 1940, as well as his unlikely reflection
about "01' Massa," who sometimes hired out his slaves to neighbors in "a sort of
nineteenth-century rent-a-slave deal." Most debatable, perhaps, is the narrator's
use of heavy dialect ("When we'se gwine go?") in his memoir as he recollects his
gradual but determined effort to rid himself of that dialect, an act that Stolz makes
a metaphor for true freedom through educational improvement. There's a lot to
debate in both the subject and the treatment here; couple this one with Gary
Paulsen's Nightjohn (BCCB 2/93) and Mary Lyons' Lettersfrom a Slave Girl(BCCB
11/92). BH
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 203
STROM, YALE 
Uncertain Roads: Searchingfor the Gypsies; written and illus. with
photographs by Yale Strom. 
Four Winds, 1993 
112p
ISBN 0-02-788531-3 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 5 up
Far from indulging in the flashing-eyes-and-violin stereotypes of gypsy life, Strom
has provided an urgent, contemporary look at the dangers that Gypsies (called
"Rom" here, as the group prefers) face in a newly fragmented Europe. The Rom
had some semblance of equality and employment under the communist regimes of
the Eastern bloc; but changes in government and increasing ethnic animosities
have shut the Rom out, causing many of them to recall their terrible fate during
the Holocaust. Strom visited Romania, Hungary, Ukraine, and Sweden, taking
pictures, making music, and talking with the Rom, who are quoted in extensive
first-person interviews. While the interviews, viewed separately, lack individualiz-
ing distinction, with many of the sources sounding the same or covering the same
topics, the book taken as a whole is an urgent manifesto defending the basic hu-
man rights of a minority. There have been many books arguing for the "cultural
survival" of various indigenous populations, but this one is not about saving the
"old ways"; it's instead about saving people from physical attacks and discrimina-
tion in housing and employment. The book is liberally illustrated with color and
black-and-white photos of the Rom, showing lively traditions of dance and music
along with grim reminders of prejudice and poverty. The interviews are, some-
times distractingly, side-barred with Strom's comments about his trip; an intro-
ductory essay gives historical context, and the inclusion of music for four Rom
songs adds flavor. RS
UCHIDA, YOSHIKO, ad. 
The Magic Purse; illus. by Keiko Narahashi. 
McElderry,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-689-50559-0 
$15.95 
R 
5-7 yrs
In the folkloric tradition of humble heroes who receive a mysterious call and fol-
low it to find their destinies, a poor Japanese farmer heeds an inner voice that urges
him to visit the Iseh shrine. On his way, he takes a shortcut that leads him into the
frightening Black Swamp, where a captive maiden begs him to take a letter to her
parents in the dangerous Red Swamp. It is compassion that fuels his courage, but
it is gold that rewards him. In fact, there is a golden glow dominating many of the
watercolor paintings that complement the story. Spacious compositions and broad,
soft-edged brush strokes suggest more than define the spare shapes, which reflect
traditional elements of Japanese painting injected with mystical effects. There's
no note on the source of the tale, which lacks the classic confrontation with an-
tagonists that would lend folktale suspense, but both text and illustration are lyri-
cally styled. BH
WALKER, LOU ANN 
Hand, Heart, andMind: The Story ofthe Education ofAmerica's
DeafPeople. Dial, 1994 
[144 p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-08037-1225-1 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
"Deaf people can do anything hearing people can except hear," said I. King Jor-
dan, the first deaf president of Gallaudet University, in his acceptance speech;
Jordan became president only after Gallaudet students, supported by many other
members of the deaf community, mounted a battle against the board's appoint-
ment of a hearing president to a university for deaf people. In addition to the
204 
* THE BULLETIN
landmark Gallaudet episode, the book traces the educational history of deaf people,
focusing especially on the long-lasting split between oralists, led by Alexander Gra-
ham Bell, who believed that deaf people should communicate via lipreading and
speech only, and manualists, led by Edward Gallaudet, who believed that signing
allows deaf people to communicate fully on their own terms. Walker, the hearing
daughter of deaf parents and author of several books on deafness, treats the subject
as a cultural history and civil rights issue, writing with clarity as she explains mat-
ters ranging from nuances of signing to various attitudes towards the deaf. Most
young readers won't have thought about deafness this way, or even thought about
it at all; Walker's well-constructed account may open a few minds. A gallery of
"Twentieth-Century Deaf People ofAchievement" and a bibliography are included.
DS
WEAVER, WILL 
Striking Out. HarperCollins, 1993 
272p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023347-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023346-X 
$15.00 
R Gr. 7 up
The hard work behind a Field of Dreams fills this coming-of-age novel about a
Minnesota farm boy, Billy, who must live with the legacy of his thirteen-year-old
brother's death under the blades of a disk that lurched forward while eight-year-
old Billy was trying to drive the tractor. Now it's 1970, and Billy is turning thir-
teen himself, trying to keep up the impoverished farm with his bitter father, when
some changes unexpectedly affect the family: a local baseball coach discovers Billy's
pitching arm, and Billy's mother gets a town job. This has the classic trimmings of
an American bildungsroman, with subtle incorporation of the young hero's initia-
tion into adult complexities that include sex, work, honor-and dishonor. The
canvas is broad, with some intense subplots and secondary characters, and occa-
sionally the point of view slips from Billy's to the coach's; but for the most part the
narrative is clearly focused and will hold junior high and high school readers on
the strength of its fine-tuned psychological and physical pacing. BH
WILSON, BARBARA KER, ad. 
Wishbones: A Folk Tale from China; illus. by Meilo
So. 
Bradbury, 1993 
26 p
ISBN 0-02-793125-0 
$14.95 
R 
5-7yrs
The Chinese girl Yeh Hsien is persecuted by her stepmother but, in return for her
kindness to a fish, is rewarded with fine clothing for a trip to the festival-and
ultimately with marriage to a king. All told, she makes a considerably stronger
heroine than Perrault/Disney's Cinderella, and Wilson's picture book offers a sharp
visual contrast to Ai-Ling Louie's Yeh Shen (BCCB 3/83), which was illustrated in
subtle pastels by Ed Young. This version features art with a satirical edge and flat
perspectives patterned in sharply contrasting hues. The text that accompanies
Meilo So's contemporary-style paintings has an ironic twist at the end, too, when
the king whom Yeh Hsien marries wishes for so much that the magic fish bones
refuse to grant any more of his desires. Ashamed, he buries them near the seashore
where the tide washes them away forever. Both picture-book versions are well
worth having as family readalouds, and the two together will generate intriguing
discussion among students of folklore, especially when compared to the animated
cartoon version shown periodically on television. Wilson provides no background
note on the folktale. BH
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 205
WOODRUFF, ELVIRA 
The Magnificent Mummy Maker. Scholastic, 1994 
[160p]
ISBN 0-590-45742-X 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Although Andy Manetti wonders about his dead mom, he loves his dad and his
baby half-sister and even likes his stepmother, but his stepbrother Jason-AKA
"Mr. Gifted"-is wrecking his life. Andy's ordinary ten-year-old accomplishments
no longer seem enough for his family, so he's happy when a weird experience in a
museum, where a mummy's spirit apparently enters him, leads him to make a
much-praised drawing that has the power to grant his wishes. Along the way,
Andy discovers that his stepbrother has problems of his own and that, despite the
loss of his mom, Andy himself is pretty happy with his new family. Although
enjoyable, none of the story is particularly convincing, and the predictable path to
rapprochement in the blended family isn't really lightened by the slapstick that the
magic powers cause. Although it's not quite up to the author's previous Dear
Napoleon, IKnow You're Dead, But... (BCCB 12/92), the book's blend of silli-
ness and moderate seriousness will probably please Woodruff fans. DS
WRIGHT, RICHARD 
Rite ofPassage. HarperCollins, 1994 
[128p]
Library ed ISBN 0-06-023420-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023419-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7 up
At first, this novel, written by Wright in the '40s but published for the first time
now, seems like it's going to be an innocent boys' book of a generation ago. "Goody
goody," says fifteen-year-old Johnny when he learns that his best friend's big brother
will be taking them to the movies. But when he goes home and discovers that he
is to be removed from what he always thought was his real family and sent to
another foster home, Johnny, refusing to go, finds himself in the dark streets of
Harlem, his only refuge a vicious gang of muggers. "If I was white, I'd never trust
a nigger sonofabitch," says Baldy, leader of the gang until a fierce initiation fight
puts Johnny reluctantly in charge. As Arnold Rampersad points out in his percep-
tive, if somewhat pedantic, afterword, Rite of Passage, like Native Son, demon-
strates what white racism makes black people do to themselves and each other.
The writing is bold, humorless, sometimes heavy-handed; the story is swiftly, even
excitingly told, and unrelentingly brutal. This is not a book for those who insist
upon at least a glimmer of hope in books for young people, but kids will respect
the honest portrayal of Johnny's bleak journey to nowhere. RS
WYETH, SHARON DENNIS 
The World of Daughter McGuire. Delacorte,
1994 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-385-31174-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Daughter is eleven, and she's struggling with some difficult questions. Where did
she get her unusual name? Since she comes from a multi-racial and multicultural
family, is she black or white, Russian, Irish, Italian, or Jewish? Will her separated
parents reconcile? Can she make friends at her new school if she has to take care of
her little brother all afternoon? Fortunately, Daughter does find friends-as well
as enemies-at school, and her loving grandparents teach her family history, which
helps her come to terms with her own identity. The concerns expressed in the
206 
* THE BULLETIN
story are legitimate and understandable and the preteen friendships authentically
uneasy, but the novel doesn't develop much beyond a superficial level. The exces-
sive sunniness of the ending (all Daughter's enemies were misunderstood and Daddy
and Mom are getting back together again) belies the real-life difficulties of the
situation. There are also too many plot strands (bully trouble, a car accident in-
volving Daughter's brother, and an heirloom gold coin-in addition to the main
themes), which detracts from the impact. Kids in the mood for a cozy and gener-
ally undemanding family story, however, may have a good time. DS
YEP, LAURENCE 
The Boy Who Swallowed Snakes; illus. by Jean and Mou-Sien
Tseng. 
Scholastic, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 
0-590-46168-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4 -6 yrs
"Out of the mouths of babes... " goes the traditional epithet, but Yep gives that
a twist here with a story set in southern China, where Little Chou decides to rid
himself of a dangerous magic snake by swallowing it down. Because of his pure
heart, Little Chou doesn't die the horrible death predicted but instead emits lots of
little ghost snakes from his stomach. Eventually, a greedy rich man tries to retrieve
the snake he'd tricked Little Chou into taking, eats it himself so it will multiply
and steal silver for him, and dies after one bite. The ever-proliferating magic makes
this a complicated story which, without a note, readers must assume is original
rather than folkloric (the jacket says "original folktale," but you can't have it both
ways). The illustrators have kept their watercolor images literal, picking up Yep's
dabs of humor ("I've never had so much meat in my life," declares Little Chou as
he fries the snakes in garlic) with cheerfully exaggerated expressions and providing
a verdant background for the characters' shenanigans. This has the same appeal,
at a younger level, as How To Eat Fried Worms, and kids will find unusual gratifi-
cation in the moral, which suggests that a pure heart strengthens the stomach for
almost anything. Into the mouths of babes .. . BH
Philomel Books wishes it to be known that the bound book of Justin Denzel's
Land of the Thundering Herds will not include the state names mentioned in the
Bulletin's November review.
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 207
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: STILL GOT IT: AFRICAN-AMERICAN POETRY FOR CHILDREN
"Bought me some candy,/ ain't got it no more," writes Eloise Greenfield
in "Things." "Made me a poem,/ still got it." Sadly, when it comes to African-
American poetry, most children "ain't got it." The voices of African-American
poets too often remain undiscovered. Librarians, who help determine the litera-
ture and the literary heritages that children enjoy, can bring that poetry to children
through creative programming.
Children are often introduced to poetry through nursery rhymes, but,
because of the traditional popularity of Mother Goose, librarians may not share
similar rhymes from other cultures. Children can develop their language skills and
learn to appreciate the music of many cultures other than their own. African-
American chants, children's games, folk rhymes and folksongs, for example, can all
build a foundation for sharing poetry and enjoying picture books. Librarians can
find additional materials by selecting poems from well known African-American
poets or by searching for small gems among the works of lost African-American
children's poets such as Mary Lee Newsome and Gertrude Parthenia Brown. These
poems need not be confined to isolated readalouds; there is more than one way to
share poetry. Reading poetry aloud and teaching children the sounds of language,
librarians can also show children how language draws on all their senses. Eloise
Greenfield's "Pretty," for instance, can be recited and presented on a flannel board
to help children visualize the poet's words. Children can pretend to dress up,
repeating the poem as a creative drama. Encouraging this form of participation
helps build a bridge between poetry and the African-American oral tradition. Call
and response, choral reading, singing, visual props, and dramas are only a few of
the limitless ways that children learn to enjoy the works of African-American po-
ets. As with all poetry, librarians merely need to imagine the possibilities. "This
Little House," by Langston Hughes, is perfect for fingerplay. Gwendolyn Brooks'
"Tommy," in the hands of a creative librarian, can turn into a puppet show, while
"Sweet Talk," by Ashley Bryan, can become a flannel board drama.
While preschool and primary grade students are often poetry enthusiasts,
interest in poetry begins to wane as students advance in elementary school. Chil-
dren start to think that poetry extends no further than Shel Silverstein or Jack
Prelutsky. Librarians can show students their own pleasure in poetry, promote
poetry through programming, and introduce children to poets they may not find
on their own. African-American poets can speak to every child, not only to Afri-
can-American children. The struggle for a goal comes alive in "Touchdown," by
Sharon Bell Mathis. Lucille Clifton's "September" brings out the frustration of
having to go back to school. The pain of losing a friend comes out in "Poem," by
Langston Hughes, and Eloise Greenfield finds the triumphant self that every child
dreams of in "Buddy's Dream." These poems are not just an exercise in
multiculturalism. They are part of a literary heritage and birthright, especially-
but not only-for African-American children. African-American poets celebrate
the oral tradition, charismatic language, wordplay, and values of African-Ameri-
can culture. Librarians can spark interest in poetry by beginning where children's
interests already lie. The jump-rope rhymes and chants that African-American
208 
* 
THE BULLETIN
children use every day are all poetry. Poetry is everywhere, in a favorite song as
well as on the playground. 
Librarians can celebrate the hand claps that children
share with friends and can make children's folklore a springboard into poetry.
Poetry concerts, theatrical presentations, poetry parties, and guest poets are all
good ways to share the work of African-American poets. In addition to program-
ming, librarians should also give children a chance to discover African-American
poetry for themselves through such things as poetry displays, poetry jars, banners,
bookmarks with student poetry, poetry pockets, dial-a-poem, and poetry corners.
(Caroline Feller Bauer's Handbookfor Storytellers remains a fine source of ideas for
doing things with poetry.)
Besides engaging children with metaphor and language, poetry is also a
cultural experience. Through poetry, children can learn about African-American
history, explore musical traditions such as jazz, blues, or rap, and get a feeling for
African-American culture. Like all children, African-American youth are strug-
gling to build personal identities. What does it mean to be African-American?
What experiences have other African Americans had? What are my responsibili-
ties as a member of a community? African-American poets condense African-
American experience and reshape it into images that will touch children's emotions.
By hearing the voices of these poets, African-American children join an ongoing
cultural dialogue about identity. As Greenfield shows in "Things," poetry en-
dures. But to help it endure, librarians must lift it from the shelves and into the
imaginations of children.
A Sample of Recommended Books
Alternatives to Mother Goose:
Burroughs, Margaret Taylor, comp. Did You Feed My Cow: Street Games, Chants,
and Rhymes. Follet, 1969.
Hughes, Langston, and Arna Bontemps, eds. The Book ofNegro Folklore. Dodd,
Mead, 1958.
Jones, Bessie, and Bess Lomax Hawes. Step It Down: Games, Plays, Songs, and
Stories from the Afro-American Heritage. Harper, 1972.
Mattox, Cheryl Warren, ed. Shake It to the One that You Love the Best: Play Songs
and Lullabies from Black Musical Traditions. Warren-Mattox, 1989.
Talley, Thomas W., ed. Negro Folk Rhymes. Macmillan, 1950.
Books of Poetry:
Adoff, Arnold, ed. My Black Me: A Beginning Book ofBlack Poetry. Dutton, 1974.
Brooks, Gwendolyn. Bronzeville Boys and Girls. Harper, 1956.
Bryan, Ashley. Sing to the Sun. HarperCollins, 1992.
Clifton, Lucille. Everett Anderson's Year. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1974.
-- 
. Some of the Days ofEverettAnderson. Henry Holt, 1970.
Giovanni, Nikki. Ego-Tripping. Lawrence Hill, 1973.
Greenfield, Eloise. Honey, I Love: And Other Love Poems. Crowell, 1978.
-
. Nathaniel Talking. Black Butterfly, 1988.
-
. Night on Neighborhood Street. Dial, 1991.
Hudson, Wade, ed. Pass It On: African-American Poetry for Children. Scholastic,
1993.
Little, Lessie Jones. Children ofLongAgo. Philomel, 1988.
FEBRUARY 1994 
* 
209
Mathis, Sharon Bell. Red Dog Blue Fly: Football Poems. Viking, 1991.
Slier, Deborah, ed. Make a Joyful Sound: Poemsfor Children by African-American
Poets. Checkerboard Press, 1991.
Thomas, Joyce Carol. Brown Honey in Broomwheat Tea. HarperCollins, 1993.
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Pullman
Africa: McKissack
Africa-stories: Guthrie
African Americans: Moutoussamy-
Ashe
African Americans-fiction: Greene;
Wright
African Americans-folklore: Lester
African Americans-poetry: Grimes
African Americans-stories:
Gilchrist
AIDS: Moutoussamy-Ashe
Arithmetic: Axelrod
Art and artists-stories: Levine
Art: Davidson
BEDTIME STORIES: Gilchrist;
Mathews
Books and reading: Jaspersohn
Books and reading-fiction: Barrie
Books and reading-stories: Avi
Brothers-fiction: Bauer
California-fiction: Lowell
Canada-fiction: Heneghan
Cats-fiction: Bauer; Broome
Child welfare: Meltzer
China-folklore: Wilson
China-stories: Yep
Christmas-stories: Cooper
Civil War-fiction: Stolz
CONCEPT BOOKS: Axelrod
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Wright
Deafness: Walker
Death-fiction: Paterson; Weaver
Death-stories: Limb
Divorce-fiction: Bauer
Dolphins-stories: Farris
Drought-stories: Guthrie
Dyslexia-fiction: Barrie
Easter: Bible
Education: Walker
Ethics and values: Broome; Carter;
Landau
FABLES: Avi
Family problems-fiction: Barrie;
Wyeth
FANTASY: Woodruff
Farm life-fiction: MacLachlan;
Weaver
Fathers and daughters:
Moutoussamy-Ashe
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Paterson
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Gilman;
210 
* THE BULLETIN
Ginsburg; Guthrie; Lester;
Levine; Mathews; Osborne;
Pogorelsky; Schroeder;
Shulevitz; Uchida; Wilson
Food and eating-stories: Priceman;
Yep
Friends-fiction: Wyeth
Frontier life: Sandier
Frontier life-fiction: Paulsen;
Gangs-fiction: Wright
Gay rights: Hyde
Government: Carter
Grandfathers-stories: Gilman
Grandmothers-stories: Limb
Gypsies: Strom
HISTORICAL FICTION: Lowell;
MacLachlan; Nichol; Paulsen;
Pullman; Roth-Hano; Schur
History, Africa: McKissack
History, U.S.: Kroll; Sandier; Stolz
History, World: Carter; Meltzer
Holidays: Bible; Gibbons
Holocaust, The-fiction: Roth-
Hano
Homosexuality: Hyde
Horses: Hansard
Islam: Husain
Japan-fiction: Mori
Japan-folklore: Levine; Uchida
Jews: Roth-Hano
Jews-fiction: Greene; Schur
Jews-folklore: Gilman
Kings-stories: Shulevitz
Libraries: Jaspersohn
LOVE STORIES: Osborne
Mecca: Husain
Mental retardation-fiction: Mori
Music: Kroll; Nichol
Native Americans-fiction: Bennett
Nature study: Hansard; Lavies;
McNulty; Patent
Netherlands, The-stories: Fisher
New York City-fiction: Greene
Noah's Ark-stories: Geisert
Northern Ireland-fiction:
Heneghan
Parents-stories: Browne
Peace: Carter
POETRY: Duffy; Grimes; Lewis
Prejudice: Strom
Prejudice-fiction: Wyeth
Reading aloud: Lewis; MacLachlan
Reading, beginning: Krensky
Reading, easy: Woodruff
Reading, family: Bible; Browne;
Gilchrist; Limb; Moutoussamy-
Ashe
Reading, reluctant: Wright
Religious education: Bible; Husain
Runaways-fiction: Bennett
Russia-fiction: Schur
Russia-folklore: Ginsburg
Russia-stories: Pogorelsky
School-fiction: Schenker
Slavery-fiction: Stolz
Snakes: Lavies
Snakes-stories: McNulty
Social studies: Husain; Meltzer;
Strom
St. Patrick's Day: Gibbons
Stepfamilies-fiction: Woodruff
Story hour: Avi; Axelrod; Bible;
Fisher; Geisert; Gilman;
Ginsburg; Guthrie; Lester;
Lewis; Mathews; Osborne;
Pogorelsky; Priceman;
Schroeder; Shulevitz; Uchida;
Wilson; Yep
Texas-fiction: Schenker
Tibet-folklore: Schroeder
Traveling-stories: Priceman
Trucks-stories: Cooper
Uncles-fiction: Heneghan
War-fiction: Heneghan
Winter-fiction: Krensky
Women's studies: Duffy; Landau
World War II-fiction: Mori; Roth-
Hano
i 
S 
e 
B 
ti 
J 
ra 
a
'-i" Starred in Booklist, School Library Journal and
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
e* 
Outside
I
by Charlotte Pomerantz
Full-color pictures by
Jennifer Plecas
"Grandfather discourages Marisol from befriending
Another HarperCollins story by Charlotte Pomerantz
THE CHALK DOLL
Full-color pictures by Frank Lessac
Children's Editors' Choices for 1989 (Booklist)
Ages 4-8. $15.00 TR (0-397-32318-2); $14.89 LB (0-397-32319-0)
Trophy Paper ed. $4.95 (0-06-443333-1)
p- 
HarperCollins Children'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
An I Can Read Book"
*a
I
\i
T
-
--
t(/ 
/cycle of a dozen lyrical poems exploring issues of
African-American identity through delicately interwoven
images.... Laden with meaning, the poetry is significant and
lovely. Cooper's paintings, with vibrant, unsentimentalized
characters in earth tones illumined with gold, are warm,
contemplative-a beautiful complement to Thomas's
eloquence. A must."-Kirkus Reviews
"Poems rooted in home, family, and the African-American
experience combine with warm and evocative watercolors in
this highly readable and attractive picture book."
-ALA Booklist
All Ages. $15.00 TR (0-06-021087-7); $14.89 LB (0-06-021088-5)
Other HarperCollins books from Joyce Carol Thomas
WHEN THE NIGHTINGALE 
A GATHERING OF FLOWERS
SINGS 
Stories About Being
Ages 12 up. $14.00 
Young in America
TR (0-06-020294-7); 
Edited by Joyce Carol Thomas
$13.89 LB (0-06-020295-5) 
Ages 12 up. $14.89 LB (0-06-026174-9)
Harper Trophy paper ed. 
Harper Keypoint paper ed.
$3.95 (0-06-440524-9) 
$3.95 (0-06-447082-2)
f HarperCollinsChildrensBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
Id's
Id
I
es by
rist
ua3Wu 
iu 
uv%-LVUI 
o 
31 ItO- yUL 31in 
U 
1LIU LU3L 11-1 
tYi3YI1L.
He likes to remember her hugging people, cooking at her
restaurant....This poignant exploration of a child's feelings of
loss, sorrow, and hope features a closely knit African-American
family and community, lovingly depicted in paintings of people
against swirling backgrounds of color and line. A wonderful sense
of neighborhood permeates the pages of this touching book."
-School Library Journal
Ages 4-8. $15.00 TR (0-06-021093-1); $14.89 LB (0-06-021094-X)
HarperCollins Board Books from Eloise & Monica Greenfield
SWEET BABY COMING 
THE BABY
by Eloise Greenfield 
by Monica Greenfield
Full-color pictures by Jan Spivey Gilchrist 
Full-color pictures by Jan Spivey Gilchrist
Ages 1-4. Harper Festival ed. $4.95 
Ages 1-4. Harper Festival ed. $4.95
(0-694-00578-9) 
(0-694-00577-0)
For a free Eloise Greenfield biographical brochure, write:
at 
HarperColinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
Ir
;t
f the
mness
e Life of
Lincoln
Hanchett
biographies of
print, but until
been no short,
fe story for the
anchett offers a
how a boy born
raised without
uld become the
at at the time of
isis and of how
nny leadership
im to keep the
rth sufficiently
n the Civil War.
er will also get
better Lincoln
an-the lover,
usband, father,
friend. A video
mentary based
the book, with
same title, has
>een produced
>y White River
Pictures.
Illustrated.
Cloth, $21.50;
Paper, $7.95
` 
Starred in ALA Booklist and
The Rurllatin nF 
0ha 
Fan4ar 
Fnr r1l*iftn', 
oL-4, 
I 
S
"This stirring [full-color] picture book brings together
the sixty panels of Lawrence's 
epic narrative
Migration [of the Negro] series, which he created in
1940-41. They tell of the journey of African Americans
who left their homes in the South around World War I
and traveled in search of work and better lives in the
northern industrial cities. Lawrence is a storyteller
with words as well as pictures: his captions and his
own 1992 introduction to this book are the best
commentary on his work. A poem at the end by
Walter Dean Myers also reveals [as do the paintings]
the universal in the particulars."-Booklist
Ages 8-12. $22.50 TR (0-06-023037-1); $22.89 LB (0-06-023038-X)
A co-publication of The Museum of Modern Art, New York;
The Phillips Collection; and HarperCollinsPublishers
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
*
N
WILSON REFERENCE BOOKS
Inspire a Lifelong Interest in Reading and Writing With...
Whole Language: Literature, Learning, and Literacy
A Workshop in Print
"Well-known Lou Stanek is a whole-language workshop leader, and she has a good understanding of
what teachers and librarians want to know."-LIBRARY TALK
Whole Language: Literature, Learning, and
Literacy offers a concise, easy-to-follow dis-
cussion of the concepts, philosophy, and
terms of whole language. You'll find practical
how-to's, effective whole language tools,
practical samples of curriculum plans, as well
as success stories from teachers, librarians,
and parents across the country.
Booktalk! 5, Whole Language, and Read for the Fun of It are one-of-a-kind
resources that develop youngsters' reading, writing, and listening skills.
To Order Call Toll-Free 800-367-6770.
Outside of the U.S. and Canada call 718-588-8400. Fax 718-590-1617.
i THE H.W. WILSON COMPANY Sharing Knowledge Since 1898
l 9U 
. 0 
\ 
r 
I 
- A\n- 
.. 
j 
ct 
tr 
x ,N 
10 
5,SO-67-7_
Whole Language: Literature,
Learning, and Literacy
A Workshop in Print
By Lou Willett Stanek
1992 244pp. ISBN 0-8242-0837-4 LC 92-29691
$39 U.S. and Canada, $44 other countries.
I II 
I I 
... 
.
.0 
.
.
.. 
.
.0 
.
.
.
.
.
.
"Begs to be lovingly shared
and savored"*
TYTrr 
* * 
-
I'*
UE 
EhE/d'14 *411 
LW f-dhZ~~~~ZZZZ~~/,1 
UW-'
*" 
rru 
i&~J•vI,
the Evening Star
By Rosemary Wells
w 
d
ramtngs by Susanje ers
ure book, a favorite
acclaied artist of
Eagle, Sister Sky
he bittersweet love
obrothergrowing
gether-and apart.
d Jeffers, together,
aby in presenting a
in asmall Vermont
wmunity during the
les of this century."
eHom Book, stared
beautifull detailed
ns [are]...authentic
iculously rendered."
-Kirk.usRevie5s
0armhearted story
of a time gone by."
-Bookfst
Full color. Ages 5-8.
0-8037-1398- 
$1&OO0
.0-8037-1399-1. $14.89
IDial
Books
for Young
Readers
ADivionof PenaginUSA
Fables, Foibles, and Foobles
CARL SANDBURG
Edited and with an introduction by George Hendrick
Illustrated by Robert C Harvey
"Carl Sandburg believed in the necessity of play, humor, and fun, the importance of
keeping the child heart alive. 'If it can be done,' he wrote in Always the Young
Strangers, 'it is nota bad practice for a man of many years to die with a boy heart.'
In Fables, Foibles, andFoobles, as in his earlier Rootabaga Stories, we see Sandburg
at play-with words, imagination, reality. His boy heart is very much alive in these
stories, written for anyone whose child heart is still intact." -
Penelope Niven,
Director of the Carl Sandburg Oral History Project
These stories are un to read. They are fun for children with active imaginations.
They are fun 
for adults after a busy day." -
Warren R. Weber, dcief, I & RM Carl
Sandburg Home National Historic Site
mus. Paper, $10.95
Order toll free 80(545-4703
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street * Champaign, IL 61820
*
University of llinois Press 
SEOND CUo
1325 South Oak Street 
PosTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAI
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIN, IL
RtEUKN POSTAGE GUAwRANEE
