U
ILLI 
N 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
Books make great gifts, but pick-
ing the perfect books for your
favorite youngsters can be daunt-
ing. Let the expert staff of The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books help you navigate the book-
store wilderness full of shiny new children's
books.
Updated and expanded from last year's edi-
tion, the Guide Book to Gift Books contains
annotations for over 225 of the best books
for giving (and receiving) and is available as a
downloadable PDF file that you can print out
and use for every holiday, birthday, or other
gift-giving occasion on your calendar this
year.
Listed books have all been recommended in
full Bulletin reviews from the last three years
and are verified as currently in print. Entries
are divided into age groups and include au-
thor, title, publisher, and the current list price.
To purchase, go to:
www.lis.uiuc.edu/giftbooks/
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
January 2004
Vol. 57 No. 5
A LOOK INSIDE
177 THE BIG PICTURE
Luba: The Angel ofBergen-Belsen by Luba Tryszynska-Frederick; as told
to Michelle R. McCann; illus. by Ann Marshall
178 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
184 
*Prep byJake Coburn
191 
* September 11, 2001: Attack on New York City by Wilborn Hampton
199 
* The Beast by Walter Dean Myers
200 * Thunder Rose by Jerdine Nolen; illus. by Kadir Nelson
206 * Rainbow High by Alex Sanchez
214 
BLUE RIBBONS 2003
216 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Molly Dolan
Krista Hutley
Hope Morrison
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $70.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2004 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Ann Marshall from Luba: The Angel of Bergen-Belsen ©2003. Used by
permission of Tricycle Press.
JANUARY 2004 
* 
177
THE BIG PICTURE
Luba: The Angel of Bergen-Belsen
by Luba Tryszynska-Frederick; as told to Michelle R. McCann; illus. by Ann
Marshall
This complex picture book is based on the true story of Luba Tryszynska-Frederick,
a Polish Jew who saved more than fifty children in Bergen-Belsen when she found
them abandoned in the woods by truck drivers ordered to shoot them. Through-
out the winter of 1944-45, Luba begged, bribed, and cajoled various other camp
prisoners and officials to give her food for the children, all but two of whom sur-
vived. Celebrated as a hero after the war, Luba found that her own two-year-old
son, torn away from her at Auschwitz, and her husband and family were all dead.
Michelle R. McCann has documented her account of Luba's experiences with
great care, including an opening author's note indicating fictionalized dialogue
and a list of the children involved, a prologue supplying background on Nazi con-
centration camps, an epilogue on the aftermath of Luba's rescue, and a note on
World War II and the Holocaust. Also provided are a map and bibliography of
books, articles, videos, letters, personal interviews, and web sites. The narrative is
thoughtfully rendered to reveal incidents in a straightforward tone that neither
flinches from nor overdramatizes a stark historical episode ("They used one wet
cloth to keep fifty-four children as clean as they could"). A photograph at the
book's end shows sturdy Luba with some of the children on liberation day, and
another depicts their fifty-year reunion in Amsterdam. As the youngest child res-
cued by Luba has said, "My mother always told me that she gave birth to me, but
that Luba gave me life."
Ann Marshall's thickly textured paintings, sometimes overlaid with eerie
fabric or paper collage effects, can be read on two different levels. In the scene
where the children create a birthday party for Luba, for instance, the bright cloth-
ing and happy faces project a veneer of fantasy over the horror. One could ask, is
this a glamorized image, repeated as it is on the cover, to resemble kibbutzniks
dancing the Hora? A picture of Luba collecting wood in snowy darkness resonates
like some "Silent Night" Christmas card, with a spotlight shining over the wooden
barracks and barbed wire fences. Even in the most desolate moment, when an
illustration shows Luba despairing of the children's lives, a pink-frilled bedspread
and velvet blanket drape gracefully over the side of her bunk. Yet the scraped and
battered boards in this same picture, the thin legs of a child lying askew on a filthy
mattress, and a face locked in a deathly stare on the facing page all project realistic
depth. With hints of Dutch Renaissance portraiture, the artist seems to be daring
us to ask if horror can be beautifully portrayed. Especially unnerving are the am-
biguous faces that engage a reader directly from the past.
178 
* THE BULLETIN
The challenge for any Holocaust book intended to be read aloud to a
picture-book audience or alone by young readers is how to depict a brutal and
often hopeless situation for children whom we want to nurture with hope for the
future. How does one stay true both to the inherently tragic nature of the Holo-
caust and the expectantly triumphant nature of childhood? The June 1997 Big
Picture featured another picture book depicting a Holocaust survivor, Neil
Waldman's The Never-Ending Greenness, which joined the company of Hoestlandt's
Star of Fear, Star of Hope (6/95), Nerlove's Flowers on the Wall (3/96), Nivola's
Elisabeth (3/97), and Oppenheim's The Lily Cupboard (3/92); all of these manage,
largely through tight focus, to reconcile those two impulses sufficiently to make
for a successful narrative. More recently, Kushner and Sendak's Brundibar (BCCB
12/03) grappled with the same question, with its rosy overtones and bleak visual
subtext. Darker than Brundibar, Luba will nevertheless depend on adult transla-
tion to challenge children to distinguish between the book's dreamlike snatches at
celebrating survival and its bleak expressions of death haunting the background,
but it will then provide young audiences with a compelling account-and an in-
spiration for riveting discussion. (Imprint information appears on p. 210.)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AGELL, CHARLOTTE 
Welcome Home or Someplace Like It; written and illus. by
Charlotte Agell. 
Holt, 2003 
231p
ISBN 0-8050-7083-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Aggie's romance-writing mother has always been something of a mystery to Aggie
and her brother, Thorne. Mom constantly moves them from place to place, but is
she really researching her books, as she says, or is she simply looking for someplace
to call home? Aggie is certainly tired of being transplanted, so when they land in
Ludwig, Maine, she is delighted to learn that maybe, finally, this might be a place
where she could stay. Her mother leaves her and Thorne in the care of their
elderly grandfather, who, besides making a mean lemonade, receives prescient phone
calls on his foot. As Aggie settles in, she begins to learn more about the other
quirky inhabitants of the town and to uncover a few quirks of her own (including
an affinity for raising chickens) that deepen her resolve to stay put. She captures
everything in her notebooks, where she displays a wry wit that sometimes erupts
into more giddy teasing of her coolly distant brother. Accompanied by her comi-
cally captioned line drawings, her narration is engaging and endearing as she sifts
the local personalities and the family mysteries that her mother has neglected to fill
her in on. Especially winning is her alter ego, a small figurine of a Chinese fisher-
man that she keeps in her pocket, who offers Confucian wisdom for most any
situation. Her journal is episodic and other-focused; though readers definitely get
JANUARY 2004 
* 
179
her perspective on the things that happen, and she does have her dark and whiny
moods, her takes on Ludwig, her family, home, and what it means to be a teenager
are fresh, funny, and self-aware. While this isn't action-packed, there is enough
atmosphere, humor, rogue chickens, and gentle mystery here to make for a re-
freshing read. KC
AMBROSE, STEPHEN E. 
This Vast Land: A Young Man's Journal of the Lewis and
Clark Expedition. 
Simon, 2003 
293p
ISBN 0-689-86448-5 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
The real Corps of Discovery member George Shannon may not have kept or left a
diary, but Ambrose redresses this oversight with a journal of the trek West, written
from the point of view of the team's youngest member. Shannon is in his late
teens when the expedition embarks, and he fast-talks his way into Lewis's good
graces by boasting of his strength and skill at swimming and hauling boats through
water. As the journey progresses, Shannon develops new skills as a hunter and
steadily sheds many of his polite and even priggish ways: he drinks; he smokes; he
takes a Shoshone "squaw," Peme; he even murders two Indians. Most of the
fictional journal is almost too authentic for its own good-with exciting or inti-
mate bits (perilous mountain crossings; a graphic account of Shannon's first sexual
encounter with Peme) appearing irregularly amid stretches of terse, awkward ob-
servations: "The branch that comes in at our camp we named Killed Colt Creek
from our killing a colt to eat"; "After four miles down the river the road left the
river to the left and ascends a mountain." Fictionalization allows Ambrose to
express, through Shannon, attitudes that twenty-first-century readers may wish
the Corps had evinced: disapproving of casual sex with "squaws," critical of the
Corps' theft of an Indian canoe, openly appreciative of Sacajawea. Moreover, a
forced ending allows Shannon to summarize-for a young Robert E. Lee, no less-
all the lessons he learned (and readers hopefully have, too) from his ordeals. A
breathy editor's note establishes that Shannon was, indeed, a real person, but for
further verification of fact readers are left on their own. EB
BAUER, 
MARION 
DANE 
Snow; illus. by John Wallace. 
Aladdin,
2003 
32p 
(Ready to Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-689-85436-6 
$11.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-85437-4 
$3.99 
R Gr. 1-2
For many emergent readers only true will do, and Bauer's latest entry in her weather
series fills the bill. A well-bundled little tyke scurries across a stark winter land-
scape ("The trees are bare. The grass is brown") that soon softens as the clouds roll
in and release their fluffy burden ("The specks of ice and dust cling to one another.
They grow so heavy that they drop from the cloud"). Then, in a few gracefully
crafted sentences, the snow retreats from its winter domain, melting "into puddles,
into rivers, into lakes," but fortunately not before our mittened and booted buddy
has built a snowman and swooped down a hill on a sled. Chunky font, controlled
vocabulary, and narrow scope promise a successful and satisfying beginner outing,
and Wallace's literal watercolor renderings offer visual clues to the few truly chal-
lenging words within the text, such as "crystals" and "tongue." (An unfortunate
exception is the "gray" clouds that "crawl across the sky" in a pretty but obviously
inaccurate shade of blue.) A page of snow miscellanea closes out the title, and
although the reading level takes a jump here, able readers may want to tackle it
180 
* THE BULLETIN
with a bit of help. Adult prompters may be startled to learn that a set of identical
snowflakes has been discovered, but apart from that revelation, this should be a
trauma-free read. EB
BELL, LONNIE 
The Story of Coca-Cola. Smart Apple, 2004 
48p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Built for Success)
ISBN 1-58340-292-6 
$28.50 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
FRISCH, AARON 
The Story of Nike. 
Smart Apple, 2004 
4 8p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Built for Success)
ISBN 1-58340-295-0 
$28.50 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
These entries in the Builtfor Success series trace the phenomenal rise of two popular
brand names, as a pharmacist's tonic tops its trade and imported sneakers outrun
their German competition. Both titles focus on the humble genesis of these com-
mercial behemoths and how timely innovations and savvy marketing put them on
the inside track. Although the tone is undeniably adulatory, each author makes an
effort to peer into some of the company's darker corners. Bell, for instance, re-
marks on the disastrous reformulation that sent Coca-Cola loyalists into rebellion
against "new Coke" and freely admits that, due to company secrecy, one cannot be
certain that Coke Classic is, indeed, a return to the beloved recipe. (The book does
not, however, address just why the original pharmacist's concoction was so good at
curing headaches, or why those coca extracts were removed. Hmmm.) Frisch
deals with accusations of worker exploitation by the Nike corporation and, al-
though he never makes an indictment against Nike, he does point out that in times
of falling profits the company has laid off workers while escalating their gargan-
tuan budget for celebrity endorsements. Glossy color glamour shots of products,
advertising, and endorsers abound, and both titles end on a positive note that
wishes the companies good economic health. These may not be the most even-
handed discussions, but the topics have strong kid appeal, and students above tar-
get-audience age who need brief, undemanding report materials could find them
both useful and entertaining. EB
BERGER, MELVIN 
The Real Vikings: Craftsmen, Traders, and Fearsome Raiders; by
Melvin and Gilda Berger. 
National Geographic, 2003 
[56p] 
illus. with pho-
tographs
ISBN 0-7922-5132-6 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
It's a little difficult to accept the Bergers' attempt to envision kinder, gentler Vi-
kings when they open with a scene of ruthless slaughter. However, after acknowl-
edging that this was indeed a brutal people (although possibly no more brutal than
contemporary cultures), the authors do successfully divert attention to the Vikings'
less sanguinary endeavors in agriculture, shipbuilding, and exploration. Viking
hierarchy is explained in some detail, and everyday chores and housing arrange-
ments also receive due attention. The overview goes well beyond a nicely photo-
illustrated show-and-tell of material culture by exploring technological advantages
in ship construction and weaponry that allowed the Vikings to make incursions
deep into Europe and to transatlantic shores. (Alas, gustatory advantages are unex-
amined, and kids will have to consult Kurlansky's The Cod's Tale, BCCB 10/01,
JANUARY 2004 
* 
181
for the contribution of dried cod.) The issue of slavery could use a bit more expla-
nation, but overall coverage is comprehensive and clear. Crisp photographs of
artifacts and landscapes, maps and original paintings supplement the text. A time-
line, index, and list of child and adult-oriented sources are included. EB
BIRDSEYE, TOM 
Attack ofthe Mutant Underwear. Holiday House, 2003 
199p
ISBN 0-8234-1689-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Cody Lee Carson's family has just moved, and Cody relishes the chance to have a
"New Life" as a fifth-grader in the "Nobody-Knows-About-the-Old-Cody town."
Leaving behind such incidents as getting his head stuck in the school-bus window,
baring his Tweety Bird underwear on stage during the school play, or diving out of
a tree wearing a bungee cord, the New Cody is determined to avoid groundings,
bad grades, and the principal's office. This isn't as easy as he thought, however: he
does his homework wrong, he runs away from his election speech for class presi-
dent, he ruins the school talent show, and his crush, Amy, stops liking him after he
mistakenly gives her the trick Valentine's Day present he intended for his little
sister. Finally, Cody's teacher says he can't go on the end-of-the-year camping trip
unless he gets his act together. Cody, who writes in journal format with plenty of
exclamation points, is naive and exuberant, if not particularly thoughtful, and his
slice-of-life stories are worthy of both laughter and sympathy. Birdseye has a feel
for the high-stakes life of the nearly-teen set, where embarrassment (the kind that
can kill you) lurks in even the most unlikely places and the opinion of your peers is
all that matters. The flaws of this book are, in many cases, flaws appropriate for a
fifth-grade journal: the writing is sometimes repetitive and, when nothing much is
going on, dull; and characters and elements are introduced only to be left behind
as Cody's interest moves on. Still, Cody's excitement is contagious, and as he is a
genuine character, kids will find him an easy one to empathize with as they grow
up in their own uniquely embarrassing ways. KH
BREWER, PAUL, comp. 
You Must Be Joking!: Lots of Cool okes; comp. and illus. by
Paul Brewer. 
Cricket, 2003 
107p
ISBN 0-8126-2661-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Although the cover hype suggests the inclusion of enough strategies to turn even
reserved preteens into polished gagsters, this is simply a collection of darn good
jokes with a dash of appended advice. Anecdotes, banter, knock-knocks, word-
plays, and riddles are clean-as-a-whistle middle grades material, with a light sprin-
kling (so to speak) of potty humor. Jokes are divided into fifteen chapters, themed
by subjects such as school, sports, goofy names (think Car Talk closing credits),
computers, food, and by style, i.e., knock-knock, riddles. Taking for granted snappy
delivery and eager reception, most jokes should rate a solid chuckle on the Laugh-
o-Meter, with a few rising to hearty guffaw. Tellers' tips range from obvious (memo-
rize shorter, easier jokes first) to thoughtful ("Short is good... take out unnecessary
words-get straight to the point"). Unfortunately, many of Brewer's gags are
structured in lightning-quick dialogue style, a la Burns/Allen, or straight man/
Groucho, and there's no tip on how to convert these delights into a format suitable
for a solo comedian. Black-and-white spot art, though inessential, nevertheless
lightens the layout. It would take a maudlin soul indeed to reach the last page
without cracking a grin. EB
182 
* THE BULLETIN
BROOME, ERROL 
The Judas Donkey; illus. by Sharon Thompson. 
Fremantle Arts
Centre, 2003 
11 Op
Paper ed. ISBN 1-92073-118-0 
$13.50 
R Gr. 3-6
Francesca longs for a horse like the beautiful palomino down the street; what her
grandfather's actually brought home for her, however, is a donkey, a legacy of
Gramps' land-protection activities, which involved shooting the herds of feral don-
keys that destroy the environment (this one was the "Judas donkey," whose trans-
mitting collar led the hunters to herd after herd of donkeys). Francesca and her
school friend, Tula, gradually become fond of wise little Judy, as they call her,
visiting her almost daily at Francesca's grandparents' place and discovering that
she's got virtues that those elegant horses lack. Their pleasure is short-lived, how-
ever: when Francesca's grandmother starts showing signs ofAlzheimer's, it's clear
that Francesca's grandparents are going to have to move from their home to a
smaller, safer place-with no space for donkeys. Broome's usual sprightly style
(last viewed here in Drusilla the Lucky Duck, BCCB 12/03) remains effective, and
she accessibly and naturally knits together the plot strands of Francesca's adven-
tures with Judy and her sorrowful awareness of her grandmother's decline. The
picture of the small Northwestern Australian town is understated but telling, and
the sad fact of the donkeys' fate is imparted straightforwardly and without blame
(Gramps is a kind and affectionate man who clearly didn't enjoy this part of his
task). Nor is the resolution overly saccharine-Gramps and Gamma still move
into their new place, and Francesca doesn't find a way to keep Judy, but she does
at least find a good home for the donkey that saves her from euthanasia. Thompson's
slender, designerly lines give the black-and-white sketches a sophisticated flair;
that plus the touch of bracing reality makes this an animal story suitable for those
looking to move beyond Dick King-Smith. DS
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH, ad. 
Turtle's Race with Beaver: A Traditional Seneca Story; ad.
by Joseph and James Bruchac; illus. by Jose Aruego and Ariane Dewey. 
Dial,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2852-2 
$15.99 
R 4-7 yrs
Father and son team Joseph and James Bruchac follow their previous picture book
collaboration, How Chipmunk Got His Stripes (BCCB 3/01), with this Seneca tale
of a good-natured turtle who outwits a selfish beaver. A happy resident of "a
beautiful little pond," Turtle buries herself in the mud for the winter without a
thought of trouble, but while she is sleeping, Beaver arrives and claims her pond as
his own. Come spring, Turtle emerges and discovers the interloper; her sugges-
tion to Beaver that they share the pond is met with a chalenge to race. Word of
the race spreads through the forest, and all the animals come to root for their
favorite, but Turtle wins the race with a clever trick. Despite her offer that they
share the pond, Beaver slinks away in embarrassment-but it's clear from the con-
clusion that even old Beavers can learn new tricks. The language is crisply effec-
tive, and the contrast between Turtle's bucolic life and Beaver's industrious one
and their inevitable conflict have innate suspense. The text builds to a careening
momentum that culminates in Turtle's win, making this prime readaloud or sto-
rytelling material. Aruego and Dewey's pen-and-ink, gouache, and pastel illustra-
tions reflect the story's energy in the linear compositions and the zingy palette.
Joseph Bruchac includes an opening note about the origins and sources of this
JANUARY 2004 
* 
183
story; James also includes some information about uses for this humorous teaching
tale. JMD
CHARLIP, REMY 
Little Old Big Beard and Big Young Little Beard: A Short and Tall
Tale; written by Remy Charlip; illus. by Remy Charlip with Tamara
Rettenmund. 
Cavendish, 2003 32p
ISBN 0-7614-5142-0 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
In case you're wondering whether it is possible to be little and old and have a big
beard or to be young and big and have a little beard, this book provides the picto-
rial proof in the form of crowds of cartoon cowboys who fit those descriptions.
After a silly preamble about the plausibility of his characters, Charlip hunkers
down to tell the slightly less plausible, but equally silly, story of this unlikely couple.
A tale of woe it is, as they lose their beloved cow, Grace, somewhere between going
up and down an implausible, and really silly, hill. Now, they know that you can't
be a cowboy without a cow, so they set out to look for their Grace, but to no avail.
Discouraged, they cry a river of tears until Grace finds them, and their peaceful
cowboy life of going up and down their hill with their cow and eating beans is
restored. The payoff for all this silliness? A cowboy version of "Amazing Grace,"
altered to "A-grazing Grace, how sweet you found/ such wretched souls as we."
Charlip and Rettenmund rely on clean, uncluttered draftsmanship, comically ex-
aggerated landscapes and figures, and bright watercolor washes to realize the silli-
ness and emphasize the repetition of the text. Orange, brown, and yellow dominate,
but a full palette marks differences in night and day and picks out the figures from
the backgrounds. This is an irresistible readaloud, with repetition and internal
textual rhyme that's tongue-teasing rather than twisting, making it user-friendly
for beginning readers as well. Oh, and did I mention it was really silly? KC
CHILD, LAUREN 
Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Book?; written and illus. by Lauren
Child. 
Hyperion, 2003 
36p
ISBN 0-7868-0926-4 
$16.99 
R 6-9 yrs
Herb's sleepover with his friend Ezzie is interrupted after Herb falls asleep with his
head on an open book: "Herb woke with a start to hear a strange, high-pitched
shrieking noise. He looked over to see if Ezzie was awake, but there was no sign of
him at all. Furthermore, his bed had become sort of lumpy and huge, which was
funny because Herb had always found his bed to be just right." The "shrieking
noise" is Goldilocks, indignant that Herb has invaded her story. Herb takes off
(meeting the Three Bears on the way) and races across the storybook countryside,
passing Hansel and Gretel, Rapunzel and the prince, and Puss-in-Boots. He goes
through a door ("difficult to open because the illustrator had drawn the handle
much too high up") and finds himself smack in the middle of Cinderella's ball, the
denizens of which have been slightly altered with pen-mustaches and some injudi-
cious scissor-snipping. A guilty Herb flees by cutting a hole to the next page,
where (upside down because he put the pages back in the book wrong) he meets
the wicked steprelations. Chased and/or assisted by various fairy tale personages,
Herb falls back into his bedroom. He explains the situation to Ezzie, and the two
of them, with erasers and tape, set the storybook to rights. Child's tale of a boy's
literal foray into a book has a straightfaced yet snorting humor that fans of Scieszka's
The True Story ofthe Three Little Pigs (BCCB 9/89) will appreciate. Mixed-media
illustrations combine photo-bits, dashingly drawn characters, and cloth in a ca-
184 
* THE BULLETIN
cophony of textures that further melds real and story worlds. This irreverent inter-
textual pastiche will cause musing young viewers to consider their old, well-worn
storybooks in an entirely different way. Just don't forget to hide the scissors. JMD
CHIN, OLIVER 9 of 1: A Window to the World; written and illus. by Oliver
Chin. 
Frog, 2003 
111p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-58394-072-3 
$12.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
This graphic novel takes a documentary form, following the work of nine elev-
enth-graders in a fictional high school in Fremont, California as they complete a
class assignment about responses to the 9/11 tragedy. Each teen interviews some-
one he or she has never met before about the events of September 11, and the
results are a rich patchwork of opinionated perspectives from both the teens and
their subjects: one man talks about his friend's death in the Trade Center, a Rus-
sian immigrant discusses his history of fighting the U.S.-armed Afghan rebels, an
Oakland resident describes the local devastation that reminds her of the sources of
desperation, an Iraqi woman outlines her country's experience in Desert Storm.
The international connections implicitly and explicitly made here are valuable ones,
putting the events of 9/11 in a broad historical and human context and giving
voice to divergent viewpoints; there's also a lot of information packed into the
work. There are some glitches in the information, however, and there's a sameness
of voice throughout that undermines the diversity. Though the graphic-novel
format is appealing, the layout's narrative flow can become confusing; sometimes
the drawing is sturdy and straightforward, but sometimes it's simply stiff or un-
clear. The book doesn't explicitly announce its fictional nature, so some readers
may base their interest on their belief in the reality of the project rather than in the
narrative's thought-provoking viewpoints. There's no reason life can't imitate art,
though, so teens disappointed that this wasn't a real project could well be encour-
aged to make their own, and the accessible format will help introduce them to
some perspectives that will enrich their view of current events. Reading questions
and a list of recommended titles for further exploration are included. DS
COBURN, JAKE 
Prep. Dutton, 2003 
182p
ISBN 0-525-47135-9 
$15.99 
R Gr. 7-12
Novels about teenage gang members fighting for respect on the mean streets are
nothing new in young adult fiction, but when those boys are among the wealthi-
est, whitest inhabitants of New York's Upper East Side, the results are frankly
unsettling. The gang members in this world "aren't poor and angry-they're just
angry." They don Timberland boots and North Face hoodies to prowl streets they
already own by virtue of their high-profile addresses and brilliant financial futures.
Nick earned his street cred from tagging as part of a three-man crew, but when his
friend Kodak was nearly killed in a gang-related skirmish, Nick swears off the life
and spends his time trying to win the love of his best friend, Kris. When her little
brother, Danny, runs afoul of a particularly vicious gang named MKII, Nick re-
luctantly calls on his old friend Greg to use his influence with his own gang, the
Diggs, to stop MKII's bloody revenge on Danny. Greg has other ideas, and the
violence continues unabated. Coburn has the ear of an insider not very far re-
moved from his characters; he captures the offhanded cruelty of their malaise in
his depictions of the stylized gangsta affectation of their clothes and speech pat-
terns. He walks the reader through parties where "everyone is partying because
JANUARY 2004 
* 
185
they don't know how to stop anymore," where getting stoned, destroying prop-
erty, stealing, and cutting people up with butterfly knives is a game with no repris-
als. Refusing the comforting illusion that they will straighten up in college by
including chilly portraits of former prep-school hoods now attending Princeton,
he nevertheless offers hope by creating Nick as a sensitive insider turned outsider
who sees through the games. Pair this with Walter Dean Myers' The Beast (re-
viewed below) and be prepared for a stark reality check regarding young people in
the poorest and richest neighborhoods of New York City. KC
COLLINS, SUZANNE 
Gregor the Overlander. Scholastic, 2003 
311p
ISBN 0-439-43536-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Gregor follows his baby sister, Boots, down a shaft in their apart-
ment-building laundry room and finds himself in a subterranean world on the
brink of war. The siblings are found by the crawlers (giant sentient cockroaches)
and traded to the humans (descendants of a founder who established the first be-
low-ground colony) living in the underground city of Regalia. Gregor discovers
he is prophesied to be a key player in the war between factions of Underlanders:
humans, crawlers, and spinners (giant sentient spiders) vs. gnawers (giant sentient
rats). The boy also discovers that his father, who disappeared nearly three years
before, is held captive by the gnawers, and it is only with Gregor leading humans,
roaches, spiders, and even one giant rat on a risk-filled quest to rescue his father
that the prophecy can be fulfilled. Two-year-old Boots is a constant reminder of
the Overland as well as a surprising asset: her generous and sunny nature embraces
even the crawlers, who eventually come to worship her. The accoutrements of
successful fantasy-a unique setting, a believable social hierarchy, and colorful but
rounded characterizations-are here, and Collins makes the best of them. She
firmly establishes both her characters and her world before sending her players on
their dangerous path. Betrayals, revelations, and shifts of alliance keep the tension
high, and the action is almost nonstop. There have been a number of fantasies
about secret civilizations that exist beneath the streets of urban centers; this lively
title is a splendid addition to the ranks. JMD
COOK, LISA BROADIE 
Martin MacGregor's Snowman; illus. by Adam
McCauley. 
Walker, 2003 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8859-9 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8858-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
"I live for snowman building," says Martin MacGregor, but so far this winter he's
had little chance to demonstrate his talents. Since Martin's an enterprising kid, he
makes do as best he can, attempting to create snowmen by dumping flour on his
baby sister, gluing cotton balls to the dog, covering himself with bath bubbles (in
a display that somewhat startles his mother's book club), and enjoying various
ingenious machinations that unfortunately all end up with Martin still longing for
snow and in trouble to boot ("Martin MacGregor waited for the snow in his cool-
ing-off chair"). As the months roll by and the weather provides nothing more than
a pathetic dusting of snow sprinkles, Martin grows resigned to his deprivation;
April, however, provides him with a wonderful surprise in the form of a blizzard
that dumps feet of snow on the town, closing the schools and giving Martin the
opportunity for which he's been longing. There's a lot of text here, but it's all very,
very funny, with amusing events galore, ranging from Martin's slipping soap bubbles
186 
* 
THE BULLETIN
to his irate response to praise of his snowman illustration (when his art teacher
compliments him on capturing the "true essence of a snowman," he frustratedly
yells, "THE ESSENCE OF A SNOWMAN IS SNOW'). Martin's repeated dis-
ciplinary setbacks will elicit further giggles, and while the final blizzard provides a
satisfactory solution, audiences will appreciate the final twist: Martin now stares
disconsolately out at a summer thunderstorm, longing for a chance to get out and
do some swimming and sandcastle-building. Mixed-media art contrasts sturdily
rustic block-printed lines with delicate watercolor textures; comic exaggeration
makes sawed-off Martin a droll figure indeed, with his maniacal bug eyes, but it's
the spanking-clean behind of the insufficiently bubble-covered Martin that will
really set viewers rolling in the aisles. Pair this with Kevin O'Malley's Straight to
the Pole (BCCB 12/03) for two very different views of snowy winter weather. DS
Cox, JUDY 
Go to Sleep, Groundhog!; illus. by Paul Meisel. 
Holiday House,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1645-3 
$16.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
Groundhog gets into his pajamas, sets his clock for February the second, and goes
to bed, but he has a problem-he can't sleep. At "half-past October" he decides to
take a walk, and he encounters Halloween for the first time: "Raggedy scarecrows
and grinning jack-o'-lanterns. Children dressed up like pirates, cowboys, and prin-
cesses." A friendly witch tells him he ought to be sleeping, so she takes him home,
puts him to bed, and reads him a story, which is nice but doesn't really help: at
half-past November he goes out for a walk and encounters Thanksgiving (and a
helpful turkey); at half-past December a similar walk leads him to Christmas (and
a jolly Santa Claus). Groundhog finally falls asleep, only to be awakened by his
alarm clock. He takes a quick look at snowy February and his long shadow: "'What
am I doing up?' he said. 'There are six more weeks of winter coming! I should be
in bed!'" Cox's tale recalls Adrienne Adams' Easter Bunny that Overslept in its
appealing multiholiday theme, and its structural repetition and merry tone will
make it a readaloud winner. The text is comfortably simple and gently humorous,
and Groundhog is an appealing, childlike insomniac. Acrylic and gouache illus-
trations have an almost folk-art look, the opaque colors adding a rich depth to the
varied compositions. Little lookers will delight in following Groundhog's journey
through the holidays and in spotting his companions (tiny mice) in various scenes.
A note on the origin of Groundhog Day is appended. JMD
CREEDON, CATHERINE 
Blue Wolf illus. by James Bentley. 
HarperCollins,
2003 
182p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-050869-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-050868-X 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old track star Jamie Park is still grieving for his recently deceased
mother when he receives a mysterious invitation from his heretofore unknown
aunt Louise, and with breathless suddenness the boy is off to a mysterious locale in
the mountains of the Northwest. Louise lives a life without frills such as indoor
plumbing, growing her own vegetables, getting game from the neighbors, and
visiting town infrequently for supplies she can't produce herself. Although he is
frequently exasperated by Louise's unwillingness to answer his questions about his
parents or herself, Jamie adjusts quickly to her ways; he also revels in the surround-
ings, running through the woods accompanied by unseen wolf companions that
JANUARY 2004 
* 
187
run alongside him. He accepts this mystery easily, having encountered the wolves
before, but the mystery deepens when his aunt is visited by Ji-Min, whom Jamie
discovers is his paternal uncle, and by Louise's godchild Cicely. It becomes clear
(to the reader, if not to Jamie) that Ji-Min, Cicely, and Louise are the wolves that
have been trailing Jamie, and that Jamie himself will have to choose whether or not
to accept the familial ability to shape-change. The mystical mood, outdoorsy ele-
ments, and shape-shifting story are an intriguing combination. The book runs
short on suspense, however: the secret is repeatedly and heavy-handedly hinted at,
and there is never any palpable danger. Still, there is a wildness to Louise's life and
Jamie's adjustment to it that has the appeal of Paulsen's wilderness stories; that
and the souppon of the supernatural provided by wolves seen and unseen will be
enough to keep readers walking on this wild side. JMD
CRIST-EVANS, CRAIG 
Amaryllis. 
Candlewick, 2003 
184 p
ISBN 0-7636-1863-2 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Just as the grounded ship Amaryllis looms over the Staples brothers' Florida surf-
ing area, massive events beyond their control cast intrusive shadows over their
lives. Dad's drinking problem has long burdened their family, and now the Viet-
nam War, which older sibling Frankie saw as an escape route from home, has
proved to be another untamable monster. Younger brother Jimmy tells the tale,
shifting between domestic scenes in which his father transfers his temper fits from
Frankie to his only available child, and letters from Frank, which paint a progres-
sively more harrowing picture of carnage and drug addiction. The final letter
comes not from Frank, but from the Army; Frank is MIA, and Mr. Staples begins
at last to realize that his behavior probably drove Frank to his death. The grip of
this tragedy is somewhat enervated by the unrealistic polish of Frank's letters (he's
a bright kid, but his meticulously phrased missives never miss a beat, even when
he's presumably in a narcotic haze), and the tonal differences between Jimmy's
smooth narration and more plausible family conversations. While this doesn't
match the raw immediacy of Myers' Fallen Angels (BCCB 4/88), it does explore
with some success the helplessness of family members as they watch a loved one
take leave from their lives. EB
D'ADAMO, FRANCESCO 
Iqbal; tr. by Ann Leonori. 
Atheneum, 2003 
122p
ISBN 0-689-85445-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Getting the straight facts on Iqbal Masih, the Pakistani rug-knotter turned child-
activist who was shot to death in 1995, is no easy matter, and in this Italian import
his story is further embellished with a thick glaze of fiction. Fatima, a fictional
bonded laborer in the carpet factory of Hussain Khan, tells of the brutal condi-
tions under which she and other children slave for a pittance to pay off their par-
ents' never-ending debts. When Iqbal arrives, having been sold to Hussain by a
former master, probably for his rebellious behavior, he forces the children to face
up to the hopelessness of their future in the shop and to look for a means of escape.
They take courage from his bold ways-purposely ruining a valuable finished rug,
sneaking out into the city through a tiny window-and when the opportunity
arises to turn Hussain in to the authorities, they present a united front against their
ruthless employer. When Fatima holds forth on the early years of her confine-
ment, the tale is gripping and immediate; curiously, though, after Iqbal enters the
picture the narration becomes more distant and formal, part Fatima's adulation,
188 
* THE BULLETIN
and part Iqbal's lengthy diatribes. After enumerating the many horrors of Hussain's
sweatshop, D'Adamo backs off from frank confrontation of Iqbal's death (here
unequivocally assessed as murder), softening the blow with an oblique account
delivered in a fictional letter to Fatima from another ex-worker. An inadequate
epilogue and paucity of sources leave readers stranded without supportive informa-
tion. For a brief but pointed account, turn to "The Story of Iqbal Masih" in David
L. Parker's Stolen Dreams (BCCB 2/98) or one of the Iqbal-specific materials from
D'Adamo's brief list of suggested reading. EB
DARROW, SHARON 
The Painters of Lexieville. 
Candlewick, 2003 
182p
ISBN 0-7636-1437-8 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Pert Lexie is desperate to escape the stifling poverty and toxic relationships that she
sees around her in the unpainted frame-and-flakeboard shotgun shacks that make
up Lexieville, Arkansas. Mostly, she is looking to get away from her lecherous
uncle, Orris, who can't seem to keep his hands off her. Hope comes in the form of
Mrs. Turnbull, a social worker who teaches self-defense to the girls at the high
school, gets jobs for Pert and her family, and secures a coveted placement for Pert
in hairdressers' school after graduation. After Pert takes steps to protect herself
from Orris, he ambushes her and delivers a savage beating. She is rescued by her
father, who stays with her, and her brother Jobe, who sets off into the woods after
Orris and assaults him in retribution, presumably killing him. The incident pro-
pels Pert into a mind-numbing depression and sends Jobe off to church to work
out his guilt and salvation through prayer. The narration alternates between the
voices of Pert, Jobe, their mother Truly (until she dies), and Mrs. Turnbull's case
reports, helping ground the more sensational aspects of the story with more or less
plausible motivations. Unfortunately, the action turns on a set of condescending
stereotypes. The distant, addle-brained mama, the leering, incestuous uncle, the
well-meaning, purse-lipped case worker, the charismatic, snake-handling preacher,
and the various weak-willed women who can't seem to resist the charms of drunk,
unemployed lechers are all figures from central casting that we wish we'd seen the
last of. More sensitive care is given to the drafting of Pert, Papa, and Jobe, how-
ever, who seem genuinely deserving of the happy endings they manage to cultivate
for themselves out of their unhappy circumstances, offering hope and light at the
end of even the darkest tunnel. KC
DAVIS, AUBREY, ad. 
Bagels from Benny; illus. by Dusan Petricic. 
Kids Can,
2003 
32p
ISBN 1-55337-417-7 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Young Benny's favorite thing is helping out in his grandfather's bakery: "Everyone
bought bagels. Grandpa baked the best bagels in town." Benny is puzzled when
his grandfather won't accept thanks for his bagels, but his grandfather explains that
all the ingredients in his bagels come from the earth and the earth was made by
God, so it is God who deserves thanks. Benny says a thank-you prayer and, just to
make sure God hears him, takes a bag of fresh bagels to the synagogue. There he
places the fragrant bagels inside the Holy Ark that holds the Torah, "His Special
Book." Week after week, Benny gives bagels to God, until his grandfather, curious
as to the fate of all those bagels, follows him to the synagogue. Grandpa explains
that God doesn't eat bagels, but Benny asks, "Then where do the bagels go?" While
the two puzzle over the question, a poorly dressed, obviously needy man comes
JANUARY 2004 
* 
189
into the synagogue and takes the bagels from the Ark. Benny is despondent that
God didn't get his thank-you bagels, until Grandpa explains that by making the
world a better place, Benny has thanked God in the best way possible. Davis takes
a traditional Jewish folktale and transforms it for a contemporary audience in this
accessible retelling. The prose is easy and flowing and the dialogue natural and
winning; the relationship between the boy and his grandfather provides a loving
backdrop for this teaching tale. Petricic's watercolor and pencil illustrations ex-
tend the open liveliness inherent in the text, the white space and line drawings on
the verso pages balancing the (bagel-like) circular scenes on the rectos. Patrons
who need a gentle message gently given should reach for this generosity-affirming
story. JMD
DURBIN, WILLIAM 
Blackwater Ben. 
Lamb, 2003 
200p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90149-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72928-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
It is the winter of 1898, and thirteen-year old Ben Ward is spending the season
working for his father in the kitchen of the Blackwater Logging Camp. The labor
is difficult and the Minnesota winter blindingly cold, but Ben is determined to
please his "ornery" dad; he's also hoping that time spent with his father will result
in stories of his long-deceased mother, about whom his father rarely speaks. In a
highly contrived coincidence, Ben learns that Charlie the Dentist (saw filer) courted
his mother before she met his father ("'Blimey O'Reilly!' Charlie's mouth dropped
open. 'Don't tell me your mum was Lucinda Warren?'") and that he's full of fond
remembrances that he willingly shares with Ben. The plotline, organized into
sequential episodes that don't always transition smoothly into the next, is gener-
ally entertaining, but Ben's tendency to whine about the work and grow jealous of
the other kitchen worker yields a somewhat shallow characterization inconsistent
with the coming-of-age tone of the book. Nonetheless, Durbin's novel succeeds
in presenting an intriguing glimpse of a little-known logging subculture, chock
full of colorful characters, camaraderie, and men at work. An afterword provides
background information on life in a logging camp and a glossary of "Lumberjack
Lingo" is included in the front of the book. HM
DUVALL, DEBORAH L., ad. 
How Rabbit Lost His Tail: A Traditional Cherokee
Legend; illus. by Murv Jacob. 
University of New Mexico, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8263-3010-X 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Ji-Stu (Rabbit) is one conceited bunny: "He was proud of his shiny eyes and his
long floppy ears. But mostly he was proud of his tail." Otter's shiny coat proves
more of a crowd-pleaser, however: "For hours Otter danced in turn with all the
girls around the fire. Ji-Stu sat on a stump and watched. Once in a while the girls
would dance with him, but their eyes would follow the splendid coat of Otter as he
whirled and turned in the firelight." Ji-Stu can barely contain his envy, and when
he discovers that the animals are going to give a prize for the most splendid coat,
he tricks Otter out of his coat with a clever ruse, then wears Otter's coat to the
council. The disguised rabbit is chosen as the winner, but a suspicious Yona the
Bear grabs him by the tail, and Ji-Stu leaves his pride behind in his struggle to
escape. The story is propelled forward not only by the action but by the emotions
of the animal characters: readers will understand the rabbit's pride, his envy, and
his desire to win, even as they recognize that his deception cannot possibly suc-
190 
* THE BULLETIN
ceed. Cherokee artist Jacob's black-and-white pen-and-ink illustrations have a
heraldic quality: decorative borders and framed compositions hold the densely
lined figures firmly within the white pages. The illustrations bubble with detail,
from the patterns on ceremonial costumes to the decorations on pottery. Folkloric
justice reigns here, and in the end, all is as it should be: Ji-Stu runs faster without
his tail, Otter learns to love swimming thanks to the rabbit's trick, and Yona at-
taches the magnificent rabbit tail to his ceremonial rattle. There is no source note.
JMD
FREEMAN, MARTHA 
Who Is Stealing the Twelve Days of Christmas? Holiday
House, 2003 
200p
ISBN 0-8234-1788-3 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Twelve of the thirteen households on Chickadee Court have long cooperated on
an annual outdoor display featuring symbols from the song "The Twelve Days of
Christmas," but the tradition is threatened this year by a series of thefts. The birds
disappear-from the cheesy gold-painted, cardboard-beaked rubber duck that mas-
querades as a partridge, to the meticulously handcrafted calling bird-only to re-
appear a day or so later. When the police fail to take this seeming prank seriously,
Alex Parakeet and his best friend Yasmeen shoulder the sleuthing responsibilities
and uncover a connection between the front yard heists and a break-in at the local
toy store, from which the entire stock of the year's hottest toy, Super Macho Mili-
tary Mice, has been purloined. Neighbors are prime suspects, and the holiday
bonhomie around the cul-de-sac steadily withers until the kids face off with the
culprit and clear the name of the gruff loner (the holiday holdout in the thirteenth
house), who proves himself a hero and a friend. Freeman doles out kid-sized clues
designed to challenge, but not frustrate, budding investigators. Alex's narration,
particularly his keen observations of the adult species, are wry and witty, but never
unnaturally precocious. Alex and Yasmeen succeed where adults fail because they're
normal kids with normal kid knowledge that eludes their elders, and readers will
instinctively appreciate the righteousness of their success. EB
FRISCH, AARON 
The Story ofNike.
See review under Bell, p. 180.
GOTTFRIED, TED 
Homeland Security versus Constitutional Rights. 
Twenty-First
Century, 2003 
128p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2862-9 
$24.90 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Most Americans have encountered, in one form or another, changes enacted fol-
lowing the 9/11 attack in order to strengthen security, and most are aware that
many of these changes have been controversial. For young people who wish to
delve more thoroughly into the controversies, Gottfried offers a balanced and well-
grounded investigation into the many actions taken in the name of homeland
security and the many reactions to same. Carefully structured text keeps its focus
clear chapter by chapter as it examines the initial response, the changes in law, the
treatment of detained suspects in the U.S., the treatment of the Afghanistan
campaign's prisoners at Guantanamo Bay, and other weighty matters. Brief headed
sections, some less than a page in length, break the issue down further, with argu-
ment and counterargument appearing in close and clearly identifiable proximity
JANUARY 2004 
* 
191
while sidebars provide insights into specific subjects such as torture, the official
meaning of war, etc. The information is solid, but it's sometimes rather too solid
and dry, making for hard going on the reading front; the writing never really trans-
forms the material into anything more than a capable (if sometimes unpolished)
synthesis of secondary material. It's still a useful synthesis, however, that'll be
helpful to readers looking to sort out the sometimes complicated sequence of events
and arguments on this important contemporary issue. Black-and-white photos
and some historical reproductions are included throughout; in addition to end-
notes, a timeline, glossary, resource list, and index are included. DS
HAMPTON, 
WILBORN 
September 11, 2001: 
Attack on New York
City. 
Candlewick, 2003 
14 5p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7636-1949-3 
$17.99 
R* 
Gr. 5-9
In this riveting but respectful account, Hampton retraces the attack on the World
Trade Center through the experiences of individuals who lived through the trag-
edy. The text is divided into three main narrative sections-The Attack, Flight,
and The Aftermath-and each follows the same cast throughout the day as they
make agonizing decisions that determine whether or not they will survive. Among
those highlighted are Jim Kenworthy, who realizes his wife was in a stricken build-
ing and must decide whether to hunt for her or rush to support their school-age
children; Bob Fox, who must entrust his disabled friend to the care of firefighters
evacuating the tower; Omar Rivera, a blind man who, for the first time, cannot
rely on the guidance of his guide dog, Salty. Hampton also offers his own perspec-
tive on the events, acknowledging that he was involved not as a victim, but as a
typical New Yorker: "In the days and weeks that followed, we went to Yankee
Stadium, ate out in restaurants, went to the opera, a museum, and the theater. We
were not looking for diversion. It was the only way we knew to fight back." Un-
sensational, conscientious reporting informs the presentation, and when specula-
tion is absolutely necessary (as in the case of reconstructing the last hours of the
hijackers themselves), that ambiguity is clearly noted. Dozens of crisply repro-
duced black and white photographs punctuate the text, and the lack of livid color
associated with broadcast news sends a subtle but powerful message that Septem-
ber 11th can now begin to be viewed as history. A brief bibliography, index, and
photo credits are included. EB
HOFFMAN, MARY 
Encore, Grace!; illus. by June Allan. 
Dial, 2003 
110p
ISBN 0-8037-2951-0 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
The perennially cheerful Grace (from Starring Grace, BCCB 9/00) returns in a
new easy chapter book. Grace must cope with many unsettling changes: Crishell,
the new girl in Grace's class, is "stealing her thunder"; her best friend, Aimee, is
moving; and neighbor Mrs. Myerson is in poor health. The dialogue is sometimes
stilted, and there are moments when the sensibilities of the adult author are overly
evident. Still, Grace rises to each occasion with uncommon, well, grace, making
friends with the troubled Crishell, assuring Aimee they will keep in touch, and
handling her gentle grief at Mrs. Myerson's death. More telling than showing
limits the textual liveliness that usually attracts young readers, but the everyday
comfort of recognizable events and interactions will be enough to hold them.
(Hoffman won't disappoint drama lovers, either: Grace's class rewrites "Sleeping
Beauty" for a school play.) Allan's black-and-white drawings don't have quite the
192 
* 
THE BULLETIN
same energy as previous illustrator Binch's, but Grace's fans will still recognize her
indomitable spirit. JMD
HOFFMAN, NINA KIRI 
A Stir ofBones. Viking, 2003 
211p
ISBN 0-670-03551-3 
$15.99 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Susan lives in a house full of violent secrets, a place where her controlling father
demands a certain level of order. When classmates Julio, Edmund, and Deirdre
plan to use a local haunted house for refuge from their own lives, Susan joins
them, finding her way into yet another house full of secrets. This house, however,
welcomes Susan and introduces her to its only resident, the ghost of young suicide
victim Nathaniel (a.k.a. Nathan) Blacksmith. Lonely Nathan fast welcomes all
the teenagers, and House allows them to stay. Various magical phenomena occur,
some instigated by would-be witch Edmund, and some manifested by House it-
self, all feeding back to Susan's fear of her father and her desperation to escape
what has become an unbearable existence. In this prequel to Hoffman's fantasy
titles A Red Heart ofMemories and Past the Size ofDreaming, the magic is nebulous,
floating haphazardly through a too-gently-unfolding plot. Susan's dilemma is so
often dangled in front of the reader that it becomes teasing rather than tense, and
the revelation-that Susan's father beats her mother whenever Susan does any-
thing to displease him-is so overly foreshadowed that it undercuts the impact of
the revelation. The writing, however, is poetic and evocative. The language con-
jures the magic that Hoffman's plot just misses, with simple yet precise turns of
phrase that effectively chill. This has many of the supernatural elements that will
keep young adults turning the pages, and the unsatisfying conclusion (the prof-
fered magical solution to Susan's difficulty leaves her passive and her problem
unresolved) may spur readers to seek out Susan's further evolution. JMD
HOOBLER, DOROTHY 
We Are Americans: Voices of the Immigrant Experience; by
Dorothy and Thomas Hoobler. 
Scholastic, 2003 
194p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-439-16297-1 
$21.95 
R Gr. 5-9
This highly detailed narrative history traces U.S. immigration from the Native
Americans, described as the first immigrants to America over 14,000 years ago, to
contemporary immigration policy and recent trends. The Hooblers (RealAmeri-
can Girls Tell Their Own Stories, BCCB 12/99, Vanity Rules: A History ofAmerican
Fashion and Beauty, BCCB 4/00) once again incorporate an assortment of per-
sonal anecdotes, letters, and memoirs into their collection, endowing the text-
book-like layout with a remarkable array of archival photographs and boxed
first-hand recollections. There is no shortage of information here, yet the lan-
guage remains accessible and readable, if occasionally dry. Readers will benefit
from the careful attention paid to contextualizing the relationship of immigration
trends to events occurring worldwide, from the Irish potato famine to the Russian
pogroms to the surge of war brides arriving after World War II. The photos detail
a range of everyday life activities as well as the usual assortment of posed family
shots and effectively highlight the sometimes tragic, sometimes laughable tales of
travel, culture, and community. Though lacking a much-needed timeline, source
and illustration notes are included as is a list of further reading, including all ten
volumes of the Hooblers' American Family Albums series. HM
JANUARY 2004 
* 
193
HOPKINSON, DEBORAH 
Shutting Out the Sky: Life in the Tenements ofNew York
1880-1924. Orchard/Scholastic, 2003 
134 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-439-37590-8 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
New York's cramped tenements were springboards or dead ends for immigrants
from many countries, but here Hopkinson focuses on newcomers from Italy and
Eastern Europe, particularly five immigrants who arrived as children or teens and
who left memoirs of their experiences. Although the tenements themselves are
explained in some detail, the emphasis is on the business of assimilation, and per-
sonal reflections range beyond cramped, unhealthy housing and grinding labor to
probe intimate corners of uprooted lives. Rose Cohen, who joined her father after
he was already settled in the new homeland, was shocked to find he had trimmed
off his forelocks and compromised many of his Jewish traditions. Leonard Covello
was reluctant to let American acquaintances meet his Old World parents and was
hurt when news of his success in school phys ed met with anger from his father:
"We work so that he can have some future-and he spends his time at school
playing!" Cameo portraits of the five featured voices appear after Hopkinson's
foreword, but the balance of monochromatic illustrations, reproduced in sludgy
brown tones, are drawn from unrelated photo collections, many from photogra-
pher Lewis Hine. All quotations are carefully sourced, and a timeline, index, and
bibliography are included. Readers who have been intrigued by the haunting im-
ages of Raymond Bial's Tenement (BCCB 11/02) will have a better understanding
of the people who filled the rooms. EB
HOWE, JAMES, ed. 
13: Thirteen Stories that Capture theAgony and Ecstasy ofBeing
Thirteen. Atheneum, 2003 
2 82p
ISBN 0-689-82863-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
These thirteen stories catalogue some of the joys and trials (mostly trials, mostly
humorous) of being thirteen. Though the stories chronicle diverse experiences,
the main characters inevitably end up wiser and better, suggesting that there may
be more wish-fulfilling nostalgia and hopefulness than reality here. Take the girl
who has been dumped by her relentlessly patronizing older friend, who sabotages
our heroine's first babysitting gig, only to be forgiven by our newly minted wise
and empathetic thirteen-year-old. Then there is the boy who befriends a smelly,
mentally challenged homeless man and invites him to participate in his bar mitzvah,
to the chagrin of his mother, but to the approval (silent, of course) of a thirteen-
year-old girl. In these gentle tales by authors such as Bruce Coville, Meg Cabot,
Alex Sanchez, Ellen Wittlinger, Todd Strasser, Ron Koertge, and Ann M. Martin,
among others, characters get forgiven, embarrassments are smoothed over, and
taboos (including a boy kissing another boy full on the mouth in a darkened movie
theater) are violated without much repercussion. One notable exception to the
generally optimistic glow of the book is Lori Aurelia Williams' "Black Holes and
Basketball Sneakers," a gritty story of bullying and gangs that remains disturbingly
unresolved, though even here the thirteen-year-old does the noble and brave thing.
Each story is followed by the author's reminiscences of his or her own experience
of being thirteen, which may explain the hazily hagiographic nature of the stories;
they either remember thirteen warmly or use their writing as a means to revise
their experience. What the stories lack in realism and distinctiveness they make up
for in reassurance and genuine fondness for kids on the threshold of their teen
194 
* THE BULLETIN
years; it will likely hold more interest for nervous and curious twelves than for
those in the thick of thirteen. KC
HURST, CAROL OTIS 
A Killing in Plymouth Colony; by Carol Otis Hurst and
Rebecca Otis. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2003 
149p
ISBN 0-618-27597-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Imagination is loosely tethered on a very long leash in this fictional reconstruction
of an actual murder that took place in 1630 Plymouth. Eleven-year-old John
Bradford, son of the colony's governor, is at his wit's end about how to please this
stern, critical parent. His personal problems are temporarily eclipsed, though, by
a mystery within the community. John Newcomen is found in the woods-shot
dead; several men come under suspicion and a little girl is suddenly struck mute,
perhaps from a related trauma. The murder story, the purported main event, is
largely upstaged by John's domestic trials. The rocky relationship between the
elder and younger Bradfords is realistically drawn, and much to Hurst and Otis'
credit, the scene in which William finally talks frankly with son John ends not
with sentimental rapprochement, but with a stern, Puritanical lecture: "It is not
my task to give thee what thou want. It is my task to help thee to be right with
God." 
Flashes of convincing detail -are too often, though, offset by the stray
anachronism ("I thought I was a goner"), some inconsistently or awkwardly de-
ployed "thy's" and "thou's," and the author's own admittedly sketchy resources, as
summarized in an afterword. (They never mention whether historians identify
John Newcomen and John Billington as the deceased and his killer.) Readers who
first met the colonists in Kate Waters' Samuel Eaton's Day (BCCB 11/93) may
enjoy seeing another side to these neighbors, but true fans of historical reconstruc-
tions will require more substantiation. EB
INGOLD, JEANETTE 
Mountain Solo. 
Harcourt, 2003 
309p
ISBN 0-15-202670-3 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Tessie Thaler, a talented teen violinist, has just hit the wall in her rising musical
career. Her debut in Germany, for which she and her teacher suspected she was
not emotionally prepared, was indeed a disaster, and now Tessie has joined her
father and his new wife and daughter in her old home in Montana, where she
plans to avoid all the New York people she can't bear to face, particularly her
demanding mother. Dad, always skeptical of her ambition, is delighted to have
her back, and stepmother Meg, a Forest Service historian, offers Tessie a new di-
version as they investigate the possible site of an old homestead belonging to an-
other musician who lived in the region a century ago. Ingold delivers her tale in
three alternating sections-Tessie's visit with her father's family, her memories of
her burgeoning talent, and the story of Frederick Bottner, the young farmer who
once delighted his family with homemade music. Bottner's tale, while interesting
in its own right, never intertwines compellingly with Tessie's. However, the ac-
count of how Tessie, steadily pressured by her devoted mother, grew from a gifted
little girl to a darling child prodigy to just another promising violinist is riveting
enough to sustain interest through tangential plot lines. To her credit, Ingold
draws the first Mrs. Thaler as an overinvested mom rather than a stock evil stage
mother, and that understatement adds to the novel's credibility. Equally realistic
is Tessie's period of embarrassment and wound licking. When she makes up her
JANUARY 2004 
* 
195
mind to go back to New York and try again, readers can feel assured that she'll get
it right the next time. EB
JOHNSTON, TONY 
The Mummy's Mother. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2003 
160p
ISBN 0-439-32462-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Ten-year-old Ramose-well, four-thousand-ten-year-old Ramose-has been rudely
awakened from his eternal slumber by grave robbers pilfering his mummified mother
from the adjoining chamber in their tomb. Ramose bursts free and pursues the
criminals through desert, at sea, and in New York, where Neferet, his mother, is
put on display for the entertainment of museum-going gawkers. The boy is vari-
ously aided or impeded by several talking animals, and his truest allies prove to be
a gang of rascals on an overseas field trip from a toney boys' school, who promise
to further his efforts if he will defeat their archrival in a ping-pong tournament.
There's a wacky suspension of logic reminiscent of classic cartoons, as each person
Ramose encounters fails to notice at first (or at all) that the boy is wrapped head to
foot in ratty linen strips. Without that medium's split-second wisecrack timing
and lickety-split action pacing, though, the jokes fall flat, the trajectory droops,
and the mummy's incessant wailing for Mother begins to sound more Oedipal
than comedic. Generously sized font, short chapters, and an invitingly goofy premise
will, however, bring this within reach of even wobbly readers, and an appended
author's note comments on her inspiration for this romp. EB
KADOHATA, CYNTHIA 
Kira-Kira. Atheneum, 2004 
[24 4 p]
ISBN 0-689-85639-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Katie adores her older sister, Lynn, whose charisma and imagination make the
world a magical place for her younger sister; when hard times force their family to
move from their Iowa home to Georgia, where work is available in the chicken-
processing factories, it's Lynn who holds things together for Katie in the face of
their parents' long working hours and the prejudice against their Japanese-Ameri-
can family. Soon Lynn's health begins to flag, however, and while her parents do
what they can (including buying a small house, so that the family can have the
home that Lynn has longed for), Lynn is eventually diagnosed with lymphoma,
which takes her life. Katie's narration is the uninflected stream-of-consciousness
of a young child, and there are touches of adult retrospection wafting through the
subtext, so it will achieve its best effects with more sophisticated readers who can
fill in some of the contextual blanks. It is, however, a story compellingly and
touchingly told, in a matter-of-fact yet fluid style that speaks eloquently to Katie's
experience: "I wondered if anyone else in history had ever been as sad as I was at
the moment. As soon as I wondered that, I knew the answer was yes. The answer
was that millions of people had been that sad." The slice-of-life approach makes
this a story of more than family loss, too, with the brutal existence of the factory
workers a strong, if understated, theme: since no bathroom breaks are permitted,
Katie's mother and the rest of the women must wear pads at their jobs; Katie's
mother finally votes for the union in order to win the right to a bereavement day in
the event of a child's death, a privilege she herself did not have. Readers drawn by
confident prose and strong family stories will appreciate this quietly lyrical ac-
count of the growth of a young girl. DS
196 
* THE BULLETIN
KRISHNASWAMI, UMA 
Monsoon; illus. by Jamel Akib. 
Farrar, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-374-35015-9 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
It's been a long, hot summer, and the narrator, a young Indian girl, is waiting
anxiously for the monsoon rains to end the dusty, baking heat. Whether shopping
with her mother in the crowded city, playing hopscotch in the alley with her brother,
or listening to her grandmother's stories of monsoons past at home, she's straining
anxiously to hear the signs of impending rain. Finally, it comes ("Then-oh!-
the rain, the perfect rain, the stretching, sweeping sheet of rain storms down"),
settling the dust of summer and revivifying the inhabitants. The measured-rhythm
text effectively evokes the busy city, the parching winds, and the population's over-
heated anticipation of relief. The illustrations expand the picture further: though
the palette is sometimes insufficiently differentiated, undercutting the strength of
the compositions, the art dramatically conveys the bustle of a city crammed with
cars and motorbikes, festooned with billboards, and thronged with people, all wait-
ing for a break in the weather. Even the domestic scenes, as the narrator half-
watches television under the overhead ceiling fan, are injected with hot colors that
make it clear there's no relief here, but the transmogrification of the landscape into
a purple-hued frenzy with slashing white rain dramatically announces the arrival
of the long-awaited monsoon. The obvious partner for this is Hesse's Come On,
Rain (BCCB 4/99); use them together for a comradely view of the way people half
a world apart share their revelry in the rain that spells relief from heat. A few
Hindi words are explained on the copyright page, and a concluding note explains
the meteorological and cultural implications of the monsoon. DS
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
The Book of Rock Stars: 24 Musical Icons that Shine through
History; illus. by Stephen Alcorn. 
Hyperion, 2003 
4 8p
ISBN 0-7868-1950-2 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Krull (author of Lives ofExtraordinary Women, BCCB 9/00, and others) presents a
compilation of biographical sketches of famous rock and rollers, from Elvis Presley
to Kurt Cobain, drawn from those figures depicted in Alcorn's Music Masters print
series. The book narrows the treatment from Alcorn's more catholic selections,
focusing largely on artists from the 1960s-1980s, such as Bob Dylan, Jimi Hendrix,
Janis Joplin, Joni Mitchell, and others, which are likelier to appeal to parents than
kids themselves. The prose is choppy, and the sketches themselves are overly ge-
neric, often omitting basic biographical details and downplaying the excess that
led many of these artists to early graves. Still, Krull does manage to instill her
biographical blurbs with enough hints of lives intensely lived to whet readers' ap-
petites for more a more detailed treatment. Alcorn's portraits (done in polychrome
relief-block prints) are a mixed bag, some reflecting the physicality of the artist
depicted, some depicting their stage personae, and some falling just short of either.
Several (such as those of Bob Marley and Jimi Hendrix) raise the artists depicted to
the iconographic level that Krull claims for them. Suggestions of adult titles for
general reading are followed by single adult sources on each artist or group, the
official website address, and a discography (offering only three or four recordings
per artist). This title may make a good browsing book for junior high through
high school, but there is an audience question: will young readers who know little
or nothing about many of the artists mentioned be interested in finding out more?
Stay tuned. JMD
JANUARY 2004 
* 
197
LONG, MELINDA 
How I Became a Pirate; illus. by David Shannon. 
Harcourt,
2003 
36 p
ISBN 0-15-201848-4 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Jeremy Jacob's day at the beach takes a precipitate turn when a pirate ship heaves
to and rotund Braid Beard rows ashore and recognizes that the boy's sandcastle
skills mark him as a masterful digger. There's a chest full of treasure to be buried
and a digger is just what they need; Jeremy Jacob has no objections, as long as he's
back in time for soccer practice tomorrow. At first the freebooter life is a nonstop
picnic: no table manners, no bedtime, no spinach and carrots, no tooth brushing.
Alas, there's also nobody to tuck a boy in for the night ("Tuck you in? ... Pirates
don't tuck"), or read him a story, or comfort him in a raging storm. Jeremy Jacob
is pleased to suggest a place to stash their loot (under the tree in his backyard) and
he's off the hook and home in time for soccer practice with his team-the Pirates,
who else? The plot may amount to little more than a semiprecious gem, but
Shannon's illustrations are pure gold: dense, detailed caricatures that affection-
ately satirize buccaneer fantasy. The crew is tricked out in predictably frayed fin-
ery, but careful examination discloses such buried pleasures as a pince-nez delicately
perched on one massive schnoz, a matching pair of eye patches worn purely for
affect (that pirate lifts one or both whenever he needs to take a peek), a hula girl
tattoo with "Mom" inscribed at her feet, a natty set of nautical-print jammies, and
a cat boasting as few teeth as his scurvy shipmates. Among such company, what
listener wouldn't crave being pirate for a day? EB
LUND, DEB 
Dinosailors; illus. by Howard Fine. 
Harcourt, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-15-204609-7 
$16.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
Six dinosaurs, from the august Hadrosaurus captain to the lowly T-Rex cabin boy,
answer the call of the sea and revel in their first hours on the briny. What a lark!
"They're hale and hearty-dinotough!/ They talk of salty sailing stuff:/ Blocks
and winches, dinocleats,/ Shackles, tacking, trimming sheets." A squall presents
them with a reality check, and suddenly the thrill is gone: "They dinosault like
Ping-Pong balls,/ Bumping dinorumps and walls./ Dinoswingers hang from sails,/
They mash the mast and ram the rails." The ship won't stay still, lunch won't stay
down, and the dinos are all too happy to tromp back onto terra firma. But with
wanderlust coursing through their veins, sedentary life's a bore, and they're off to
ride the rails on a new adventure: "Dinotrainers, all aboard." Lund has a ball
tacking the "dino" prefix onto any word that will make her cadence clip and her
verses rollick. Fine's beasties bear a strong resemblance to Mark Teague's dino cast
from Yolen's How Do Dinosaurs Say Goodnight? (BCCB 6/00)-improbably tinted,
preposterously agile, hilariously expressive. Their plummet from the heights of
joyful seamanship to the depths of mal de mer is a hoot, and a double-bleed of a
shipload of spewing dinos is a guaranteed crowd-pleaser. You can never have too
many dinosaur books, and this one's definitely see-worthy. EB
MACAULAY, DAVID 
Mosque; written and illus. by David Macaulay. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 2003 
96p
ISBN 0-618-24034-9 
$18.00 
R* 
Gr. 5-10
Architecture and engineering enthusiasts who've reveled in Macaulay's meticulous
renderings in Castle (BCCB 9/77), Cathedral (1/74), and their like will applaud
their guru's return to his widely respected oeuvre. Again, a slender line of fiction
198 
* 
THE BULLETIN
lends narrative cohesion to the fascinating business of monumental construction.
Suha Mehmet Pasa, a devout Muslim in the late sixteenth-century Ottoman Em-
pire, establishes a charitable foundation and commissions a mosque and related
buildings (religious school, bathhouse, soup kitchen, private tomb). As his archi-
tect, a student of the real-life Islamic master Sinan, directs operations, readers pore
over ingenious solutions to such problems as retaining a dome's shape while under
construction, or making the deceptively delicate minaret astonishingly sturdy.
Although extensive knowledge of Western building techniques is certainly not
required, readers with some familiarity will enjoy comparing such details as stained-
glass technique (no lead required), bathhouse heating (strikingly similar to Roman
baths), and labor recruitment (the donor, a retired admiral, can round up some
galley slaves as easily as Castle's Master James could enlist a small army of laborers).
Text and illustrations are strongly focused on the buildings themselves, but Macaulay
slips in just enough background on the fictional Suha Mehmet Pasa to demon-
strate how both the structures and the charitable impetus behind them are inte-
grally related to Islamic faith. EB
MACLELLAN, ERIN 
Run from the Nun! Holiday House, 2003 
16 5p
ISBN 0-8234-1796-4 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Fifth-grader Kara McKinney is on a single-minded mission to get herself tossed
from St. Joan of Arc and rejoin her best friend Molly at her old public school.
Everything seems to backfire: a dash for the door-tackled by the principal; breaking
into the priests' mausoleum-forgiven in confession; chucking her uniform in
favor of glittery makeup and an Aerosmith tee shirt-a couple of hours' detention.
When Kara's put in charge of the school food drive, she recognizes a perfect chance
to sabotage the event and get the boot, but her rash promise to award the winning
class a free day actually meets with grudging approval, and almost against her will
Kara finds herself drawn into the good deed and bonding with some possible new
friends. The theme of friendships imperiled by separation and the bittersweet
inevitability of new friendships in the making are delicately played, but a second
subplot involving the kids' investigation of a suspected grave robbing plot is trans-
parent and silly. MacLellan sets her tale in the here and now, but the sisters who
oversee Kara's progress seem somewhat anachronistic for contemporary parish-
school staff, and there's a strong The Trouble with Angels look about this high-
spirited gal with a heart of gold whose creative ebullience might be the making of
a pretty good nun. Characters may be stock, and the plotting predictable, but the
pacing is quick and readers who like gutsy gals will meet one here with spunk to
spare. EB
MCCAUGHREAN, GERALDINE, ad. 
Gilgamesh the Hero; illus. by David
Parkins. 
Eerdmans, 2003 
95p
ISBN 0-8028-5262-9 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Gilgamesh, a mighty king determined to leave his mark on the world, pushes his
people to their limits, building monuments, starting wars, etc. Enkidu, a wild
man tamed by the charms of a dancer, goes to Gilgamesh determined to put an
end to his extremes. The two fight, but they are equally matched; thus, after
wrestling each other to exhaustion, "they hugged each other with the passion of
new friends who know that they will stick together through thick and thin, come
what may, do or die." In their final shared adventure, Enkidu's life is forfeit for
JANUARY 2004 
* 
199
their killing of the Bull of Heaven, and Gilgamesh is horrified by the realization
that there is something he cannot control with brute strength or religious sacrifice.
Thus begins his ultimately futile effort to defeat death, an effort McCaughrean
details with a controlled passion that makes this ancient Mesopotamian king ac-
cessible to contemporary readers. Unlike Zeman's more formal picture-book ver-
sion of this ancient epic (Gilgamesh the King, BCCB 1/93), this has the vivid language
and dialogue of an effective chapter-by-chapter readaloud. The retelling down-
plays the overt sexuality and bloody extremes of various translations but maintains
the powerful sweep of traditional epic literature in a cohesive narrative with strong
chronological momentum that drives the hero through his own story. Parkins'
images have the impact of block prints: thick black lines add emotional emphasis
to the larger illustrations, while the smaller spot and border art (black and white
and two-color) varies between thematic borders and iconographic stamps. No
specific sources are given, but any reader whose interest is piqued will easily locate
versions of Gilgamesh's story online. JMD
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
The Beast. 
Scholastic, 2003 
170p
ISBN 0-439-36841-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
By taking advantage of a scholarship to a prep school in Connecticut, Spoon hopes
to attract more academic funding that will get him out of Harlem, into an Ivy
League school, and on his way to better life. For reasons he can't articulate to
himself, he avoids going home until Christmas break, whereupon he finds disturb-
ing changes in his neighborhood: "I was hearing talk of tides that drift and carry
people away, of roads that turn into mazes, of paths that disappeared." His best
friend has left school, a girl everyone respected is pregnant, cops pick up another
friend on unspecified charges, and his girlfriend's brother may be starting to run
with a gang. Most heartbreaking of all, his girlfriend, Gabi, has started using.
Spoon can't understand how she could do this, growing up in their neighborhood,
seeing the damage that drugs do. Gabi barely understands it herself, only knowing
that between her blind grandfather's arrival, her mother's cancer, her brother's
troubles, and Spoon's departure, she began to feel as though her life were unreal.
When her mother dies and Gabi disappears into a drug haze, Spoon begins the
slow work of getting her back. "You're not a lie, Gabi. ... You're real and you're
here and I do love you," Spoon tells her. "That's funny, because I don't love me
anymore," she replies. Myers writes an aching, poetic sadness into his character's
voices that humanizes a cast of characters that might easily have become caution-
ary ciphers. There is no bravado here, no easy answers, only the hard work of
doing the right thing in a place where, to paraphrase Spoon, easy doesn't live
anymore. KC
NAGDA, ANN WHITEHEAD 
Meow Means Mischief; illus. by Stephanie
Roth. 
Holiday House, 2003 
92p
ISBN 0-8234-1786-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
With their parents away, Rana and her sister will be under the care of their father's
parents, who've come from India for the occasion. That's not good news to Rana,
who prefers her mother's cuddly parents and who's astonished by her grandmother's
imperious commands; she's also desperately hoping her parents will let her keep
the stray kitten she's taken in, but she's afraid that her grandmother's severe judg-
200 
* THE BULLETIN
ment of his trial stay will ruin her chances. While it's inevitable that Grandma
softens towards her granddaughter and champions the cat (and there's some con-
trivance in the classroom-journals device that allows Rana to speak her mind),
there's also style, sympathy, and perceptiveness here. Grandma's acceptance of the
cat isn't just a literary convenience, it's a response to Tiger's effect on her grand-
daughter, since shy Rana has connected with her classmates over kitty care and
behavior. Rana's discomfort with her grandmother isn't random either; not only
is the lady a bit of a pill at times, Rana's struggling with her biracial identity,
wishing she looked like her mother instead of "her dad and her wrong grandma."
Unfortunately, Roth's illustrations obscure this point, making Rana a dead ringer
for her mother, though otherwise the art has an easygoing rumpledness that adds
to the book's accessibility. This cat story with a little something extra will be
welcomed by novice readers. DS
Nix, GARTH 
Mister Monday. 
Scholastic, 2003 
368p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-439-55123-4 
$5.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Arthur Penhaligon's first day in seventh grade at his new school is an eventful one:
felled by a near-fatal asthma attack during an unexpected cross-country run, Arthur
is visited by Mister Monday, a supernatural being of no small authority. Mister
Monday passes Arthur a Key, believing that the boy is on the verge of death, after
which the Key will return to Monday's control. Arthur, with the help of a frag-
ment of the Will of the Architect, confounds Monday and lives, holding onto the
mysterious Key. The boy is hounded by beings trying to retrieve the Key for
Monday, beings that carry a plague that threatens all Arthur holds dear. His deter-
mination to find a cure for the plague leads the boy out of his own world and into
Monday's, a world in which the Morrow Days (of which Monday is one) battle for
power by subverting the Will of the Architect. A desperate battle against Monday
leads Arthur to a pivotal moment between worlds, a space where order and chaos
teeter in the balance. In this first title in the Keys to the Kingdom series, Nix is
playing with some complex philosophical notions here that, absent the light of
explanation, can make motivations a little cloudy. Despite the occasional lack of
clarity, however, Nix succeeds in setting his likable hero (Arthur has an admirable
talent for rising to the occasion that serves him well in the most precarious circum-
stances) in the midst of unusual events that have an unstoppable forward momen-
tum. Touches of humor lighten moments of dark existential suspense, and lyrical
language and imagery add magic to the fantastical mechanics of Monday's world.
Theology and mythology twine together in a plot that occasionally tangles but
eventually reaches a smoothly braided finish. References to Grim Tuesday point
to a seven-day series fans of Nix and even Pullman will be happy to peruse. JMD
NOLEN, JERDINE 
Thunder Rose; illus. by Kadir Nelson. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-15-216472-3 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-5
Nolen sets this original tall tale in the American West of legend and lore, but her
protagonist isn't Pecos Bill or Davy Crockett but the African-American Thunder
Rose, "first child born free and easy to Jackson and Millicent MacGruder." The
notable heroine comes into the world in the midst of a thunder and lightning
storm: "I am right partial to the name Rose," she announces, after rolling some
lightning into a ball and setting it on her shoulders. In response to her forceful
JANUARY 2004 
* 
201
personality, her parents call her Thunder Rose, and the child lives up to her name:
lifting cows, breaking steers, inventing barbed wire, bringing rain, and taming
tornadoes. The story is crowded with incident, so much so that some of the more
important events lose impact in the crush. Still, Nolen's exaggerated prose sets the
tone, and if the text is overly lengthy, Nelson's oil, watercolor, and pencil illustra-
tions are bold enough to hold viewers. The enormity of Rose's personality and the
enormity of the frontier are reflected in the full-page and full-spread compositions,
most of which are dominated by the intrepid cowgirl, complete with chaps and
cowgirl hat. Nolen's heroine is larger than life, and Nelson gives her her visual
due: Thunder Rose ambles across the pages mounted atop her giant steer, Tater,
right into tall-tale herstory. Bits of pen-and-ink spot art add thematic touches to
pages of text, and the palette (sunny sky blues and dusty range browns) adds to the
western feel. Introduce her along with Isaacs' Swamp Angel (BCCB 11/94) for a
strong-woman duet. JMD
NOVEMBER, SHARYN, ed. 
Firebirds: An Anthology of Original Fantasy and Science
Fiction. Firebird/Penguin, 2003 
420p
ISBN 0-14-250142-5 
$19.99 
R 
Gr. 7-12
The authors of the fifteen short stories created for this collection are an impressive
collection of artists, from Diana Wynne Jones to Michael Cadnum to Patricia
McKillip. The emotional range of the collection is vast: Megan Whalen Turner's
"The Baby in the Night Deposit Box" offers the good-natured humor that results
when the mundane meets the magical, Lloyd Alexander's "Max Mondrosch" has
the heartbreaking pathos of a bittersweet fable, and Garth Nix's "Hope Chest"
reveals the dark side of heroism in a chillingly violent saga. Emma Bull retells an
old ballad to the tune of Charles Vess' illustrations in the graphic-format story
"The Black Fox," and Nancy Farmer allows an older sister who simply does not fit
in to find her own place in the strangely troubling "Remember Me." The collec-
tion rises and falls on varying waves of imagery and complexity: the language
moves from the colloquial (Nancy Springer's "Mariposa") to the mythical (Meredith
Ann Pierce's "The Fall of Ys"), and the settings shift between everyday worlds
infused with magic (Nina Kiriki Hoffman's "Flotsam") to magical realms infused
with practicality (Sherwood Smith's "Beauty"). The fiery cover is a proper indica-
tion of what lies between this book's covers: a collection of flamingly good fantasy
tales. JMD
NYE, NAOMI SHIHAB 
Baby Radar; illus. by Nancy Carpenter. 
Greenwillow,
2003 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15949-4 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15948-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
A toddler enjoys the sights and sounds of an urban stroller ride in this first-person
travelogue. From the moment the front door opens, this child is ready for excite-
ment: "Out! Out!/ Into the wind/ on wheels." The little girl observes the passing
cars and trucks, the different kinds of shoes on the feet of passersby, and the friends
and neighbors Mama meets on the street. Everything is worthy of mention, from
the leaves falling ("Giant trees/ dropping leaves/ in my lap/ Spin them around/
make them fly!/ Throw them out/ yellow on the ground/ My wheels make/ a
crunchy sound") to a stop at the fruit and vegetable stand ("Oranges/ Sweet cookie
wind/ Mama loves/ flowers/ Two bunches/ Stick my hand/ into bucket/ Wet").
202 
* THE BULLETIN
This is not a story so much as a series of impressions, in which Nye neatly commu-
nicates the excitement of a toddler thrilled by a crisp autumn day in a city. The
title refers to all the things that blip across the toddler's radar screen during her
stroller ride with her mother. Unfortunately, the first-person stream-of-conscious-
ness narration seems voiced through an adult filter, which distances the impres-
sions. Carpenter uses watercolor and black pen to depict the toddler's wild ride
through the friendly city streets. The world is seen from the perspective of the
stroller-rider: dogs up close, feet closer than faces, everything within reach tempt-
ingly accessible. The bouncy narrator investigates her world with a moment-to-
moment intensity that rings toddler-true. Although there's no cohesive plot, the
images may trigger responses in other stroller-savvy travelers. JMD
PFEFFER, WENDY 
Dolphin Talk: Whistles, Clicks, and ClappingJaws; illus. by Helen
K. Davie. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
33p 
(Let's-Read-And-Find-Out Science)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028802-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028801-9 
$15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-445210-7 
$4.99 
R Gr. 1-3
Sailors used to think of the ocean as a "silent world," but not so. This straightfor-
ward informational book designed for students in the primary grades explores the
various ways dolphins communicate, using whistles, clicks, clapping jaws, and large
body movements. By comparing the purposes and methods for and through which
humans and dolphins communicate, the book provides a sound context for young
children's understanding not only that dolphins do stay in close touch with one
another, but also why and what they might be saying to each other. There is a
clear explanation of the way echolocation works and some extension of the con-
cepts into other species. Watercolor illustrations further the comparative context
by showing families interacting on the beach while dolphins interact in the water.
Other illustrations are more technical, showing and captioning features that would
normally be invisible, like the skull and air sacs of a swimming dolphin, or a full
cutaway of a dolphin's anatomy; nonetheless, they retain the continuity of style,
cool undersea hues, and sinuous lines of the nontechnical illustrations, thereby
emphasizing a more familiar, less alienating, storybook quality in this early science
text. Two enjoyable easily implementable activities are suggested at the end which
will no doubt change the sounds one hears on the playground. KC
PINKNEY, ANDREA DAVIS 
Fishing Day; illus. by Shane W. Evans. 
Jump at the
Sun/Hyperion, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-0766-0 
$15.99 
R 5-8 yrs
Reenie and her mother have a cozy tradition of fishing for carp from the shores of
what's locally known as Jim Crow River. They're pretty successful, but the white
father and son fishing nearby, the Troops, don't do as well: they don't know the
secret of bringing the carp to the surface with a scattering of corn kernels, and the
boy is so restless he disturbs the fish. Though at first frustrated by the boy's fool-
ishness, Reenie listens to her mother's understanding advice (and the information
that the Troops need these fish to eat) and breaks local tradition by approaching
young Peter Troop; after she provides him with advice and corn kernels, the Troops'
fishing gets results, and the seeds of a friendship between Reenie and Peter have
been planted. Pinkney's writing is quietly understated, avoiding sentimentality
JANUARY 2004 
* 
203
and preachiness, and there's a pleasing flow to the present-tense narration as well
as some touches of authentic humor (young Peter sings "a ditty that I'd bet a
whole dollar makes the carp want to plug their ears"). Strong faces are the high-
light of Evans' illustrations, with backgrounds minimal and the river stylized swirls
of blue; a stillness pervades the scenes, nicely corresponding to the low-key tone of
Pinkney's prose. Use this with Jacqueline Woodson's The Other Side (BCCB 2/01)
for a look at kids meeting despite the boundaries of prejudice, or just bring it out
as a welcome fishing story with a bit of extra depth. DS
PLIMOTH PLANTATION 
Mayflower 1620: A New Look at a Pilgrim Voyage; by
Plimoth Plantation with Peter Arenstam, John Kemp, and Catherine O'Neill Grace;
illus. with photographs by Sisse Brimberg and Cotton Coulson. 
National Geo-
graphic, 2003 
4 8p
ISBN 0-7922-6142-9 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
If the "new look" of the subtitle suggests fresh historical revelations, or at least a
juicy debunking, prepare to be disappointed. Most of the Mayflower myths at
which the authors take aim have been pretty well laid to rest for some time: that
the voyagers were not all religiously motivated; that the voyagers were occasionally
contentious; that the Wampanoags-and all Aboriginal peoples-got a raw deal,
to say the least, when the Europeans settled. With most of the text devoted to
descriptions of the voyage and explanations of the Plimoth reenactors and the
replica Mayflower II, there's little space left to support offhand statements such as,
"Almost 200 years later, this document became famous as the 'Mayflower Com-
pact' when 19th-century historians mistakenly thought they had discovered the
beginnings of democracy in it." Organization is a bit dicey, with ill-defined bound-
aries between main text and substantial sidebars, and information on seventeenth-
century navigation placed after the Mayflower makes landfall. Photographs of
reenactors aboard the Mayflower II on its 2001 photo-op cruise from Plimoth
Plantation to Boston are the real draw, with the clean, well-groomed cast hauling
on the running rigging, precariously perched on lookout atop the spritsail, loading
cargo into the hold, or shoehorned into cramped, gloomy cabin space. A timeline
and index will aid researchers, and the you-are-there immediacy of the illustrations
should lure browsers aboard. EB
REES, CELIA 
Pirates!: The True and Remarkable Adventures ofMinerva Sharpe and
Nancy Kington, Female Pirates. Bloomsbury, 2003 
34 0p
ISBN 1-58234-816-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
The Kington family fortune-based on ships, sugar, and slaves-collapses due to
freakish storms and fiscal mismanagement. When Mr. Kington passes away, his
sons carry out his final wish, to arrange a marriage between their sister Nancy and
Brazilian planter Bartholome, a heartless and avaricious man with a shadowy past,
eager to ally himself with a respectable family. When Nancy realizes just how evil
her intended is, she slips away into hiding with her slave, Minerva. It's not long
before Bartholome is on their trail, and the young women make their last remain-
ing move-to sign articles on a pirate vessel that scours the Caribbean for treasure.
Nancy's tale is awash in romance, but not, for the most part, the huggy-kissy kind.
Here slavery is romanticized, with mistress and slave effortlessly bonding, a slave
mother singing the praises of the good master who taught her to read, and Nancy's
acceptance of Minerva as her stepsister accomplished without hesitation or sur-
204 
* THE BULLETIN
prise. Rees' depiction of piracy owes more to Errol Flynn than Edward Teach,
with the buccaneer captain merciful to the vanquished, courteous to the ladies,
and generous to the crew. Even the ship's surgeon washes his hands when operat-
ing-a stroke of anachronistic enlightenment if ever there was one. There's action
aplenty, though, with storms and sea battles and a devilish suitor hot on the heels
of an innocent (except for the odd murder here and there) heroine. Add popcorn
and a supersized soda, and you've got a rousing Saturday matinee. EB
REISS, MIKE 
The Boy Who Looked Like Lincoln; illus. by David Catrow. 
Price
Stern Sloan, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8431-0271-3 
$11.99 
R 7-10 yrs
Eight-year-old Benjy looks like Abraham Lincoln. A lot. And thanks to other
people, he's never allowed to forget it. He has a lifetime supply of tall black hats
("Every birthday I get the same gift"), he is perennially typecast in school plays ("I
have to be Lincoln. Even if he's not in the show"), and he can't escape the teasing
("Hey stinkin' Lincoln!" "Split any rails lately?"). Then his parents send him to a
special camp: Camp What-Cha-Ma-Call-It. There, among kids who look like
things ranging from a toaster to the Mona Lisa, he learns to accept his difference
and to be proud of his resemblance to Lincoln: "I guess your face is one thing that
makes you special." Not the book to pick up for a history lesson, this is instead a
weird but sincerely funny tale about a kid struggling to find where he fits in. Though
the story is clever, the illustrations are where the unusual premise comes alive;
Catrow's distorted characters and circus-colored palette extend the fable-like at-
mosphere Reiss sets up with his purposely pokerfaced text. The illustrations con-
tain much of the book's sly humor and occasionally deliver an unexpected punch
line: one double-page spread shows Benjy arranged in his chair like the Lincoln
Memorial, and in the fish tank nearby is a replica of the White House. Appealing
both for its oddity and for its message that there is a place for everyone (the kid
who looks like a nose makes friends with the kid who looks like a box of tissues, the
kid who looks like a horse's you-know-what makes friends with a kid who looks
like the other end, and so on), this book will make kids laugh while it makes them
feel better. KH
Ross, VAL 
The Road to There: Mapmakers and Their Stories. Tundra,
2003 
146p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-88776-621-8 
$19.95 
R Gr. 6-10
Readers who find geography dry as a sirocco should cast a glance at this lively
offering on the human-interest stories throughout centuries of mapmaking. Ross
leaps off the block with an unresolved mystery surrounding a probable forgery of a
fifteenth-century Norse map ("A few diehards still insist the thing could be genu-
ine, though, and Yale University is hanging on to it"), and then sprints through a
dozen more entries that demonstrate that maps function not only as orienting
instruments, but weighty political, social, and religious capital as well. Here one
learns of how sixteenth-century Chinese discoveries were suppressed in the name
of isolationism; how Gerard Mercator ended up in prison for map information
that seemed to undercut Church authority; how Lewis and Clark's paper maps
trumped the oral tradition of Aboriginal land claims; how the Great Indian Survey
sent a spy (code name: Number 1) to gather data inside the closed borders of
Tibet. Ross brushes in historical background with swift, broad, and occasionally
JANUARY 2004 
* 205
untidy strokes, zooming in on the juicier details of the narrow episode at hand.
The tone is informal, even gossipy; Ross obviously delights in the squabbles of the
dysfunctional Gross/Pearsall mavens of A to Z map series company and in the
British embarrassment over the success of the undercover agent they sent into the
field and then abandoned. Color illustrations and lots of distressingly undersized
maps are included; an index and chapter-by-chapter suggestions for further read-
ing will serve researchers. It might take a bit of booktalking to get this one launched,
but history and science buffs will appreciate the effort. EB
ROTTMAN, S. L. 
Shadow ofa Doubt. Peachtree, 2003 
172p
ISBN 1-56145-291-2 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Shadow's brother, Daniel, ran away from home seven years previously, and since
then Shadow's parents have watched their remaining son with laser-like intensity,
circumscribing his every move with their apprehensive attention. Now that he has
started high school, however, he is finally managing to carve out a life apart from
their glaring view-until Daniel calls. Suddenly Shadow's parents redirect all of
their anxious attention on their prodigal son, but neither that nor the fact that the
call came from prison, where Daniel is being held until his arraignment for mur-
der, does anything to lessen Shadow's resentment toward the brother who left
him. Daniel is unrepentant for the most part, and their mother's insistence that
Shadow put his life on hold as they welcome this violent, disaffected stranger back
into their family further fuels his anger. Rottman doesn't cheat on character mo-
tivation; there is no specific trauma that caused Daniel to go awry, but there is
enough emotional blundering and ham-fistedness on the part of both mother and
father to make both boys believable in their portrayals. The father begins to wise
up first; by the end of the story Dad, Daniel, and Shadow have experienced some
measure of healing and forgiveness. Least satisfying is the character of the mother,
who seems to believe, right through to the end, that families are held together by
bullying and bowling. Overall, though, the book offers a convincing portrayal of
a boy coming of age through traumas not of his own making, and it underscores
the power of a family to forgive. KC
RUBIN, SUSAN GOLDMAN 
Searching for Anne Frank: Letters from Amsterdam to
Iowa. 
Abrams, 2003 
14 4 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8109-4514-2 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Searching for another way to tell the story of Anne Frank, Rubin has based an
extensive account of Anne's life during the war years on a letter Anne sent in 1940
to a ten-year-old American pen pal, Juanita Wagner, whose teacher encouraged
the exchange. At first the chapters alternate between Iowa and Amsterdam, later
intensifying focus on the European drama as the Franks go into hiding, then are
arrested and deported. Meanwhile, "Juanita and Betty kept waiting for answers to
their letters. They waited and waited. But they heard nothing from Anne and
Margot and wondered why." Such references acquire poignancy for readers dis-
covering exactly why-as Anne goes first to Westerbork, next Auschwitz, and last
Bergen-Belsen. However tenuous the connection between the girls, it serves as a
base for a clearheaded historical account of the home front as it touched ordinary
Midwesterners, and the Nazi persecution of West European Jews. Extensive quotes
from Otto Frank and Anne Frank's diary, combined with quoted interview ex-
cerpts from Betty Wagner and others, document the lives of girls a world apart.
206 
* THE BULLETIN
There is a very occasional speculative note, but overall the text is deeply researched
and capably written, with generously distributed photographs even more revealing
of people, places, and situations. An epilogue relates what happened to a large cast
of characters, including Anne's pen pals, family, friends, helpers, suspected be-
trayer, and arresting officer. One of the strongest effects of the book is the contrast
of arbitrary life-and-death circumstances-a contrast played out in time between
young people cut off at the height of their hopes for a future, and their contempo-
raries experiencing the reality of lives played out into old age. An extensive list of
resources is organized into books, stage-play scripts, articles, unpublished manu-
scripts, videos and CD-ROMS, web sites, interviews, and illustration credits. BH
SANCHEZ, ALEX 
Rainbow High. 
Simon, 2003 
26 0p
ISBN 0-689-85477-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
The three young men from Rainbow Boys (BCCB 11/01) have returned to finish
out their senior year, plan their futures, and further explore the challenges-and
relationships-that arose in the previous book. Now out to his family and en-
gaged in a relationship with Kyle, super-jock Jason comes out to his coach and his
team, with surprising results (most take it pretty well, but there's a blitz of local
publicity that endangers Jason's college scholarship). Kyle can't conceive of a fu-
ture without Jason, so he's thinking about tailoring his college plans to his
boyfriend's, despite his acceptance into Princeton. Nelson's completely smitten
with his new boyfriend, but he's uncertain about a relationship with somebody
who's HIV positive. This isn't exactly a polished piece: there's a tendency towards
awkward and cliched phrasing ("His eyes were like wells, deep and wounded"),
and campy Nelson's the only one of the three with a discernible character. This is
really a book about intensity of experience, however, and even more than the first
book, its emotional fervor recalls opera or Victorian novels of sentiment; the boys
are always either overcome with adoration, weeping with emotion, or tortured by
doubt, and the hackneyed phrases end up underscoring the naive ardency of the
boys' attachments, much to the likely satisfaction of readers. Underneath the acute
romanticism are some real questions about responsibility to other people, the im-
plications of coming out, and the uncertainty that is essentially the lot of humanity
("Every day I ask myself, What's going to happen next? And I just hope I don't
screw it all up"). End matter provides extensive overviews of eight gay/lesbian-
related organizations. DS
SAUERWEIN, LEIGH 
Songfor Eloise. 
Front Street, 2003 
[13 6 p]
ISBN 1-886910-90-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 9-12
At fifteen, Eloise is given in marriage by her father, Lord Baudoin, to his favorite
retainer, Baron Robert of Rochefort, a rough-mannered warrior twice her age.
Although Robert tries in his way to be kind, the girl suffers from isolation in his
mountain fortress and her depression deepens after she gives birth to their son
without her mother beside her. Robert hires the "trobar" Thomas, a wandering
singer, to perform for several days and lighten his young wife's spirits. Thomas
and Eloise recognize each other from their childhood, when the boy worked with
his father on Baudoin's estate, and Eloise is seduced into a brief but fiery affair,
prompted less by love for Thomas than by homesickness and the power of his
songs of romantic, adulterous love. Eloise's own saga, and the lives altered through
her actions, parallel the courtly ballads with which Thomas woos his forbidden
JANUARY 2004 
* 207
lady. Patiently and skillfully Sauerwein traces the intertwining family histories of
Robert and his mother, Thomas, and Eloise, and sets them against a contrasting
backdrop of the peasants' year-which can be regarded either as a cycle of com-
forting predictability or numbing monotony. Surely teen readers will sympathize
with the maiden protagonist, but it is cuckolded Robert who emerges as the truly
tragic figure, completely smitten with and devoted to his childlike wife but unable
to muster the words and polished manners to win her heart. Readers who've
outgrown middle-grade novels with medieval runaway brides and happy, roman-
tic endings can now revisit the forced-marriage plot all grown up. EB
STAUFFACHER, SUE 
Donuthead. Knopf, 2003 
14 5p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92468-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82468-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Franklin Delano Donuthead avoids motor vehicles, bodies of water, and anything
else "that would cause a death-inducing accident." He lives by the motto: "Do not
escalate tensions!" His best friend is Gloria Nelots, the chief statistician for the
National Safety Department, with whom he talks on the phone once a week, go-
ing over things like the probability of his being killed by various accidents that
might occur on school field trips. What's a "sensitive, asymmetrical guy" to do,
then, when his mother eats food laced with hydrogenated oils and nitrates, scoffs
at his fears of household disasters, and dates men who won't even take a simple
medical questionnaire to determine the risk factors they might bring to his home?
Since his father was an anonymous sperm donor, he doesn't even know what
timebombs are ticking away in his own genes. When his mother befriends Sarah
Kervick, the filthy, unkempt, and ill-bred bully who has recently started to attend
Franklin's school, he is undone. Sarah wants to be "regular," and that's all Franklin's
mother wants for him as well, so they begin a campaign to get Franklin involved in
the (extremely hazardous) game of baseball while helping Sarah realize some of her
small and large dreams (curing her warts, keeping her hair clean and combed,
becoming a figure skater, etc.). Franklin's mother and Sarah have an unknown
ally in Gloria Nelots, who convinces Franklin that friendships are key to longevity
and personal safety. The characters are the stars in this funny look at risks worth
taking; Franklin's precise language and worst-case-scenario worldview, set against
Sarah's insistent pragmatism and his mother's and Gloria's growing exasperation,
provide plenty of guffaws and snorts that are balanced with a warm message of love
and the importance of community. This will be a popular readaloud that students
will want to take home and read for themselves. KC
SWAIN, RUTH FREEMAN 
How Sweet It Is (and Was): The History of Candy; illus.
by John O'Brien. 
Holiday House, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1712-3 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
While the best thing to do with candy is to put it into one's mouth, it can also be
interesting to read about it, and Swain has put together a tasty account of the
history of sweets. She notes the conventions of production and consumption,
discussing the evolution of sugar candy, chocolate treats, chewing gum, and other
treats, finishing up with a brief overview of candy's physiological effects, common
ingredients, and marketplace statistics. This is a bit light on literary nutrition (and
a few of the informational tidbits are incorrect or oversimplified), but there's still
plenty of delectable material here. The global approach is particularly worthwhile,
208 
* THE BULLETIN
emphasizing the contribution of various hemispheres to the products we now gobble
down with such glee, and the history will prove eye-opening to young readers who
assumed their favorites have always been available. O'Brien's intensely hatched
line-and-watercolor illustrations provide entertainingly whimsical visions of some
questionable uses for candy (knights joust with candy sticks and hurl huge sugar
cubes over an opponent's battlements, sleigh-riders harness a horse up with a taffy
harness) as well as quirky visions of its manufacture and devouring. This isn't
exactly meaty, but it's a flavorful mouthful with a nice airy crunch. A bibliography
for additional reading, a somewhat eccentric timeline, and three sweet recipes are
appended. DS
THOMAS, JOYCE CAROL, ed. 
Linda Brown, You Are Not Alone: The Brown v.
Board ofEducation Decision; illus. by Curtis James. 
Jump at the Sun/Hyperion,
2003 
114p
ISBN 0-7868-0821-7 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Eleven authors with personal memories of school desegregation contribute stories
and/or views relating to race relations in the 1950s and the present. Most con-
tributors are prominent authors, but presentation styles vary wildly. Lois Lowry
offers a tightly told account of Anthony, a summer houseguest whose thirst for
literacy remained unfulfilled even after fourth grade. Joyce Carol Thomas con-
tributes a moving poetic memoir that addresses 1950s racism but doesn't directly
reference integration issues. Michael Cart recalls a visit to Monroe Elementary
School in Topeka and sees social progress in the arrival of "a golden age of African
American literature"; although he can name "African American picture books,
poetry collections, and young adult novels by the dozens," he seems oblivious to
the irony that children's literature is churned out annually in the thousands. Readers
need to come prepared with a general understanding of Brown v. Board. Thomas's
introductory materials creditably explain that Reverend Oliver L. Brown's lawsuit
was not concerned with the quality of education or facilities in his daughter's par-
ticular all-black school, but with children's right to equal access to nearby schools,
regardless of color. However, except for a succinct recap of Plessy v. Ferguson in
Ishmael Reed's essay "Color Blind," that's where the background stops; what re-
mains is a few telling anecdotes and plenty of rambling introspection, and a single
(and stilted) photorealistic painting per entry. There's enough genuine passion,
however, surging through these collective memories to set readers pondering an
issue that can keep guilt and anger still burning red hot in their elders for half a
century. EB
THOMPSON, JULIAN F. 
Hard Time. 
Atheneum, 2003 
24 3p
ISBN 0-689-85424-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 8-10
Annie Ireland is having a hard time with life. Her self-involved parents offer only
casual criticism when Annie attempts to please them, she has to lug around a baby
doll for Life Skills class, and, in the opening chapters, her house burns down and
her parents check into a fat farm, sending her to live with gag-worthy relatives.
This, however, is only the beginning of a long, strange, and convoluted story that
splices together social satire, flip fantasy, and coming-of-age drama. Annie's doll
turns out to house a wry and professorial leprechaun imprisoned as a practical joke
by a magical colleague. He (subliminally) helps Annie write a school assignment
that lands her and her best friend Arby (a.k.a Roach Boy, so named for his job at
JANUARY 2004 
* 
209
the Fright Factory) in prison, after which they are sent to the Back to the Basics
Center, an outdoors school for problem kids. Life is even harder there, as the kids
in Borborygmi camp believe, a la The Grounding of Group Six, that their counse-
lors mean to kill them. More hijinks occur, but the results-Annie gains self-
esteem, thin parents, and a boyfriend-are as slickly packaged as everything else.
Thompson's novel is cool and media savvy, and its layers of unusual characters and
events creates a weird reality where honesty occasionally shines and humor is in
large supply. However, this reality loses credibility with each new element (the
most believable of which is the talking doll), and the book is overrun with charac-
ters who tend to speak in sound bites instead of real dialogue. Like a commercial
for a product that looks better on TV than it is in real life, this novel doesn't live up
to its promise. Still, the confrontation between smart, misunderstood teens and
menacing, selfish, or just plain clueless adults has a well-carved niche, and this is a
decent fit. Offer this one to fans of Thompson's work or those attracted to strange
brew. KH
THOMSON, PAT 
Drat That Fat Cat!; illus. by Ailie Busby. 
Levine/Scholastic,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-439-47195-8 
$15.95 
R 
4 -7 yrs
Thomson retells the traditional tale of the ever-hungry fat cat in emphatic but
simple language that lends itself to dramatic reading aloud: "Once there was a cat,
a fat, fat cat. But was that cat fat enough? No, he was not! So he padded along the
path in search of food." Unhappily for those also traveling the path, the fat cat has
an indefatigable appetite, and he swallows a rat ("Squeak!"), a duck ("Quack!"), a
dog ("Woof."), and a little old lady ("Drat that fat cat!"). Then the unthinking
glutton swallows a bee, forgetting that bees sting, and this bee, unhappy in the
crowded tummy of the fat cat, stings away. "Meeow, ow, ow!" yells the fat cat,
and, one after another, all his snacks are hiccuped ("Hic!") out of his tummy. The
little old lady pities the formerly fat feline and takes him home to fatten him up,
but when the story ends, the question remains: "So was that cat now fat enough?
No, he was not!" Like Margaret McDonald's Fat Cat (BCCB 11/01), this is a
worthy successor to Jack Kent's sadly out of print The Fat Cat (9/71). Busby's
cartoony illustrations have a rough-and-tumble energy that blends well with the
emphatic text. The huge orange-striped tabby dominates the spreads with his
sizable girth and his sizable grin. The simplicity of the oversized compositions and
the broad humor of the (live) snacks grousing in the cat's belly makes this a story-
time winner. JMD
TRUMBLE, KELLY 
The Library of Alexandria; illus. by Robina MacIntyre
Marshall. 
Clarion, 2003 
72p
ISBN 0-395-75832-7 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
After an able introduction to the founding of the famous library at Alexandria,
Trumble surveys important research carried out in its illustrious archives and traces
the impact that research had on subsequent scholarship. Here readers learn of the
seminal works ofAristarchus in astronomy (geocentrism), Eratosthenes in geogra-
phy (calculating the Earth's circumference), Euclid in mathematics (standard trea-
tise in geometry), Herophilus in medicine (human dissection and advances in
anatomical knowledge). She then returns to the library itself, the political maneu-
vering and subsequent wars that led to its destruction, and the final demise of
210 
* THE BULLETIN
ancillary collections. The author fights a valiant uphill battle to keep a mounting
list of Ptolemies (royal and scholarly) straight and dates sorted out within an orga-
nizational framework that almost assures confusion. End materials include two
maps of questionable necessity (ancient empires) and one much needed but in-
completely labeled map of ancient Alexandria. Names, terms, and places are de-
fined in two appendices, and a bibliography and index should help steer report
writers straight. Marshall contributes a gallery of full-page watercolor and gouache
scenes in lurid hues and action figure poses. Lack of information doesn't get in the
way of a dramatic tableau; togaed lab assistants haul a corpse down a shadowy
hallway, opposite Trumble's more balanced observation, "Herophilus did indeed
dissect human bodies. We don't know how he got them." This may not be a
flawless presentation, but antiquity hounds will find a bundle of information, ac-
cessibly packaged. EB
TRYSZYNSKA-FREDERICK, LUBA 
Luba: The AngelofBergen-Belsen; as told to Michelle
R. McCann; illus. by Ann Marshall. 
Tricycle, 2003 
48p
ISBN 1-58246-098-1 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
See this month's Big Picture, p. 177, for review.
VANDE VELDE, VIIAN Witch's Wishes. Holiday House, 2003 [91p] illus.
ISBN 0-8234-1789-1 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
When a forgetful witch shopping for Halloween cider fixings inadvertently lands
in a dumpster, she is discovered by two trick-or-treaters, fairy-princess Sarah and
her vampire older brother, Justin. Justin is rude, but Sarah offers the bedraggled
witch a Band-Aid. The witch is touched, and (against the advice of her broom)
she enchants the girl's costume wand so that all her wishes will come true for one
night. The result is dogs for everyone and Christmas every day, an eventuality that
comes to the witch's attention due to the sudden plethora of Christmas lights in
October. The witch reverses everything, but not quite the way she thinks, and
further intervention, wish by wish, is eventually required to set things right. This
is one of those handy titles that has broad appeal and broad application. The tenor
of Sarah's wishes is just right for a good-natured kindergartner, and the dialogue
among family members has the comfortable familiarity of the everyday. Each
chapter opens with a friendly, thematically appropriate silhouette or bit of line art.
Vande Velde is careful to insert just enough adult humor to make this palatable for
grownup readers-aloud while never going above the heads of youngsters reading
alone. Both groups will appreciate this light chapter-by-chapter look at wishes
done and undone. JMD
VOIGT, CYNTHIA 
The Rosie Stories; illus. by Cat Bowman Smith. 
Holiday House,
2003 
48p
ISBN 0-8234-1625-9 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 2-3
Point of view is everything in these three easy-to-read stories starring an expressive
family dog whose life revolves around food. Officially, Rosie only gets fed at break-
fast, and it's a long wait before and after. Meanwhile, Mommy and Daddy and
Jessie and Duff do irrelevant human things like school, work, and exercise (with a
Jane Fonda tape), all of which Rosie exploits in service of eating or playing, with
JANUARY 2004 
* 
211
special attention to accessing the garbage can. Voigt has cleverly manipulated
Rosie's fixation to create maximum natural word repetition for easing vocabulary
barriers. Despite the occasional coy note, these tales offer up amiable, funny, and
comfortable antics for practicing transitional readers: "Rosie barked, 'I'm hungry!
It's time! I'm Rosie!' 'All right,' Mommy said. 'All right. Don't nag.' 'Eat!' Rosie
barked. 'Nag!'" Smith's paintings ground the lightweight text with strong colors
that are cheerfully mottled and engage the viewer with close-up perspectives. Her
figures are adeptly drafted in posture and movement, especially the irrepressible
canine protagonist-modeled, according to back-cover text, on a mischievous Jack
Russell terrier. This is a tonally apt chaser for Alice Provensen's younger picture
book, A Day in the Life ofMurphy (BCCB 6/03). BH
WADSWORTH, GINGER 
Words West: Voices of Young Pioneers. Clarion,
2003 
[185p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-23475-6 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Between the years of 1840 and 1870, more than 40,000 young people joined their
families on the journey westward in search of land, gold, and opportunity. This
collection combines excerpts from hundreds of young peoples' journals and remi-
niscences of life on the westward trail. Each chapter includes multiple recollec-
tions tied together topically ("Preparations and Leaving Home," "Chores and
Chow") by the narrative thread and offers a uniquely youthful perspective on this
period of American history. Wadsworth's own writing is straightforward and func-
tional, which allows the children's voices to dominate. The rapidity with which
she jumps from account to account occasionally yields a lack of cohesion, and
sometimes the overlying theme is lost in keeping track of who said what when.
The real poetry lies in the primary material, where young children recall leaving
the familiar, the struggles of the journey, and the ache of survival along the way.
Thirteen-year old Kit Scott remembers the preparations for the journey, recalling
"the tears that fell upon these garments, fashioned with trembling fingers . .
the
heartaches that were stitched and knitted and woven into them." Marion Russell
eloquently observes the various Indian tribes "who watched with bitter eyes that
vast migration." Illustrated with archival photographs and prints, this is an excel-
lent choice for pairing with Freedman's Children ofthe Wild West (BCCB 4/84) in
a topical unit or for that child who wants the experience of walking in the shoes of
a historical peer. The sources for all quotations are provided in an epilogue that
indicates what is known about each individual's fate upon reaching the west, and
an extensive reading list of adult and juvenile titles is included. HM
WALLACE, BARBARA BROOKS 
The Perils ofPeppermints. Atheneum, 2003 
264p
ISBN 0-689-85043-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Emily Luccock, eleven years old and already familiar with misfortune, is about to
encounter it yet again. Her aunt and uncle Twice are off to India, leaving an
unwilling Emily at Mrs. Spilking's Select Academy for Young Ladies. Mrs. Spilking's
comes highly recommended by Uncle Twice's new lawyer friend, Mr. Slyde, but it
isn't long before Emily discovers that the school's elegant faqade hides a dreadful
truth: the school is a dumping ground for girls unwanted by their families for one
reason or another. A determined Emily unravels the larcenous intent of Mrs.
Spilking and her cronies, revealing a twisted skein of deceit, lies, and theft that
212 
* 
THE BULLETIN
pulls in villains and friends from Emily's first adventure, Peppermints in the Parlor
(BCCB 3/81). Wallace's style has echoes of early Joan Aiken; the trappings and
setting evoke genteel gothic romance for younger readers. A good-hearted down-
stairs maid, a not-so-vicious dog, and the kindness of the common man are only a
few of the elements sprinkled throughout this low-key Victorian adventure. Un-
fortunately, the action takes second place to the trappings, and the momentum
tends to lag, especially in the rather repetitive middle. Typecasting makes charac-
terizations predictable, and the plot is overly convenient. Nevertheless, Wallace's
tale has a nostalgic tone that may well appeal to those who fondly recall Pepper-
mints in the Parlor and who are now in a position to introduce this nonthreatening
historical romance to a new generation. JMD
WILLIAMS-GARCIA, RITA 
No Laughter Here. Amistad/HarperCollins,
2004 
[14 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16248-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16247-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-12
Fifth-grader Akilah is desperately waiting for her friend Victoria to return from
her trip to the family's home in Nigeria, but when Victoria does come back, she's
changed: the former academic whiz is silent in class, and she's distant from Akilah,
refusing, above all, to laugh. Eventually a worried Akilah finds out from her sub-
dued friend that the coming-of-age ceremony Victoria had undergone was in fact
a ritual circumcision, and though Victoria swears Akilah to secrecy, eventually
Akilah's mother, a child-welfare worker, discovers the truth. The characters some-
times respond more as political symbols than as credibly complex people, and the
attempts at cultural context aren't all that effective: the book never really gives
Akilah much perspective on her own culture (male circumcision is justified as
involving "extra skin"), nor does Akilah's Afrophile mother ever acknowledge this
complication to her idealism. Akilah herself is a distinctive presence, however, and
her perplexity and rage, in combination with her own anticipation of transition
into womanhood, gives readers an emotional entry point for the exploration of
this issue; there's also realism in her mother's immediate and somewhat counter-
productive response to the news and to the equivocality of the ending. Despite the
drawbacks, this is an dramatic exploration of a contemporary issue of substance,
and it will open the eyes of many young readers. An author's note gives some
background on the issue of female genital mutilation. DS
ZIEFERT, HARRIET 
Home for Navidad; illus. by Santiago Cohen. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-34976-6 
$15.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Ten-year-old Rosa has not seen her mother since she was seven, as Mama has been
working in New York. Navidad is a time for miracles, however, and she is hopeful
that her mother will be able to return to the family in Mexico. When Rosa gets a
letter from her mother, promising a Christmas return, Abuela cautions her not to
get her hopes up; Tfo Pancho, however, says that the corn crop is good and that he
will work extra so that Rosa's mother can come home-not just to visit, but to
stay. Ziefert adapts the story from a conglomeration of many true stories of sepa-
rated families told to the illustrator Santiago Cohen. Perhaps this is why there are
a lot of unanswered questions in the narrative, and plot details are left rather vague.
JANUARY 2004 
* 213
For instance, while Tio Pancho goes to America to earn money for a specific pur-
pose and returns when he is done, readers are not given a similar sense of why
Mama is there, nor do they learn what goal has been reached (other than that she
has earned enough for a plane ticket) that will enable her to return to her family.
The art is the real star here: Cohen establishes an upbeat tone by splashing bright
washes around his nalve figures, adding in a bit ofcollaged texture here and there
and picking out select objects and figures with bold black outlines; the combina-
tion of color and line recalls Raoul Dufy, but the sunny, intense palette is south-
of-the-border spicy. Though the happy ending featuring the return of Mama is
rather abrupt, the sunny ethos established by both text and picture is one of child-
like faith rewarded. A glossary of Spanish terms is provided. KC
'
214 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 2003 
_
The process for selecting the list remains the same every year-a group of conten-
tious and opinionated professionals read the books, endlessly discuss the books,
winnow down the list, and occasionally eat cake-yet each time it has its own
individual characteristics and result. It's always interesting, for instance, to ponder
the patterns or trends suggested by the final array. This year it's nice to see a
generous helping of books for younger children as well as older; more surprisingly,
the 2003 Blue Ribbons list contains a notably high proportion of upbeat and hopeful
books. Is that representative of an overall trend? I don't know, but I can assure
you that it's not because we've mellowed any.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
PICTURE BOOKS:
Dunrea, Olivier. Ollie; written and illus. by Olivier Dunrea. Houghton. 2-4 yrs
(November)
Farish, Terry. The Cat Who Liked Potato Soup; illus. by Barry Root. Candlewick.
5-8 yrs (June).
Frame, Jeron Ashford. Yesterday I Had the Blues; illus. by R. Gregory Christie.
Tricycle. 5-8 yrs (December)
Johnston, Tony. Go Track a Yak!; illus. by Tim Raglin. Simon. 5-8 yrs (Septem-
ber)
Jones, Ursula. The Witch's Children; illus. by Russell Ayto. Holt. 5-8 yrs (May)
Lee, Ho Baek. While We Were Out; written and illus. by Ho Baek Lee. Kane/
Miller. 3-6 yrs (March)
Martin, Jacqueline Briggs. The Water Gift and the Pig ofthe Pig; illus. by Linda S.
Wingerter. Houghton. 6-9 yrs (May)
Pattison, Darcy. The Journey of Oliver K Woodman; illus. by Joe Cepeda. Har-
court. 5-9 yrs (June)
Perkins, Lynne Rae. Snow Music; written and illus. by Lynne Rae Perkins.
HarperCollins. 5-8 yrs (December)
Provensen, Alice. A Day in the Life ofMurphy; written and illus. by Alice Provensen.
Simon. 4-6 yrs (June)
Timberlake, Amy. The Dirty Cowboy; illus. by Adam Rex. Farrar. Gr. 3-5 (Sep-
tember)
U'Ren, Andrea. Mary Smith; written and illus. by Andrea U'Ren. Farrar. 4-7 yrs
(September)
Willems, Mo. Don'tLet the Pigeon Drive the Bus!; written and illus. by Mo Willems.
Hyperion. 5-8 yrs (May)
JANUARY 2004 
* 
215
FICTION:
Davis, Rebecca Fjelland. Jake Riley: Irreparably Damaged. HarperTempest. Gr. 9-
12 (July/August)
Fenner, Carol. Snowed In with Grandmother Silk; illus. by Amanda Harvey. Dial.
Gr. 2-4 (November)
Flake, Sharon G. Beggingfor Change. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion. Gr. 7-10 (July/
August)
French, Jackie. Hitler's Daughter. HarperCollins. Gr. 6-10 (July/August)
Going, K. L. Fat Kid Rules the World. Putnam. Gr. 9-12 (June)
Hidier, Tanuja Desai. Born Confused. Scholastic. Gr. 9-12 (February)
Jenkins, A. M. Out of Order. HarperCollins. Gr. 7-12 (October)
Kimmel, Haven. Orville: A Dog Story; illus. by Robert Andrew Parker. Clarion.
Gr. 3-7 (November)
Koja, Kathe. Buddha Boy. Foster/Farrar. Gr. 6-10 (June)
Levithan, David. Boy Meets Boy. Knopf. Gr. 7-12 (September)
Pratchett, Terry. The Wee Free Men. HarperCollins. Gr. 6-10 (July/August)
Wong, Janet. Minn andJake; illus. by Genevieve C6td. Foster/Farrar. Gr. 4-6
(October)
NONFICTION:
Anderson, M. T. Strange Mr. Satie; illus. by Petra Mathers. Viking. Gr. 3-5
(September)
Capuzzo, Michael. Close to Shore: The Terrifying Shark Attacks of 1916. Crown.
Gr. 6-10 (June)
Florian, Douglas. Bow Wow Meow Meow: It's Rhyming Cats and Dogs; written
and illus. by Douglas Florian. Harcourt. Gr. 2-4 (April)
Gerstein, Mordicai. The Man Who Walked between the Towers; written and illus.
by Mordicai Gerstein. Roaring Brook. 5-9 yrs (December)
Greenberg, Jan. Runaway Girl: TheArtist Louise Bourgeois; by Jan Greenberg and
SandraJordan. Abrams. Gr. 7-12 (June)
Hampton, Wilborn. September 11, 2001: Attack on New York City. Candlewick.
Gr. 5-9 (January 2004)
Murphy, Jim. An American Plague: The True and Terrifying Story of the Yellow
Fever Epidemic of 1793. Clarion. Gr. 5-10 (June)
Myers, Walter Dean. Blues Journey; illus. by Christopher Myers. Holiday House.
Gr. 3-7 (June)
Rylant, Cynthia. God Went to Beauty School. HarperTempest. Gr. 7-12 (July/
August)
Sayre, April Pulley. One Is a Snail, Ten Is a Crab: A Counting by Feet Book; by
April Pulley Sayre and Jeff Sayre; illus. by Randy Cecil. Candlewick. 3-6 yrs
(July/August)
Sidman, Joyce. The World according to Dog: Poems and Teen Voices; illus. with
photographs by Doug Mindell. Houghton. Gr. 6-12 (March)
10ýý
216 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Darrow; Hoffman,
N.
Activism-fiction: D'Adamo
ADVENTURE: Long;
McCaughrean; Rees; Thompson;
Wallace
African Americans-fiction: Myers;
Williams-Garcia
African Americans-stories: Nolen;
Pinkney
Animals-fiction: Broome; Creedon
Animals-stories: Bruchac
ANTHOLOGIES: Howe; Novem-
ber; Thomas
Architecture: Macaulay
Asian Americans-fiction: Kadohata
Aunts-fiction: Creedon
BIOGRAPHIES: Hopkinson;
Krull; Rubin
Blacks-fiction: Hoffman, M.
Brothers-fiction: Rottman
Business: Bell; Frisch
Catholics-fiction: MacLellan
Cats-fiction: Nagda
Cats-stories: Thomson
Christmas-fiction: Freeman; Ziefert
Civil rights: Gottfried
Colonial life: Plimoth
Colonial life-fiction: Hurst
Commerce: Bell; Frisch
Cowboys-stories: Charlip
Cows-stories: Charlip
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Coburn; Freeman; Hurst;
Johnston; Thompson; Wallace
Current events: Chin; D'Adamo;
Gottfried; Hampton
Death and dying-fiction: Kadohata
Dinosaurs-stories: Lund
Dogs-fiction: Voigt
Donkeys-fiction: Broome
Drug abuse-fiction: Myers
Egypt-fiction: Johnston
EPICS: McCaughrean
Ethics and values: Chin; Coburn;
D'Adamo; Davis; Gottfried;
Sanchez; Tryszynska-Frederick;
Williams-Garcia
Explorers and exploring-fiction:
Ambrose
Families-fiction: Crist-Evans
FANTASY: Collins; Creedon;
Hoffman, N.; Nix
Fathers-fiction: Collins; Hurst
Fear-fiction: Stauffacher
Fishing-stories: Pinkney
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Bruchac; Child; Davis; Duvall;
McCaughrean; Nolen; Thomson
Food and eating: Swain
Friends: Rubin
Friends-fiction: Thompson;
Williams-Garcia
Gangs-fiction: Coburn
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Sanchez
Geography: Ross
Government: Gottfried
Grandfathers-fiction: Agell
Grandparents-fiction: Nagda
GRAPHIC NOVELS: Chin
Growing up-fiction: Howe
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Ambrose; Crist-Evans; Durbin;
Hurst; Wallace
History, classical: Trumble
History, European: Berger
JANUARY 2004 
* 217
History, medieval: Berger
History, U.S.: Hampton; Hoobler;
Hopkinson; Plimoth; Wadsworth
History, world: Macaulay; Ross
Holidays-fiction: Cox
Holocaust: Rubin
Holocaust-fiction: Tryszynska-
Frederick
Houses-fiction: Hoffman, N.
HUMOR: Agell; Birdseye; Brewer;
Charlip; Child; Cook; MacLellan;
Nolen; Reiss; Stauffacher;
Thomson
Identity-fiction: Nagda
Identity-stories: Reiss
Illness-fiction: Nix
Immigrants: Hoobler; Hopkinson
India-stories: Krishnaswami
Insects-fiction: Collins
Jews-fiction: Tryszynska-Frederick
Latinos-stories: Ziefert
Libraries: Trumble
Magic-fiction: Hoffman, N.
Maps: Ross
Marine biology: Pfeffer
Marketing: Bell; Frisch
Medieval life-fiction: Sauerwein
Mothers-fiction: Ingold
Mothers-stories: Ziefert
Moving-fiction: Agell
Mummies-fiction: Johnston
Music and musicians: Krull
Music and musicians-fiction: Ingold
MYSTERIES: Freeman
Nature study: Pfeffer
Pirates-fiction: Rees
Pirates-stories: Long
Poverty-fiction: Darrow; Myers
Prejudice-stories: Pinkney
Prisons and prisoners-fiction:
Rottman; Thompson
Prodigies-fiction: Ingold
Rabbits-stories: Duvall
Racism: Thomas
Rain-stories: Krishnaswami
Reading aloud: Hoffman, M.;
McCaughrean; Nolen;
Stauffacher; Swain; Tryszynska-
Frederick; Vande Velde
Reading, beginning: Bauer
Reading, easy: Broome; Charlip;
Hoffman, M.; Johnston;
MacLellan; Nagda; Vande Velde;
Voigt
Reading, reluctant: Bell; Berger;
Brewer; Frisch; Swain
Religious instruction: Davis;
Macaulay
RHYMING STORIES: Lund
RIDDLES: Brewer
Romance-fiction: Sanchez;
Sauerwein
School-fiction: Birdseye;
MacLellan; Wallace
Science: Pfeffer
Ships and sailing-fiction: Rees
SHORT STORIES: Howe;
November
Sisters-fiction: Kadohata
Snow-stories: Cook
Snow: Bauer
Social studies: Chin
Sounds: Pfeffer
South, the-fiction: Darrow
Storytelling: Bruchac
Storytime: Bruchac; Child; Cook;
Cox; Long; Lund; Nye; Thomson
TALL TALES: Nolen
TODDLER BOOKS: Nye
Tricksters-stories: Duvall
Uncles-fiction: Darrow
Urban life-fiction: Myers
Vietnam war-fiction: Crist-Evans
Vikings: Berger
Violence-fiction: Darrow
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Ambrose; Rees
Voyages and travel-stories: Lund;
Nye
Weather: Bauer
Weather-stories: Krishnaswami
West, the: Wadsworth
Wishes-fiction: Vande Velde
Witches-fiction: Vande Velde
Wolves-fiction: Creedon
Women's studies: Williams-Garcia
Work-fiction: D'Adamo; Durbin
World War II: Rubin
World War II-fiction: Tryszynska-
Frederick
Meet Matt the Rat!
A bilinqual series for pre-school throuqh qrade 4
leet Matt the Rat
nd be swept
way with his
adventures told
n English
and Spanish.
Title: Matt the Rat and His Sistel Maggie: wne I
at6n Mateo Y Su Hemana MaI:e: Cu-ando 
Yo tre
Author: Loreno Lberto Illustrator: rain5 o
r re s
Lbray Reinfored 
t 
Binding ui or• 
i 
,es 
48, 40 Pn
Fall 
2003 SBN:0 
974668-I- 
Priee2000
Availabl e from Baker & alooteisibutolish
For orders and inquiries:
Harvest Sun Press * PO Box 826 * Fairacres, NM 88033
Phone: 479-283-4000 * Fax: 505-526-6930
Website: www.harvestsunpress.com * E-mail: info@harvestsunpress.com
Harvest Sun
PRESS
MGEAiA 
Z1
Illustrated. Cloth, $49.95; Paper, $24.95
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS PRESS
Lincoln Park Zoo:
-is one of last remaining 'free' zoos
-began with swans bought to beautify the park
-is, at 135 years, the second oldest zoo in the
U.S (only the Central Park Zoo is older)
With a foreword by Jack Hanna, this book
combines photographs, oral histories and
other resources to chronicle Lincoln Park
Zoo's development and chart the unique role
it continues to play in the growth of Chicago
and in the establishment of zoos and preser-
vation activities in cities across America.
Read about Mike the polar bear and how
he ripped off a man's (already artifical) arm.
Other stories introduce Rocky the parachut-
ing bear; Bushman, a lowland gorilla with
an outgoing personality; and Princess
Spearmint, a Nile hippopatamus donated by
William Wrigley, Jr.
Available at booksellers, call 800-537-5487,
or visit www. press. uillinois.edu
P1 -1can hardly wait to tucl7
grandchildren in and share
hem the bilingual spiritual
IdEentures of Matt the Rat."
-AllarK 
Medff, 
Auho
Children of a Lesser Go
ise Gosliner Orenstein
"In this kaleidoscopic first-person novel...
the point of view shifts from one Alaskan
teenager to another. Each contributes
something to the shadowy portrayal of
the novel's central, tragic figure. Dove
Alexie, a 16-year-old 'mixed-breed'
who was imprisoned for striking a
white teacher, beaten by his racist
jailer, and lost in the system until
the story's end... Slowly the pieces
of the narrative fall into place to
form an intricately patterned
mosaic... A sensitive observer
and a compelling storyteller,
Orenstein offers a novel that
is both touching and harsh."
-Starred 
review/ALA Booklist
"An impressively subtle and
penetrating portrait of a complicated
world." 
-Bulletin of the Center
for Children's Books
"This gritty, tightly written Alaskan realism...
tackles harsh conditions and whether a sense of
S- self is possible despite them." -Kirkus Reviews
:Tempest
tt 
ifHarperCollinsPublishers 
Teen fiction.
the Americas, New York, NY 10019 
$15.99 Tr (0-06-052056-6)
(drens.coni 
$16.89 Lb (0-06-052057-4)
T 
A "t 
IV A
*"' 
"In this husband-and-wife team's saucy follow-up to I Stink!,
another feisty fellow immediately draws readers into his world.
With its copious sound effects and type set in various sizes
and configurations, this tale makes for one jaunty journey."
-
Starred review / Publishers Weekly
"Young swabbies will be delighted by this gander at a tug's
labor and gear, and likely absorb its pride in a job well done."
- Kirkus Reviews
"Once again Kate McMullan lets her motorized protagonist talk
directly to readers, with text that flows loosely across
the page." 
-The 
Horn Book
"There's so much here to enjoy: the energetic writing, the
boastful tug's bravado, and the well-conceived illustrations."
...... 
.. 
-
Booklist
*00 *** 
***
i
P291~I..
9 Joanna Cotler Books
An imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas,
New York, NY 10019
www.harperchildrens.com
IOUtAN
The Meanest Doll In the World
is Seeing Stars!
e creative trio pulls out all the stops ....
il be left yearning for another installment."
-Publishers Weekly,
starred review
ith its indelible mingling of wit, action,
ation, and art, this [book] stands alone,
ecially thrill fans expectant of the original
." 
-Kirkus Reviews,
starred review
. Nothing short of brilliant .... This fantasy
to be a favorite for years to come."
-School Library Journal,
starred review
U-I5OB-U5I-U * »13a.zl
HYPERION
BOOKS FOR CHILDREN
www.hyperionbooksforchildren.com 
0-7868-1240-0 * $6.99
Sequel to The Doll People
by Ann M. Martin and Laura Godwin
Pictures by Brian Selmzick
Palatini's flair for puns and arch repartee shines through
every exchange. The ever-waggish Cole, meanwhile, advances
the plot with his own steady stream of visual humor."
-Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly
S"It's a close shave-literally-for two big bad wolves in
Palatini's latest hilariously re-spun folktale. Delighted young
readers will hope for more appearances from this inept but
'Bad... bad... really, really bad' duo."
-Starred 
review / Kirkus Reviews
"The wordplay flies fast and thick throughout this text and
""- -~ 
;*»I, A 
,--A __ 
r-C 
_ --- 
91-_-_
Ages 4-7. * $15.99 Tr (0-06-000102-X)
$16.89 Lb (0-06-000103-8)
c~^bn 
f^ .,/-.
F_ 
AvilabefromtheD
I1B5N 0-6/84b5-lU5-b;
Number 39; 143 pages;
paper; $21.95*
STORY FROM FIREPLACE TO CYBERSPACE
Connecting Children and Narrative
EDITED BY BETSY HEARNE, JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINE JENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget that
children are not simply passive receptacles for whatever
treasure or trash the adult world throws at them but are
lively agents who are continually interacting with their
environment. Children actively create meaning as read-
ers, viewers, and listeners. The 391t Allerton Park Insti-
tute papers emphasize the critical need to connect chil-
dren and narrative as a way to affect their development
as listeners, readers, viewers, and evaluators of litera-
ture-and information in all forms.
The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin Storytelling Review contains:
* 162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
* Price, distributor, and grade level information for
each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use
ISBN 0-87845-106-4; 99 pages;
paper; $14.95*
",cnd 
lo (;S[,I,) Ptlhlwýttioný (nfi(t_,, P(tom 2 1, 501 F. IXII)id ,ýtlcct, 01ý11111)ýIigil, 11,
ON20
1() [lie 
of Illil 1()iS) ýIcccplcd.
Inl0i ni;ition regarding oil let- puhlik;16011,ý, ('ýIll hc A)IýItl lo I hý
ýIll bcicccSsed at oil] Wd) ",ilc: hill): 
ptthotl
I'll( c do( 
\()'I induck. shipping. \ý it I lill [I I k I III It Id St, [Ic, 111c I I i pp] I I '_ý coý! I, ý,, k)) (11" 111 '1
N)()I" ý I 1()l "lidladdiLional hook in I lics:1 n icoldln ( )Illidc(ýl l1w I I liwd,)Ijw,ý, I I It ý I) ypi I Ig
cot i,,, ý5 foi i1w Iji,.I hook., 
[.ý,O tol týatllllddltioluj Nol, Ill [lit 'allic ()I(I(,l (At.,Ili]) I ('twill
I lbjjj,ý Raw
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
PST
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAGID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
0008-9036(200401 )57:5;1 -E
* 
k 
, 
64
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2003 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
1. Go to http://www.prairienet.orglccbl
2. When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and pass-
word. This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit
number but may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
