ILLINO I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois Press
AV
THE LATEST
HILARIOUS
NOVEL FROM
AWARD-WINNING
HILARY MCKAY
A AL A Notable Children's Book
Best Beeks of th Yea (S)
-Editrs' Chbiee (eBook.Is
The Hon Bok Faunfire IJint
FeGoBook 
L 
19k
"A Few Goed Beeks of 191F
S* 
.. 
book that begs to be read aloud."
-Starred, The Horn Book
*"This is a poignant novel about honesty and the completi-
ties of friendship." 
-Starred, School Library Jouril
*AMcK y cleverly offsets her plot's more serious dimensions with
the often hilarious antiCS of the saucy Robinuons, whose
appetite for pranks youngsters will relish."
-Starred, Pblitshers Weekly
"The sharply realized characters, fast-paced story, and
witty dialogue make this English novel both distinctive
and refreshing." 
-Bookllst
Dog Friday by Hilary McKay
0-689-80383-4 * $15.00
MARGARET K. McELDERRY BOOKS
An imprint of Sim. 
6& Schuster Children's Publishing Division
1290 Avenue of the Americas * New York, NY 10020
1_
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
April 1996
Vol. 49 No. 8
A LOOK INSIDE
253 
THE BIG PICTURE
Bad Girls by Cynthia Voigt
255 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
263 * On the Wing: Bird Poems and Paintings written and illustrated by
Douglas Florian
269 * Wilma Unlimited: How Wilma Rudolph Became the World's Fastest
Woman written by Kathleen Krull and illustrated by David Diaz
276 * The Turkey Girl: A Zuni Cinderella Story adapted by Penny Pollock and
illustrated by Ed Young
277 * The Golden Compass by Philip Pullman
280 * st!aunJ-ICsdol a1 written by Francesca Simon and illustrated by Keren
Ludlow
284 
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 1996
285 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Tara L. Rivera, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor Emeritus, GSLIS
Christine Jenkins, Assistant Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1996 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration from Bad Girls ©1996 and used by permission of Scholastic Inc.
APRIL 1996 
* 
253
THE BIG PICTURE
Bad Girl
by Cynthia Voigt
With this book Cynthia Voigt has probably sewn up the prize for the
best come-on title of the year, and her two heroines thoroughly live up to the
promise, if not in the way some readers might wish: these arefifth-grade bad girls.
Good girls-think of Lowry's Anastasia, Mills' Dinah, Naylor's Alice-
are our friends. We watch them get into embarrassing situations, close scrapes and
closer crushes, and we think, this could be me. Bad girls, though, get our atten-
tion. We don't want to be them, but we like to watch what they do. Which Sweet
Valley Twin do you remember best? Not Elizabeth, forever mooning over Todd
and dutifully turning in her articles for the school paper, but Jessica: mantrap,
fashion plate, and saboteur. Voigt's bad girls, Margalo Epps and Mikey Elsinger,
lackJessica's chic, but they are still a dangerous, complementary pair. While feisty,
hotheaded Mikey, ready to punch or kick at the slightest provocation, is don't-
mess-with-me trouble, Margalo is another kind of bad girl-Machiavellian, you
might say, or as Mikey puts it, "sneaky." Between them they make Mrs. Chemsky's
fifth-grade classroom something akin to a war zone, with Margalo the general and
Mikey the troops. They get Louis, the class clown and bully, kicked out of their
class, and, with malice aforethought, get him back in ("Doesn't the expression on
his face make you want to just punch him?" asks Mikey of Margalo. "'Actually,'
Margalo said, 'it makes me want you to punch him'"). Margalo, unbeknownst to
Mikey but in her honor, puts unpleasant surprises (such as a dead squirrel) in
classmate Rhonda's lunch bag, and when Mikey finds out, she insists on sharing
the blame. Sucker: this is after Margalo has betrayed Mikey by voting for some-
one else instead of her for class president. Mikey knows; she peeked.
Voigt is a lot harder on-and truer to-the cliques, bullies, and shifting
alliances of fifth-grade society than most writers, who put the tempest in the tea-
pot and then turn off the stove. Her story is loud, angry, and jostling-sometimes
to the point of incoherence but always with the undeniable smell of fifth grade.
The focus is obsessively on the school, never leaving the classroom or playground
(or principal's office). Small hints, such as what the girls bring for lunch each day,
give glimpses of what life is like at home for the two troublemakers, but there's no
indication that Margalo and Mikey are any worse off than their classmates. Bad
girls-in children's books, anyway-are more often misunderstood girls (think of
Harriet the Spy), but Voigt doesn't let her girls that easily off the hook. And she
gives her bad girls exactly what they want: attention. Where most books (think of
any number of middle-grade stories about girls in cliques) vanquish the bully (or,
more often, her bullishness) and send her to the sidelines, these girls stay at the
center, unrepentant. Even in detention, where Margalo is writing lines on the
blackboard and Mikey scrubbing desks, they're causing trouble. Mikey strategi-
254 
* THE BULLETIN
cally cleans graffiti so it reads "you stink," and Margalo, her ever-busy brain at
work, gets new inspiration from her punishment: "'Fifty-one. I will not start
rumors,' but she didn't put a period. Instead, she finished the sentence, 'about
Ann Tarwell going to the movies with Noah Obbink.' Then she erased back, put
in the period and wrote, 'Fifty-two. I will not start rumors,' while she thought
about what other rumors she wouldn't start." We'll see about that.
Do we like these girls? Well, kids might feel a sort of rough affection for
Mikey, but any reader with a brain in her head is going to be afraid of Margalo,
even while sensing her loneliness and envying her power. You want to keep an eye
on those sneaky ones, and we're glad Voigt is here to do it for us. (Imprint infor-
mation appears on p. 280.)
Roger Sutton, Editor
So LONG, FAREWELL
In one way or another, I have been associated with The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books since 1980, when as a student in the University of Chicago Gradu-
ate Library School, I had the great fortune to work as Zena Sutherland's student
assistant. In subsequent years I served on the Bulletin's advisory committee and
wrote reviews, and in 1988 I came full-time to work with Betsy Hearne, another
top-notch boss and mentor. With this issue, I am leaving the Bulletin to return to
my hometown of Boston to take on the editorship of The Horn Book Magazine
and Guide. (My reviews will hang around longer.) I leave with thanks to Zena
and Betsy, and with the knowledge that the Bulletin lies in the capable hands of
Acting Editor Deborah Stevenson, who has been a fine friend and colleague here
for seven years. My thanks go also to our series of student assistants, to our review-
ers, and to Leigh Estabrook, Dean of the Graduate School of Library and Informa-
tion Science here at the University of Illinois, who took in the Bulletin when the
University of Chicago made the sad blunder of closing its own library school. And
to our subscribers go my thanks for years of support and friendly debate. Boston
is a thousand miles away from Illinois, but in Reviewingland, the journals sit side
by side. Let's keep in touch. RS
APRIL 1996 
* 255
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AIKEN, JOAN 
Cold Shoulder Road. Delacorte, 1996 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-32182-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
This title continues the adventures of cousins Is and Arun Twite (of Is Under-
ground), who have recently fled from the northern coal mines and are searching
for Arun's widowed mother. But long before they find Mrs. Twite, they become
entangled with a band of murderous smugglers who spirit mammoth tusks through
a tunnel under the English Channel, and they encounter the sinister leader of Mrs.
Twite's religious community, the Silent Sect. Aiken's flair for making the ludi-
crous seem commonplace is very much in evidence here; the cousins' telepathy, a
schooner moored in a treetop by a tidal wave, and a tunnel completed some hun-
dred years before its time are rendered not only credible but perfectly natural, and
these bizarre touches only embellish the murky menace that underlies the tale.
Although readers familiar with other novels in the extensive Wolves of Willoughby
Chase chronicles may take smug pride in catching allusions to past adventures and
related characters, newcomers can jump right into this stand-alone entry. EB
ANDRYSZEWSKI, TRICIA 
The Amazing Life of Moe Berg: Catcher, Scholar,
Spy. 
Millbrook, 1996 
127p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-56294-610-2 
$16.40 
R 
Gr. 5-8
This will be an eyeopener for kids who think that Bo Jackson is the ultimate re-
naissance man in sports: Moe Berg was a Princeton intellectual, an accomplished
linguist with a law degree from Columbia, who spent two decades playing profes-
sional baseball for teams ranging from the Chicago White Sox to the Cleveland
Indians. When the U.S. entered World War II, Berg switched from catching balls
to catching information: he became an OSS operative, traveling on spy missions
throughout Latin America and Europe in addition to making the odd propaganda
broadcast in Japanese, and finally retiring from the intelligence service a decade
after the war. It's a one-of-a-kind story, and Andryszewski wisely avoids overdra-
matizing the already sensational facts, conceding that Berg was an indifferent bat-
ter and runner (though a superb catcher and unofficial coach) and noting that
Berg's love of storytelling meant that several different accounts of an incident of-
ten circulated. The result is a straightforward, cleanly written, and well-footnoted
portrait of a likeable but ultimately enigmatic man, whose dual life sets his story
apart from the run-of-the-mill sports bios and may provide fantasy fodder beyond
rotisserie baseball for fans of the game. The format is stodgy and uninviting, but a
passel of black-and-white photographs helps leaven things. DS
ANZALDIJA, GLORIA 
Prietita and the Ghost Woman/Prietita y la Llorona; illus. by
Christina Gonzalez. 
Children's Book Press, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-89239-136-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
The curandera has no rue with which to help Prietita's ailing mother, but she does
tell the girl what the plant looks like and where to find it--deep in the dangerous
256 
* THE BULLETIN
woods of the King Ranch ("I've heard that they shoot trespassers ... It is not safe
for a little girl"). Although the story seems at first to be developing some kind of
anti-colonial theme, the dangers of the King Ranch become moot, as a string of
animal helpers, and, most importantly, la Llorona, the ghost woman, lead Prietita
to the healing plant. Anzaldua's stated aim here is to reclaim the scary ghost-
woman motif to benevolent ends; unfortunately, that leaves the story with lots of
build-up and atmosphere but no conflict-something like "Hansel and Gretel"
without the cage or oven. While the story might prove a letdown, the paintings
capture the sinuous mystery of the woods and the wide-eyed seeking of the hero-
ine. The text is in English and Spanish. RS
ARMSTRONG, JENNIFER 
Patrick Doyle Is Full ofBlarney; illus. by Krista Brauckmann-
Towns. 
Random House, 1996 
[80p] 
(Stepping Stone Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-97285-4 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-87285-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
World War I may loom on the horizon, but Patrick Doyle and his Hell's Kitchen
cronies have a more immediate problem-how to drive the interloping Copper-
heads gang away from the baseball field behind the brewery. Patrick makes a rash
bet that if "Doyle will hit one over the fence," his side will retain the field; how-
ever, the Doyle he has in mind is his hero on.the Giants, Larry Doyle, who will
surely come to the aid of his fellow Irishmen. Baseball fantasy is obviously the
draw here, but Armstrong gives her characters little time on the field; except for
some rooftop warm-ups and the big finish (Patrick himself hits the homer after
two strikes, naturally), readers won't see much of the game. A running analogy
between St. Patrick driving the snakes out of Ireland and the boys' problems with
the Copperheads is stretched rather thin. Still, readers who live for the game may
glean a few insights into how the game was played on the streets of old New York,
and a glossary of baseball terms and some historical background on the period are
included. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. EB
BANG, MOLLY 
Chattanooga Sludge; written and illus. by Molly Bang. 
Gulliver
Green/Harcourt, 1996 
4 6 p
ISBN 0-15-216345-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
When the Chattanooga Creek was named "the most polluted waterway in the
southeastern United States," the Chattanooga city council invited Massachusetts
scientist John Todd to apply his experimental water reclamation technique, the
Living Machine, to their local crisis. Bang examines both the theory behind the
experiment and Todd's efforts to adapt it to a large-scale problem. The result of
the project-only partial removal of toxins in Todd's sample of creekbottom
sludge-provides readers with a sobering view of the pollution problem and the
encouraging but limited ability of science to combat it. The picture-book format,
with its cheery collages and intrusively cute cartoon frog guides, is busy and sug-
gests a young audience, but students in the upper primary and middle grades will
be better able to contend with the fairly intense discussion of the role of microbes
in cleansing a biome. The absence of background on the project is a curious and
serious omission. Bang never mentions when or precisely where this experiment
was conducted, the use made of the results, the current state of clean-up efforts;
John Todd's name is, in fact, only mentioned in the frogs' dialogue bubbles, and
APRIL 1996 
* 257
we have no idea what happened to the polluted creek. No source notes direct
curious readers (or their science teachers) to further information on the project.
EB
BERRY, Liz 
The China Garden. 
Farrar, 1996 
[288p]
ISBN 0-374-31248-6 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
"Let Ravensmere die,/ Let the land be torn open,/ The end of the world/ Is surely
betokened." That's the local rhyme about the West Country estate where Clare's
mother has taken a nursing job and Clare is spending her summer. It looks like
the truth of the rhyme might soon be tested, as the old earl (Clare's mother's
patient) seems not long for this world, and his heir apparent plans to profit from
making Ravensmere a toxic waste site. Soon Clare realizes that Ravensmere is part
of her own history, that her mother was part of a centuries-old tradition that went
horribly wrong, and that it is up to Clare to unravel the mystical secrets of
Ravensmere's China Garden and accept her role as Guardian of Ravensmere-if
she can. This is a good, solid fantasy that is particularly effective in its use of
English history: Berry weaves real past and fictional past together deftly, making
gossip about the previous earls (who flourished if they acknowledged their Guard-
ianship but came to grief if they denied it) both convincing and titillating and
adding a slight and believable feminist edge to the family history and to the tradi-
tion. She's also laid on a steamy romance for Clare in the person of mysterious
Mark, and the possibility that they are, quite literally, destined to bond forever
merely adds to the intensity. Things get a little convoluted towards the end, so
that there's rather more drama in the anticipation than in the final revelation, but
mysteries are often like that. This might well please readers with a taste for gothic
romances as well as the legion of British fantasy fans. DS
BUNTING, EVE 
SOS Titanic. 
Harcourt, 1996 
[25 6 p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200271-5 
$12.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-201305-9 
$6.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Barry, unhappily leaving his grandparents behind in Ireland to go to his parents in
New York, is uneasy from his first day aboard the, well, you've read the title. His
assigned guardian for the trip is a slimy sort, forever checking the jewels he has
placed in the ship's safe, and Barry's enemies, the Flynn children, are traveling
below in steerage. And with mutterings about the shortage of lifeboats and the
heavy hints of icebergs along the way-not to mention the predictions of the cabin
steward who was born with a caul ("'I see disaster,' he said")-Barry is understand-
ably one nervous fellow. While any historical fiction about the Titanic is obvi-
ously going to be laden with a certain amount of predictability, Bunting barely lets
a page go by without a foreboding observation or remark, something that might
have been more effective if we didn't already know what was going to happen.
Although the scenes of the wreck itself have an excitement and immediacy that
will be enjoyed by disaster fans, the hefty doses of irony ("They'd be passing ice-
bergs. With any luck he'd get to see one") and prognostications of doom ("'I told
you this ship was doomed,' a doom-filled voice behind Barry said") sink the story
long before they get around to the ship. RS
258 
* THE BULLETIN
CARR, JAN 
The Nature of the Beast; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Tambourine,
1996 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13597-8 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13596-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Isabelle uses a found dollar bill to purchase an unusual pet: "They happened to
have a special on beasts." Beast, bigger than his owner, very, very hairy, and given
to unusual habits such as sleeping in the chandelier and shouting "C'est la vie,"
isn't quite what Isabelle's mom had in mind, but her scientist father is intrigued
and advises Isabelle to document his behavior. This documentation allows Isabelle
to notice when Beast's abnormal actions suggest he's sick; they take him to the vet,
and everybody, even Isabelle's dubious mom, is happy when he recovers. The
story wanders around a bit amidst its not-too-cohesive elements, but the core plot,
the strange eccentric thing that comes home to stay, is a durable and appealing
one. Karas' illustrations pull the story together, showing Beast as a surprisingly
expressive tri-toed furball, an oversized talking puppy-mutant whose company is
understandably enjoyable for Isabelle, as well as for young listeners. Youngsters
looking for a pet book with a difference will relish the story of this most cuddly of
betes noirs. DS
CART, MICHAEL My Father's Scar. 
Simon, 1996 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-80749-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Andy is a freshman in college, intermittently pondering his crush on Professor
Hawthorne and remembering his miserable childhood, when he was physically
abused by his alcoholic father and bullied by other boys for being a fat egghead.
There are sweeter memories as well, such as his times with his great-great-uncle
Charles who gave him books and taught him about friendship, and his romantic
feelings for Evan, an older boy who, as it happens, is big brother to Andy's chief
tormentor, Eddie. There's no question that Cart can write an individual scene,
but the fade-out, fade-in structure of the novel makes the scenes more emblematic
than developed. Evan's revelation to Andy that, as a child, Evan was molested by
his father and liked it is dropped in to no apparent point; when one of Andy's
childhood bullies later becomes his first lover, we wonder about all the years in
between; Evan's vociferous coming-out in the middle of a church service is theat-
rical rather than believable, as are the subsequent tortures visited upon him. This
kind of a loaded plot needs more careful attention than vignettes can supply. The
characters, too, are typecast as good and bad agents who, each according to kind,
help or hinder Andy in his quest to understand his sexual self. Although the ulti-
mate effect is rather hollow, the book certainly knows the terrors inflicted upon
gay boys by their fellows and families and equally, the hope that can be offered by
an Evan or an Uncle Charles. RS
CLIMO, 
SHIRLEY, 
ad. 
The Irish Cinderlad; illus. 
by 
Loretta
Krupinski. 
HarperCollins, 1996 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024397-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024396-1 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Adding to her companion volumes of The Egyptian Cinderella (BCCB 10/89) and
The Korean Cinderella (BCCB 6/93), Climo here condenses the traditional Irish
APRIL 1996 
* 
259
story "Billy Beg and his Bull." Billy is a lad cast out by his stepmother and be-
friended by a bull whose magic eventually allows him to kill numerous giants, as
well as a dragon, and to win the hand of a princess. The story was popularized by
famous shanachie Seumas MacManus in a nineteenth-century collection and
adapted by contemporary storyteller Ellin Greene in a 1994 picture-book version
with powerful illustrations by Kimberly Bulcken Root (BCCB 4/94). Climo's
version suffers by comparison in both style and abridgement. The nuanced pat-
terns of repetition are lost to a straightforward pitch of language, and much of the
life-and-death urgency is temporized; neither the stepmother nor the giants are
killed, for instance. Similarly, Krupinski's doll-like faces and soft pastel hues glaze
the action with the tone of a toy world, which makes the story safer for a younger
audience but defuses its power considerably. 
As an educational series, these
Cinderellas will reach a wide audience, but they do lose something in the transla-
tion. Teachers and librarians interested in alternative presentations might read
aloud from Judy Sierra's collection of Cinderella stories or from more folklorically
tuned picture-book versions such as Louie's Yeh-Shen. BH
COHEN, CARON LEE 
Where's the Fly?; illus. by Nancy Barnet. 
Greenwillow,
1996 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-688-14044-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
The left side of the first spread shows a round vignette of a big ol' fly sitting on
some surface, and the right side asks, "Where's the fly?" A turn of the page reveals,
in both illustration and text, that the fly is "on the dog's nose." But then the
question is "Where's the dog?" And so on, through the house, the yard, the school,
the neighborhood, the town, the bay, the planet, and a few more stops in between.
This is vaguely reminiscent both of Istvan Banyai's Zoom (BCCB 2/95) and Jerome
Wexler's Everyday Mysteries (BCCB 9/95), since it includes teasers about perspec-
tive and perception as the viewpoint both pulls back and moves around (one nice
touch here is that time doesn't stand still-the dog gets up and wanders across the
yard, and the paper carrier moves along). Unfortunately, as the stakes get higher
the book begins to cheat itself and its reader with spreads in which the previous
images cannot be detected (you can't match the neighborhood to anything in the
"town" spread, for instance, or the town to the big city or the ocean to the planet).
The top of the recto has, over the text, an accumulating series of small images
selected from the larger illustrations, but sometimes the image seems to be de-
signed as a hidden-picture clue and sometimes it seems to be simply a symbol for
that page. Also confusing is the text's apparent attempt at circularity: when it asks
the first question all over again, the answer seems to be merely "on the next page."
The illustrations, with their homely if somewhat bland simplicity, offer a pleasant
playing field, but the inconsistent rules here make the game frustrating. DS
COLEMAN, EVELYN 
White Socks Only; illus. by Tyrone Geter. 
Whitman,
1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-8955-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A little African-American girl listens with contented nostalgia while her grandma
once again tells about her childhood summertime trip into town to see if what they
say is true about frying an egg on the sidewalk. It is, but when the thirsty young
260 
* THE BULLETIN
Grandma goes to get a drink of water at the town fountain, trouble strikes. Grandma
sees the "Whites Only" sign on the fountain and reasons that it means she should
take off her black shoes and drink while standing in her white socks. A potbellied
redneck does not take kindly to the girl's logic, especially after other African Ameri-
cans in the town follow her lead, removing their shoes and taking a drink. Only
the arrival of the "chicken man," feared and fabled, scares the bigot off-perma-
nently, it seems. As with Coleman's The Footwarmer and the Crow (BCCB 12/
94), this is a mischievous and slightly spooky tale of vengeance, but it's hard to
believe that a black girl old enough to read hasn't heard a thing or two about
Mississippi segregation. History and folklore aren't quite in step with each other
here, but the girl's spirit survives the story's contrivance, and Geter's impressionis-
tic oil paintings have a hot hazy glow that enhances the half-real, half-legendary,
tone of the text. RS
COLES, WILLIAM E., JR. 
Another Kind ofMonday. Atheneum, 1996 
[2 4 0 p]
ISBN 0-689-80254-4 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Mark gets a surprise when he opens a library copy of Great Expectations: stuck
between two pages are three one-hundred-dollar bills and a note that seems to
promise more, with an oblique clue as to the next place to look ("Mihal Dobrejcak
and his Mary/ Also were led by a star./ Quester: read their history,/ And decide
what your chances are"). A nasty librarian proves useless; a nice one leads Mark to
a novel, Thomas Bell's Out of This Furnace, an account of a steelworker's life in a
mill not far from Mark's Pittsburgh home. Solving that clue leads to more money
and another note; soon Mark is ordered by his anonymous epistolary commander
to take a companion on his journey through Pittsburgh's history. The clues Mark
and Zeena (his troubled and troubling companion) follow in their quest lead to
legends of the eccentric and dark variety, such as the story of Mrs. Soffel, the
warden's wife who sprang and ran off with the notorious Biddle Brothers only to
be caught and locked up in her husband's own prison. The clues all seem to lead
to moments of real-life history, and they cause Mark and Zeena to question and
solve problems in their own lives (not to mention giving them a shot at becoming
crack reference librarians and/or burglars). While the writing is cluttered by too
much detail and the ending is disappointingly abstract, Coles conveys a real sense
of adventure and discovery as Mark and Zeena experience some of the stranger
reaches of the place they call home. RS
CULLEN, LYNN 
The Three Lives ofHarris Harper. Clarion, 1996 
[160p]
ISBN 0-395-73680-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Soon-to-be-eighth-grader Harris thinks that the couple he babysits for has a per-
fect life, he finds his own blue-collar parents embarrassing, and he believes that
girls don't like him. He's of course wrong on all three counts, but he has to go
through plenty before arriving at the end of his journey to self-knowledge. The
book focuses its themes neatly through Harris' summertime adventure in
babysitting: little Jamey Benya is a handful, but the work and money are steady
and Mrs. Benya is a major looker. Harris' daredevil best friend Bert scoffs at
Harris' job and tries to get him interested in going out with "babes" (with a subse-
APRIL 1996 
* 261
quent turning of tables that gets Harris two girls interested in him and no best
friend). The comedy is balanced by Harris' envy for the Benyas' life, which causes
a serious rift between him and his father ("'Mr. Benya doesn't drive a chip truck,'
Harris shouted. 'He wears suits, and good shoes, and looks like he's worth some-
thing'") that is only breached when Jamey, scared by his parents' hostility toward
each other, disappears while Harris is supposed to be watching him. Affable but
well-grounded, this boy's-eye view of the trials of everyday life takes itself and its
readers just seriously enough. RS
DAVOL, MARGUERITE W. 
How Snake Got His Hiss; illus. by Mercedes
McDonald. 
Kroupa/Orchard, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08768-9 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09468-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
According to this original pourquoi tale, the titular beast, wrapped into a coil and
"all puffed up with his own importance," once went on a heedless roll, creating
havoc among the other animals until Elephant's giant foot squeezed the air right
out of him and left him with his long, skinny shape. Young listeners are bound to
enjoy the repetitive kathumb-kathumb-kathumbs and pockety-pockety-pocketys and
the typeset that reshapes itself with each alteration in Snake's course. Other ani-
mals transform too-some more credibly than others. It's easy to see how Lion
got his distinctive mane when startled by the rolling reptile, but why Ostrich learns
to run fast because she has a sore foot is more of a mystery. Stylized figures in day-
glo bright pastels bound across the pages in wacky disregard of gravity and per-
spective; they should keep the story-hour crowd focused front and center, ready to
chime in on cue with their hup hup hups. EB
DENENBERG, BARRY 
An American Hero: The True Story of Charles A.
Lindbergh. Scholastic, 1996 
255p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-46923-1 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Neatly dividing (and metaphorizing) Lindbergh's life into two parts, "Ascent" and
"Descent," Denenberg charts his subject's course from childhood and adolescence
through his historic transatlantic flight and marriage to Anne Morrow. That's
"Ascent"; darkness falls with the kidnapping and murder of the Lindberghs' son,
the couple's later campaign to keep America out of World War II, and their at-best
naive admiration for the Nazis. Incorporating much and cannily from both
Lindberghs' books-chapter five, "Alone," is entirely excerpts from Charles' The
Spirit ofSt. Louis-Denenberg is dutiful in the opening chapters but seems to find
himself more at home with his discussion of Lindbergh the celebrity in both tri-
umph and trial. The account of the controversial Hauptmann conviction is fair
and openminded, and when it comes to politics, Denenberg wisely uses Lindbergh's
own words: "The three most important groups who have been agitating this country
toward war are the British, the Jewish and the Roosevelt Administration." In fact,
this biography is less notable for any new information or viewpoint on Lindbergh
than it is for its sensitive compilation of what the man had to say for himself.
Black-and-white photos pace the spaciously designed text, quotes are scrupulously
sourced, and a bibliography and index are included. RS
262 
* THE BULLETIN
DE VRIES, ANKE 
Bruises; tr. by Stacey Knecht. 
Front Street/Lemniscaat,
1996 
168p
ISBN 1-886910-03-0 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 5-7
Judith has a big problem: her mother's constant and violent abuse. No matter
how well Judith behaves or how carefully she tends her little half-brother (her
mother's golden child), the beatings come, leaving Judith to cover up her bruises
with long sleeves, long trousers, and lies, and leading the family to move whenever
anyone demonstrates concern about Judith's strange behavior. At her new school,
she gradually becomes friends with a boy who has recently begun to overcome his
own problems with his distant father; between her friend and Judith's concerned
teacher, people eventually begin to understand what's happening to Judith, but
will it be too late? A Dutch import, this problem novel is twenty years out of date
in America, with stock characters (Judith's mother has all the subtlety of Mommie
Dearest), glibly psychological explanations for the problem (Judith looks just like
her mother's little brother, whose death, considered Judith's mother's fault, rup-
tured the family), and sensationalized scenes of abuse. It's also unlikely that real
residents of any country today would be as naive about the situation as the teachers
and other professionals are here (young readers will wonder why nobody ever men-
tions calling the police). Judith's leaving her mother's house at the end is appar-
ently meant to be a victory, but it's a dishonest one, with no discussion of what will
happen to her next or of any legal moves necessary to keep her from going back
home. What keeps the story moving is its believable depiction ofJudith's hurt and
bewilderment and her hunger for, yet fear of, affection-from her new friend,
from her visiting aunt, and most of all from her mother. Readers prepared to
overlook the stretches of unlikeliness may find the intensity of Judith's story ab-
sorbing. DS
DEWEY, JENNIFER OWINGS 
Stories on Stone: Rock Art: Images from the Ancient
Ones; written and illus. by Jennifer Owings Dewey. 
Little, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-316-18211-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
So little is known about the Anasazis that discussing their artwork becomes a for-
midable task, and one that is met here with only limited success. Some generalized
comments on the transition of a nomadic hunting culture to a farming society and
on the artists' techniques provide the bulk of the background. This information is
padded with Dewey's reminiscences of childhood tours through the Southwest to
look at the rock art, and her personal speculation regarding who may have created
it and what it means. Attempting to convey a sense of awe for the cryptic images
and their mysterious creators, Dewey occasionally employs romanticized and adult-
oriented prose: "From the time the first human beings banged one rock on an-
other, rock art has created visual connections. The images link the commonplace
with the mysterious. Rock art is concerned with spirits, fear, and hope. These
ancient marks on stone are maps of the human heart, mind, and imagination." It
is unclear whether the pastel pictures are intended to replicate, or merely emulate,
the Anasazi images. Although the text distinguishes between petroglyphs ("pecked"
into the stone) and pictographs (painted on stone), and it remarks on the range of
sizes (from a few inches to ten feet), the homogenous illustrations fail to convey
these differences. A map of the Anasazi region is included, but no sources for
further reading are offered. EB
APRIL 1996 
* 263
EHRLICH, AMY, ed. 
When I Was Your Age: Original Stories about Growing
Up. 
Candlewick, 1996 
159p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-56402-306-0 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 5-8
As the title suggests, the ten entries here are original stories (some fictional, some
autobiographical, and probably all a bit of both) about growing up, by well-known
children's authors ranging from Katherine Paterson to Walter Dean Myers to Su-
san Cooper. The subject of recalling experiences of youth is probably more inher-
ently interesting to adults than it is to children, and a few of the stories have trouble
making it across that barrier; some of the recollections don't quite have the narra-
tive impact readers might like. The best stories, however, such as Mary Pope
Osborne's "All-Ball," which tells of the author's fixation on a beloved but doomed
toy in the face of her father's departure, and Laurence Yep's "The Great Rat Hunt,"
which amusingly depicts young Laurence's unexpected bonding with his father
through the title experience, are accessible to those not yet gifted with the luxury
of hindsight. The variety of tone, which ranges from Francesca Lia Block's wist-
fulness in "Blue" to the vigorous comedy of Avi's "Scout's Honor," adds to the
collection's appeal. A childhood picture of the author and pertinent notes are
included with each story; author biographies are appended. DS
FLORIAN, DOUGLAS 
On the Wing: Bird Poems and Paintings; written and illus. by
Douglas Florian. 
Harcourt, 1996 
48p
ISBN 0-15-200497-1 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
What Florian previously did for camels, sloths, and moles (beastfeast, BCCB 8/94)
he now does for egrets, storks, white-tailed kites, and their avian ilk. Compact
poems in a variety of meters and forms offer creative interpretations of, rather than
field guides to, the essence of each bird species ("Two things I know about the
vulture:/ Its beak/ is strong./ It's weak/ on culture."-"The Vulture"). While the
ingenuity level flags occasionally, the poems are generally pithy and entertaining,
and the book's clean-lined design attractively presents both poetry and art. The
fluid and inventive watercolors set the verse off perfectly, with a wheeled roadrun-
ner, a mynah with a cranium stuffed with a tape recorder, and a medal-bedecked
frigate bird all possessing a certain luminous beauty in addition to their poker-
faced interpretation of the poetic metaphor. The subject here is a bit more arcane
than that of the previous book, but avid junior birdmen and those with a taste for
vivid poetry will find this worth sticking their beaks into. DS
Fox, MEM 
Feathers and Fools; illus. by Nicholas Wilton. 
Harcourt, 1996 
36p
ISBN 0-15-200473-4 
$16.00 
M 
6-9 yrs
Glamorous, stylized paintings obliquely illustrate this featherweight fable about
two species, peacocks and swans, that learn the terrible consequences of fear and
intolerance. Afraid that the swans they ridicule might fly ashore and conquer
them, the peacocks lay in a secret artillery of sharpened feathers for defense. The
swans then do the same and the arms race is on until the peacocks spot a swan
flying overhead, reed in beak. The reed was intended for nest-making, but the
peacocks fear the worst and the war begins: "Soon cries filled the air and blood
darkened the earth. A cloud of feathers rose into the sky and haunted the sun."
Soon, all the birds are slaughtered, but a sign of renewal appears: "Then, in the
shadows of the gardens, an egg hatched, and a small bird staggered out into the
264 
* THE BULLETIN
bloodstained stillness." Enough, already. Fox's metaphorical hammer may ring
soft, but it rings relentlessly. At least Dr. Seuss, in the similarly themed Butter
Battle Book, had the good grace to be funny. Handsomely designed if somewhat
gift-wrappy in effect, this is bound to lure adults attracted by the faux-naif mes-
sage. RS
FRENCH, VIVIAN 
Once upon a Picnic; illus. by John Prater. 
Candlewick,
1996 
[2 6p]
ISBN 1-56402-810-0 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4 -7 yrs
The family from Once upon a Time (BCCB 4/93) goes on a picnic, and while
Mom and Dad remain oblivious, their little boy spots all sorts of folktale types in
action: the Three Bears out for a romp, Little Red Riding Hood taking on the
wolf, the giant who kicks off his smelly ol' shoe which becomes a house for an old
woman and her progeny. The rhyming text is more labored than in the previous
book ("All those children/ in that shoe./ Look how much/ they have to do!") and
not quite as funny, for there's no tension between what the boy sees and says, as the
innocent eye of the first book has turned into an experienced one in the second
("Look! A witch!/ I think her spell/ isn't working/ very well"). The pictures,
though, are a playground of favorite folks simply lined to expressive intent. The
lower-right recto wordless vignettes of the troll and the billy goats comprise a pic-
ture book all unto itself, tweaked by the Gingerbread Man who slips over the
bridge while the troll is still recovering from the Biggest Brother of Them All. RS
GANERI, ANITA, ad. 
Out of the Ark: Stories from the World's Religions; illus. by
Jackie Morris. 
Harcourt, 1996 
96 p
ISBN 0-15-200943-4 
$18.00 
R 
7-12 yrs
Drawn primarily from scriptural and oral traditions of major world religions, thirty-
four brief offerings are grouped by themes such as Flood Stories; War, Pestilence,
and Persecution; and Lives of Religious Leaders. Selections are diverse, ranging
from the ghostly Shinto love story of creator gods Izanami and Izanagi, to the
sardonically humorous Jewish tale of how Evil survived the Flood. Where pos-
sible, a motif from one tale is reprised in the next: Shiva's hand-fashioned son
Ganesh is followed by the clay Golem of Prague, and the Christian nativity story
echoes the Islamic tale of Maryam and the virgin birth. Ganeri's retellings, brisk,
informal, and decidedly occidental in tone, lack cultural particularity but are com-
fortably approachable. Abundant watercolor paintings are at once energetic and
elegant; Morris meticulously controls the bleeding and blending of her colors to
achieve a batik-like effect. Middle grade readers, who can easily peruse these selec-
tions on their own, will nonetheless enjoy hearing them read aloud. A glossary and
a ready reference section are included, but source notes are not. EB
GOROG, JUDITH 
When Nobody's Home: Fifteen Baby-Sitting Tales of
Terror. Scholastic, 1996 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-590-46862-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Gorog, author of the collection Please Do Not Touch (BCCB 9/93), offers fifteen
more stories, here focusing on that enduring theme of babysitting. Some stories
APRIL 1996 
* 
265
are classic "doomed babysitter" tales (several, in fact, are well-known urban leg-
ends, although not all contained babysitters in their oral versions), some are tales
of doomed, or at least beset, babysittees, and some are just strange things that
happened during babysitting; several, including a couple of the urban legends, end
with a note insisting that the foregoing is a true story, which is an entertaining nod
to the tradition. The stories often aren't as tight as they should be (or as their oral
versions generally are), so that the impact is lessened and their unlikeliness more
apparent, and the book's framing device (a strange babysitter brings this collection
with her on a job) is superfluous. There are still some inventive tales in here
("Toads and Slime," about a babysitter cursed with emitting said grislies from her
mouth whenever she speaks, and "Double Pay," about a girl with a very important
but very eerie sitting job, are two of the best), the variation in tone from funny to
spooky keeps things interesting, and Gorog has a good sense of what kind of may-
hem young readers will be drawn to. Poe this isn't, but the book's undemanding
spookiness would make it a great slumber-party readaloud. DS
Goss, LINDA 
The Frog Who Wanted to Be a Singer; illus. by Cynthia
Jabar. 
Kroupa/Orchard, 1996 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08745-X 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06895-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
A storyteller's voice informs this lively if lengthy present-tense tale of a frog who,
despite the scorn of all the other animals, is determined to sing the boogie-woogie
blues: "I'm tired of holding all this inside me. I've got talent. I want to sing." But
in his neck of the woods, only birds sing, and it's fortitude and bravery as much as
talent that gain Frog his success at the Big Time Weekly Concert. Frog's dooba-
dooba-doobas dance across the page as the animals forget their misgivings and inhi-
bitions and join on in. Learn the simple melody printed on the endpapers, and
your story-hour audiences will join in too. Scratchboard illustrations are as wide-
awake as the text, as Frog jives and struts and takes center stage (only to, initially,
dodge the fruit thrown by the audience). Try this on your shy ones. RS
HAHN, MARY DOWNING 
The Gentleman Outlaw and Me-Eli: A Story ofthe Old
West. 
Clarion, 1996 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-395-73083-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Motherless Eliza Yates has suffered enough torment at the hands of her nasty,
dishonest relations; with a change of clothes and shorn locks, she transforms her-
self into Elijah Bates and hits the road to Tinville, Colorado, in search of her
father. Teenage con artist Calvin Featherstone (who is, coincidentally, heading
toward Tinville to avenge his father's death) takes on Eli as a sidekick, and the pair
wins and loses small fortunes fleecing the citizenry along the way. After a series of
predictable escapades, Eli is reunited with Papa, and Calvin, easily reconciled to
the discovery that his father was a rotter (shot to death by Papa Yates), is headed
home to college in Boston. Save for a bath-house scene in which Calvin nearly
discovers Eli's gender, and a chaste peck on the cheek as the pair part, Hahn makes
little of Eli's secret identity; in fact, Eliza could well be Elijah with minimal impact
on the plot. This amiable but slight romp offers a crash course in Western conven-
tions to readers new to the genre. EB
266 
* THE BULLETIN
HAYES, JOE 
A Spoon for Every Bite; illus. by Rebecca Leer. 
Orchard, 1996 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08799-9 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09499-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Hayes combines two themes from Southwestern Hispanic tradition-rich and poor
compadres, and the tortilla as an eating utensil-into a humorous tale in which a
poor couple teaches their boastful neighbor a lesson. When the rich guest brags
that he can use a different spoon every day of the year, his humble hosts remark,
"We have a friend . . . who uses a different spoon for every bite he eats." This
drives the greedy guest into a frenzy of acquisition; impoverished from amassing
and discarding spoons, he demands to meet this man whose wealth is evidently
greater than his own, only to learn that their friend is an Indian who scoops up his
meals with a stack of tortillas. Leer complements the lively text with pastel illustra-
tions in rich and lustrous tones reminiscent of oil paintings; expressive counte-
nances reveal the blustering rich man to be foolish rather than mean-spirited, and
the poor couple, coyly exchanging sidelong glances, able to carry their superiority
with humor and good grace. A concluding "Note for Readers and Storytellers"
discusses the oft-told joke and offers background on los dos compadres tales. EB
Ho, MINFONG 
Hush!: A Thai Lullaby; illus. by Holly Meade. 
Kroupa/Orchard,
1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08850-2 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09500-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-5 yrs
Mama has just cradled her son in his hammock bed, but his rest will surely be
disturbed by the noises of the forest creatures. The determined mother shushes
them all-small mosquito, loose-limbed monkey, glossy white duck, great big el-
ephant-with a lyrical reprimand, "Green frog, green frog,/ don't come leaping./
Can't you see that/ Baby's sleeping?" By the time "all is quiet, all is still./ The
mother dozes/ at the windowsill," the only one left awake is Baby, with "his eyes
bright and round." Soothing cadence and steady repetitions strike the right chord
for a bedtime selection, but listeners not quite ready to meet the sandman will be
diverted by the animals' op-op and jiak-jiak and tuk-ghaa, tuk-ghaa calls and will
follow Baby's antics as he sneaks out of his hammock to creep around the porch
and swing from the rails while his mother is otherwise engaged. Tropical forest
and stilt house of cut paper are rendered in placid shades of olive and tan, with
figures outlined in earthy orange ink. A double-page spread in which all the ani-
mals are asleep in their proper resting places will introduce the youngest audience
to the pleasures ofsearch-and-find pictures. EB
HODGES, MARGARET, ad. 
Comus; ad. from A Masque at Ludlow Castle by John
Milton; illus. by Trina Schart Hyman. 
Holiday House, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1146-X 
$16.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Alice is lost and alone in the deep woods, her brothers having gone off to find her
sustenance while she rests for a moment, when Comus the magician appears, dis-
guised as a shepherd, and leads her to his lair instead of to promised safety. Mean-
while, a good spirit appears to Alice's brothers and instructs them on how to save
her; they successfully chase off Comus but finally need the aid of the nymph Sabrina
to release Alice from her spell. Milton's masque limning the power of chastity is
APRIL 1996 
* 267
rather an odd choice for a picture-book adaptation, and indeed the result is prob-
lematic. Hodges simply makes Alice "truly good" and gets on to the darker part of
the story, but the change of virtues makes the need for dual rescue baffling and
undercuts the sinister temptation of Comus' power. The events in this version
seem random, and while the formality of the prose adaptation gives it some classic
fairy-tale atmosphere, the account is too long and too wordy for most young audi-
ences. The illustrations offer the creepiest old forest this side of Arthur Rackham,
with menacing members of Comus' transformed menagerie peering through the
trees at palely vulnerable Alice; Hyman's depiction of the beneficent Sabrina doesn't,
unfortunately, manage to make the nymph interesting, but her portraits of Comus'
cave are darkly and gaudily decadent. A historical note about the performance of
the masque is included. DS
HOLLAND, ISABELLE 
The Promised Land. Scholastic, 1996 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-590-47176-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
This sequel to The Journey Home (BCCB 9/90) reunites readers with Maggie and
Annie Lavin, orphan-train children now settled for three years with the Russels.
Although Uncle James and Aunt Priscilla now have a year-old son of their own,
the sisters' place in the family seems comfortable and secure. Among their prairie
neighbors, however, unresolved Civil War hostility, ethnic biases, and contradic-
tory views on religious practices erupt, and the girls are drawn into the vortex of
the debate when their uncle arrives from Ireland, anxious to claim his nieces and
raise them Catholic. Although thorny issues are often articulated through forced
dialogues, the messy tangle of deeply held prejudices and animosities is authentic
and presented with respect for divergent opinions. A satisfying conclusion finds
the girls safely ensconced with the Russels yet lovingly attached to their uncle, who
admits, "May God and the Church forgive me, but you're better off here." Hol-
land hints at an imminent romance for Maggie, leaving the Russels' cabin door
ajar for possible further visits with the Lavin sisters. EB
JACKSON, DONNA M. 
The Bone Detectives: How Forensic Anthropologists Solve
Crimes and Uncover Mysteries of the Dead; illus. with photographs by Charlie
Fellenbaum. 
Little, 1996 
48p
ISBN 0-316-82935-8 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Here's a winning combination: a well-constructed science lesson and a well-drawn
murder mystery. In brief chapters, Jackson reconstructs an actual 1988-89 inves-
tigation of a puzzling cache of bones discovered in a remote area of a Boy Scout
camp. Although the importance of all areas of the investigation is stressed, it is the
work of the bone specialists and forensic sculptors that crack the case. Jackson
introduces each stage of their examination with a cogent explanation of some frag-
ment of evidence yielded by bones (growth indicators that help determine age,
tendon markings that suggest build and weight, etc.), and then turns to the scientist's
specific contribution to this case. Along the way she even poses some challenges as
a sort of self-quiz of the readers' forensic abilities. But while she snares her audi-
ence with the thrill of the scientific chase, Jackson does not allow them to forget
the enormity of the crime, as snapshots of the victim, smiling and laughing in a
happy past, are superimposed on skull images to clinch a positive identification
and bring the perpetrator to justice. Crisp photographs, often presented in series,
268 
* 
THE BULLETIN
guide viewers smoothly through the science explications. Appended materials in-
clude discussion of several modern examinations of historic remains, descriptions
of other forensic fields, a partial glossary of scientific terms, and a bone chart. EB
KIDD, RICHARD 
Almost Famous Daisy!; written and illus. by Richard Kidd and
illus. with photographs. 
Simon, 1996 
[2 9p]
ISBN 0-689-80390-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Daisy is determined to paint the winning entry in the art competition ("Paint your
favorite things"), so she packs up her dog Duggie and travels after her favorite
artists, visiting Van Gogh's St. R6my, Monet's Rouen, Chagall's Vitebsk, Gauguin's
Tahiti, and Pollock's Wyoming and New York. Finally she returns home and
realizes that's where her favorite things really were all along, and she paints up her
own entry of hearth and home, dog and parents. The story doesn't have too much
impact on its own (and kids may have trouble understanding the "almost" fame of
the ending-this reviewer remains puzzled); the pleasures here lie in the visuals.
Daisy and Duggie are black-and-white, breezily scrawled cut-outs who have two
spreads in each location: in the first they rub shoulders with a famous painter and
with figures from his paintings against a background inspired by a specific work of
art; on the next spread, Daisy sends a postcard featuring that work of art back to
her parents, as small symbols (a monochromatic stars and stripes, for instance, for
America) foretell her next destination. The dramatic hues and kinetic collages, as
well as the amusing homages, make Daisy's peregrinations worth looking at, al-
though there are a few questionable aspects (Belarus is neither Russia, as Daisy's
suitcase label suggests, nor the Soviet Union, as the stamp she uses states; the
painting representing Chagall is not a particularly characteristic work; and it's not
clear why Jackson Pollock gets two locations when everybody else only gets one).
This might best be used as sort of a light-hearted art history game; it's less knowing
and perhaps therefore more accessible than dePaola's Bonjour, Mr. Satie (BCCB 3/
91). Brief biographical notes on the artists are included. DS
KROLL, STEVEN 
Pony Express!; illus. by Dan Andreasen. 
Scholastic, 1996 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-20239-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
After an introduction to the genesis of the relay mail system, readers accompany
the riders on their first ten-day run between Sacramento and St. Joseph, arriving at
the route termini to welcomes of bands and bonfires and cheering crowds. Kroll
details the inclement weather, challenging terrain, and boggled connections that
were conquered at breakneck pace by the determined riders. Then he immediately
follows the account of the triumphal run with a discussion of the factors that shut
down the Pony Express. If the transition is abrupt, it is also accurate, neatly un-
derscoring the bittersweet termination of service a mere eighteen months after its
inception. Facing pages feature a full page of text on parchment-like background
opposite a romantic, if stiff, full-page painting, both posted on tawny, richly grained
board. This doesn't have the extensive historical detail of van der Linde's The Pony
Express (BCCB 7/93), but it's a dramatic account. Substantial concluding notes
comment on the state of mail delivery service before and after 1860-61. Route
map, bibliography, and index are included. EB
APRIL 1996 
* 269
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
Wilma Unlimited: How Wilma Rudolph Became the World's
Fastest Woman; illus. by David Diaz. 
Harcourt, 1996 
[4 2p]
ISBN 0-15-201267-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Picture-book biography has entered an innovative stage with the likes of Jonah
Winter's Diego (BCCB 11/91), Diane Stanley's Peter the Great (10/86), and Allen
Say's El Chino (9/90). Now Krull and Diaz join the ranks with an inspiring suc-
cess story about a baby born with the odds against her: she weighed only four
pounds at birth, she was black and poor in a racist southern town during the
1940s, and she was crippled with polio as a child. But she had four points in her
favor: a devoted mother, supportive brothers and sisters (twenty-one of them, in
fact), a deep religious faith, and an inner strength that pushed her to work through
her paralysis, onto the basketball court, and all the way to three Olympic gold
medals as a sprinter. If there's any stinting in this simply phrased, sensitively
selective account, it's in the stage of her training on the track. In a single sentence
Rudolph leaps from discovery by an athletic coach to triumph in Rome, but per-
haps it's valid to emphasize the childhood struggles in which her achievements
were rooted. Diaz' artwork reinforces the mythic-hero aspects of the narrative
with deeply framed compositions featuring stylized, statuesque figures of robotic
power. In fact, the one quibble with his depictions might be the Herculean stout-
ness of Wilma jumping over a wagon, an illustration that faces a sentence stating
"she was always so small and sickly." As he did in the Caldecott Medal book
Smoky Night (BCCB 3/94) by Eve Bunting, Diaz has textured the background
paper here according to story motifs-straw packing material for the picture in
which Wilma and her mother send the hated leg-brace back to the hospital, net-
ting for a basketball game, dirt for a race, the stars and stripes for an award cer-
emony, footprints on the endpapers. Because these backgrounds are all brown-hued,
and brown skin tones dominate the illustrations, there's no distraction of focus
despite the ambitious layout and complex typeface. With the kind of concentra-
tion that Rudolph mustered to win her way, Diaz rivets our attention with thick
outlines and organic shapes that carry us from enforced stillness to driving motion
in the sweep of one brief book. BH
KURTZ, JANE, ad. 
Miro in the Kingdom of the Sun; illus. by David
Frampton. 
Houghton, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-69181-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-10 yrs
The son of the Inca Sun King lies dying, and the high priest determines that only
the waters from the lake at the corner of the earth, drunk from a golden flask, can
save him. Miro's brothers attempt the search but, failing to find the lake, they try
to pass off common water to the prince and are jailed for their ruse. The spirited
Miro, friendly since childhood with the Andean animals and birds, receives from
the macaws a magical feather fan that send her flying to the lake and helps her
defeat its monster guardians. Miro delivers the water to save the prince, and risks
the wrath of the Sun King himself when she turns down his royal reward to live
forever in the palace: "Thank you, ... but here I would be like a yellow monkey on
a leash." Kurtz expands upon an Incan folktale, "The Search for the Magic Lake,"
casting it in the dignified, almost reverent prose of a high fantasy quest tale.
Frampton's tinted woodcuts, rugged and bold befitting Miro's adventures, incor-
270 
* THE BULLETIN
porate intricately patterned motifs from Incan art in strong and rugged earthtones.
In an introductory note, Kurtz credits her source and indicates the additions she
has made to the tale. EB
LYNCH, CHRIS 
Mick: Blue-Eyed Son #1. HarperCollins, 1996 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025397-5 
$13.89
Papered. ISBN 0-06-447121-7 
$4.50
Blood Relations: Blue-Eyed Son #2. HarperCollins, 1996 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025399-1 $13.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-447122-5 
$4.50
Dog Eat Dog: Blue-Eyed Son #3. HarperCollins, 1996 
[14 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027210-4 
$13.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-447123-3 
$4.50
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 8-12
It's taken Mick until junior year to realize that life demands more of him than to
follow in the footsteps of his drunken, bigoted, morally bankrupt brother Terry.
But breaking with the mores of his close-knit Irish neighborhood, which expects a
younger son to follow his brother who follows his father, is an uphill, if not impos-
sible, battle. Mick establishes the setting and the problem: when Mick refuses to
participate in Terry's hate-mongering activities and begins to hang out with new
Latino friends, Terry has him viciously beaten. Blood Relations follows Mick's
quest for physical and psychic refuge; the support of his mysterious friend Toy, the
reluctant affection of the cool beauty Evelyn, and a fleeting sexual encounter with
Toy's young mother provide him some temporary comfort, but ultimately dem-
onstrate that he can't cast off his identity by shaking off his address. Dog Eat Dog
pits the brothers against each other in a final showdown, winner take home, with
trained fighting dogs as their proxies in battle. Off to a fine start in Mick, master-
fully creating a closed community in which the gym and pub define the character
of their patrons, Lynch loses some steam by book two, relying on more prosaically
drawn, repetitive scenes of Mick's failures and Terry's sadism to set the stage for
the big finish. But when that finish finally arrives, the unrelenting brutalities of
the earlier volumes will leave the audience virtually unshockable. Toy's revelation
that he is gay elicits only the mildest surprise, and when, after Mick's dog breaks
Terry's neck, Mick rides off into the sunset on the back of Toy's motorcycle, we
can only wonder why he didn't leave sooner. EB
MCLERRAN, ALICE 
The Year of the Ranch; illus. by Kimberly Bulcken
Root. Viking, 1996 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-670-85131-0 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
A subtly engaging picture book recounts a family's venture into desert homestead-
ing during the year 1919, when Papa tries to realize his dream of farming land near
Yuma, Arizona, while keeping his daytime job in an office. Mama is reluctant but
brave, while the four girls vary in their responses. Most enthusiastic is Emily, who
revels in the beauty of the landscape despite sandstorms, scorpions, and outhouse
facilities. There's something sad as well as realistic in the parents' decision to move
back into town, where Papa wants to realize another ambition of "building some
colleges." The ending will give even young listeners a taste of the poignance of
memory. "If only Papa could have seen this!" says one of the sisters, now a grand-
APRIL 1996 
* 
271
mother viewing the fields where they had once seen bare slopes. "This is what he
always saw," says an elderly Emily, with a smile. Root's watercolor paintings are
deep in hue and skillfully drafted, suggesting both action and emotion without
exaggerating either. Her informal compositions, varied in shape and placement
across the pages, pace a longish text into manageable chunks; there's plenty for
listeners to look at on this journey into family history. BH
MARTIN, BILL, JR. 
"Fire! Fire!" Said Mrs. McGuire; illus. by Richard
Egielski. 
Harcourt, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-15-227562-2 
$15.00 
R 
3-6yrs
Raising the alarm in the first spread is the titular Mrs. McGuire, gazing intently
into the camera for the evening news. "'Where? Where?' said Mrs. Bear" as she
sees the report in an electronics store. "'Downtown!' said Mrs. Brown," who is up
a ladder painting the outside of the building. And so it goes, until a hefty chunk of
the urban population is assembled in and around an apartment in which a massive
birthday cake is ablaze with candles. Martin concocts a few pithy pairings of char-
acter and name: rotund Mrs. Kelp clings to a fish bowl, Mrs. Bear is swaddled in
an enormous, fleecy brown coat, and Mrs. Kopp is-yup-a policewoman. How-
ever, much of the visual humor may zip past a young audience. Mrs. McGuire's
colleague at the newsdesk is a vacuous blond Adonis with more smile than smarts,
and the male members of the fire squad forget their more pressing duties to fetch
water for buxom, leggy Mrs. Votter. A pratfall ending ("'Oh, help us and save us!'
said Mrs. McDavis,/ as she slid down the stairs with a sack of potatoes'") is as lame
as its rhyme. Still, there's an appealing mock-melodrama to Egielski's gouache
paintings, undeniable bounce and energy to the slight text, and enough overall
screwy confusion to satisfy antsy lap-sitters. EB
MARTIN, JANE READ 
Now I Will Never Leave the Dinner Table; written by Jane
Read Martin and Patricia Marx; illus. by Roz Chast. 
HarperCollins, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024795-9 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024794-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
This is a sequel to the creative team's Now Everybody Really Hates Me (BCCB 12/
93); here Patty Jane, the stubborn narrator, has been informed by her babysitting
older sister that she can't leave the table until she takes a bite of her spinach and
swallows it. Patty Jane hates spinach and, at least for awhile, hates her sister Joy,
and she revels in imagining ways to get rid of this plague on her family. This
doesn't walk the dual-audience tightrope as well as the first book: the child's voice
here is less authentic, Patty Jane's resentment isn't as heartily drawn, and her final
relenting seems arbitrary. P.J. is still an entertainingly offended heroine, however,
and Roz Chast's wiry-lined watercolors, with their amusing diagrams, framing
devices, and speech balloons, have a droll energy of their own. DS
MATAS, CAROL 
After the War. 
Simon, 1996 
[12 8p]
ISBN 0-689-80350-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
The author of several other novels set during World War II, Matas casts this
docudrama into the form of a story related by Ruth Mendenberg, a fifteen-year-
old survivor of the Ostroviec ghetto, Auschwitz, Buchenwald, and post-war Polish
272 
* THE BULLETIN
anti-Semitic pogroms. Italicized flashbacks give us a glimpse of her horrific memo-
ries as she joins a Zionist group that makes its way across dangerous borders, with
the goal of illegal entry into Israel. Although their ship is attacked by the British
and Ruth is taken to a refugee camp in Cyprus along with her companions, she
does find one of her brothers (nearly eighty members of her family are dead) and
escapes with her boyfriend to the promised land. The action is fast paced and the
history well researched, but too much information has been loaded onto the dia-
logue and first-person narrative. In addition to having an unbelievably broad per-
spective on the European/Middle Eastern political panorama ("Betar is aligned
with the Irgun in Palestine, a militant group which launches attacks on the British
to try to help them decide to leave Palestine"), Ruth has a self-conscious flippancy
("Of course, I can't swim, they don't give lessons in concentration camps") that
seems to belong more to a 1990s suburban middle-schooler than to a 1940s victim
of the Holocaust. What's realized well is not the traumatic experiences them-
selves-which seem almost generically packed into stories within a story here-
but the day-to-day anxiety of loners trying to connect with each other; despite the
expository tone, Matas' re-creation of life on the run acquires some authentic ur-
gency. BH
MEYER, CAROLYN 
In a Different Light: Growing Up in a Yup'ik Eskimo Village in
Alaska. 
McElderry, 1996 
[192p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-80146-7 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-9
Returning to the same fictional village and family she explored in Eskimos: Grow-
ing Up in a Changing Culture (BCCB 4/78), Meyer looks at some of the changes
Yup'ik Eskimos have seen in the ensuing generation. Her choice to give informa-
tion on hunting, education, family life, etc. within a fictionalized framework is an
odd one, for we don't always know what is factual information and what is part of
the "story" (loosely termed; there really isn't a plot). When she states, for example,
that "a few years ago there was a scandal when Native Alaskan poachers were caught
on videotape, gunning down a herd of walrus," how are we to know if this event
actually occurred? That said, the synthesis of ecological facts, Yup'ik traditions,
and the how-to's of everyday life is smooth, and is also honest about problems
such as poverty and alcoholism-there's no new-agey glossing-over of contempo-
rary dilemmas. Since the "characters" are drawn to be examples rather than indi-
viduals ("this is how many Yup'iks of this remote area live") they are too generalized
to engender much empathy; still, the author's respect for her subject is apparent.
Photos (of whom?) will be included in the finished book, which will also have a
glossary, bibliography, and an index. RS
MORRESSY, JOHN 
The Juggler. Holt, 1996 
26 1p
ISBN 0-8050-4217-2 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-12
The book opens by telling of an itinerant medieval juggler's visit to the castle of a
despotic count, who punishes the juggler for his disobedience by chopping his
hand off. The story then goes back to follow that juggler, Beran, from his peasant
childhood, when he left his devastated village and began to make his way alone in
a dangerous world, to his increasing skill in the art of juggling, and to his fate at the
count's castle; then we see Beran marry and become an innkeeper, make his pil-
grimage to the Holy Land, and finally return home to die at a peaceful old age.
Chronicles of an entire fictional life are rare in children's and YA literature, but
APRIL 1996 
* 273
this book sustains its interest level quite well. In addition to Morressy's excellent
realization of the medieval world and mindset (a harder-edged portrait than those
drawn in either of Karen Cushman's books, Catherine Called Birdy, BCCB 6/94
and The Midwife's Apprentice, 5/95, or in Frances Temple's The Ramsay Scallop,
4/94), he gives his hero one fascinating and continuing problem: Beran has sold
his soul to the devil in exchange for his juggling gifts, and he has repented of the
bargain. The book's refusal to treat its Faust story as fantasy, its unforced period
evocation, and its deliberately paced roaming coax the reader into sharing as well
as encountering its medieval understanding; there's also glamor, danger, and ac-
tion in many of Beran's adventures. Readers looking for a challenging and un-
usual trip back in time may find this just the ticket. A note about Morressy's
sources on medieval life is included. DS
MYERS, ANNA 
Fire in the Hills. Walker, 1996 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-8027-8421-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Hallie is only fifteen when her mother dies in childbirth, leaving her the woman of
the house in charge of the four younger siblings while her father and older brother
work their Oklahoma farm. Times get even harder when that older brother, who
had helped curb bigotry towards local German-Americans, joins the army to fight
in World War I; Hallie then risks incurring further patriotic wrath from the com-
munity by helping a young draft-dodger who hides out in the local woods. Myers
has a much sharper sense of authenticity than most writers depicting this era, and
her characters, such as Hallie's tough but supportive neighbor, Mary Jones, are
rich and unglamorized. There's too much going on in the plot, however, and
most of it all gets cobbled together overwhelmingly at the end after an excessively
melodramatic scene of danger and rescue. Fans of historical fiction who've en-
joyed the strength of Hallie's portrayal probably won't mind. DS
NASH, OGDEN 
Custard the Dragon and the Wicked Knight; illus. by Lynn
Munsinger. 
Little, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-59882-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A sequel to Nash's poem "The Tale of Custard the Dragon" (and to the Munsinger-
illustrated book of the same), this sees cowardly Custard again forced into unwill-
ing heroism, this time against the wicked knight Sir Garagoyle, who has abducted
Custard's beloved mistress, Belinda. Nash's verse has some entertaining linguistic
fillips, although this isn't his most meticulously scanned work; the story, while
enjoyable, is essentially a repeat of Custard's first adventure. Munsinger's Muppetish
Custard hams up the melodrama with toothy relish, with the big green guy so
inherently cuddly that you're not sure why Belinda even bothers with her other
pets. Fans will appreciate this second helping of Custard. DS
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Alice in Lace. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1996 
[144p]
ISBN 0-689-80358-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
"Patrick and I were getting married, Pamela was pregnant, and Elizabeth was buy-
ing a car," but don't be alarmed, faithful Alice fans, this is simply the Critical
Choices unit in Alice's eighth-grade health class. The in-class critical choices are
274 
* THE BULLETIN
hard enough-Alice and Patrick quarrel to the point of temporary breakup about
their wedding-but real life is producing its own thorny questions. Did Miss
Summers' romance with Alice's father cool because she was seeing the vice-princi-
pal? Will Elizabeth survive her mother's pregnancy without dying of embarrass-
ment? Did the popular health teacher actually make a sexually harassing remark to
Alice's classmate? (No.) There's a bit more contrivance here than is usual for this
series, particularly in the matter surrounding the accusation of the teacher, but
Naylor's still one of our best writers of everyday junior-high life. It's entertaining
to see Alice and Patrick's relationship add a few new dynamics (as does older brother
Lester's relationship with both his girlfriends), and we remain, as always, com-
pletely invested in and entertained by the process of Alice's maturation. DS
NEUFELD, JOHN 
Gaps in Stone Walls. 
Atheneum, 1996 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-80102-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The murder of Ned Nickerson, the most despised man in Chilmark, would hardly
trouble his neighbors were it not for the inevitable investigation. Twelve-year-old
Merry Skiffe has particular reasons for concern-she cannot verify her whereabouts
on the night of the murder, her deafness impedes communication with the inves-
tigator, and her young age hinders her clumsy efforts to flee. The tale is set in a
nineteenth-century community on Martha's Vineyard, once remarkable for its high
incidence of deafness among the population. Never explicitly introducing charac-
ters as deaf, Neufeld cunningly allows the reader to infer this information through
the characters' interrelationships. The central murder mystery, however, is more
clumsily handled, and the audience seldom empathizes with Merry's anxiety to
prove her innocence. The revelation of whodunit is strained, and the fact that the
killer goes free will evoke only mild puzzlement rather than relief or outrage. Those
seeking a tense mystery can give it a pass, but historical fiction buffs will find much
to enjoy in observing the methods of communication developed over time by this
tight-knit community. EB
ONYEFULU, IFEOMA 
Ogbo: Sharing Life in an African Village; written and illus.
with photographs by Ifeoma Onyefulu. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1996 
[26p]
ISBN 0-15-200498-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
Six-year-old Obioma introduces readers to the ogbo, or age group, a social struc-
ture common in Nigerian village life, in which those persons born within a given
span of years perform a particular service to their village community. Although
Obioma is still too young to take an active part in her own ogbo, she relates some
of the responsibilities of her older relatives. Her ten-year-old brother works within
his ogbo to maintain the village square; Mama's ogbo keeps the stream free of
refuse; Papa's group makes community decisions; even Uncle Chike, who now
lives in the city, returns to his ogbo to build houses for those who cannot afford to
pay for the construction. Each stop on Obioma's village tour is illuminated by
several large color photos of the ogbos in action, and if some of the younger sub-
jects seem to deliberately mug for the camera, the images nonetheless convey the
satisfaction these villagers find in their cooperative labor. In her opening remarks,
Onyefulu discusses variations in ogbo composition and she thoughtfully includes
definitions and pronunciations of Nigerian terms within her text. Keep this title
APRIL 1996 
* 275
in mind when Kwanzaa next comes around or any time you want a little lesson in
cooperation. EB
OTFINOSKI, STEVE 
The Kid's Guide to Money: Earning It, Saving It, Spending It,
Growing It, Sharing It; illus. by Kelly Kennedy. 
Scholastic, 1996 
[128p]
ISBN 0-590-53850-0 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Breezy and chatty, this offers a quick survey of money management from running
a lemonade stand to preparing a budget, from opening a savings account to getting
a credit card. As Otfinoski acknowledges, much of his information will have little
direct application to the financial lives of young readers, and it's a little jarring to
go from paper routes to tax deductions to IRAs in the same book. There isn't
much more than a cursory discussion of any one subject, so the book is less helpful
than it might be in job-hunting, budgeting, etc., but the sequencing-earning,
spending, banking, sharing, borrowing, and investing-is a useful lesson in itself,
and definitions are clear if sometimes limited. Appendices, including a directory,
reading list, glossary, and index as well as a handy introduction to reading stock
charts, are included. RS
PATERSON, KATHERINE, ad. 
The Angel &d the Donkey; illus. by Alexander
Koshkin. 
Clarion, 1996 
[37p]
ISBN 0-395-68969-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 7-10 yrs
Paterson retells the story from the Book of Numbers in which the Moab king
Balak summons soothsayer Balaam to curse the Israelites, but through the inter-
vention of God, an angel, and a talking donkey, Balaam is inspired to bless this
people instead. While Paterson stays close to both the events and the intent of the
scriptural tale, she does take a number of literary liberties. That Balaam's greed
impels him to visit Balak is stated here explicitly; no mention is made of God's
problematic directive to embark on the journey. Paterson stretches the suspense
by revealing to the audience the angel on the road only when he is revealed to
Balaam himself. Balaam's poetic oracles have been diluted into prose, and dia-
logue is jarringly modern and informal ("Tell Balaam to get on that donkey of his
and come here immediately." "I'd better sleep on it"). Koshkin's jewel-toned
mixed media paintings are fussily composed and stiffly rendered; unvaryingly
troubled expressions of all characters contrast oddly with textual attempts to cap-
ture the humor of Balaam's dilemma. Notes on the Bible story's authorship are
included. EB
PENNEBAKER, RUTH 
Don't Think Twice. 
Holt, 1996 
[19 6p]
ISBN 0-8050-4407-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Anne is seventeen, but instead of embarking on senior year she's ensconced in a
home for unwed mothers in the Texan back of beyond. It's 1967 and there aren't
many options for young pregnant single women, so she's got a lot of company.
Anne's sometimes disdainful narration tells of her remembering the misplaced
love that had got her where she was, but also of the rapes, the flawed contracep-
tion, and the unluckiness that resulted in the other girls' pregnancies; she also
examines the changes her pregnancy has made in her relationship with her family.
276 
* 
THE BULLETIN
The subject matter isn't new, but Pennebaker writes about it smoothly and well:
Anne's falling in love and, subsequently, from family grace is believably portrayed.
The real strength here is the varied portraits of the residents of the home, ranging
from brassy Nancy to sanctimonious Harriet to Anne's nice roommate, Cheryl
(although, since the girls are all of different faiths, classes, and regions of origin, it's
not clear how they all ended up in this particular home). A realistic treatment but
with soapishly enticing elements, this will appeal to readers who enjoyed Doherty's
Dear Nobody (BCCB 12/92). DS
POLLOCK, PENNY, ad. 
The Turkey Girl: A Zuni Cinderella Story; illus. by Ed
Young. 
Little, 1996 
32 p
ISBN 0-316-71314-7 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
While an East Coast native variant of Cinderella, "The Scar-faced Girl," has often
been retold, "The Turkey Girl" has been less widely disseminated because it does
not fit into the European happily-ever-after fairy tale mode. This Zuni story,
which is also available in The Girl Who Married the Moon (BCCB 1/95) by Joseph
Bruchac and Gayle Ross, relates the fate of an orphaned girl ostracized in her
village and befriended only by the turkeys whom she tends. When they magically
clothe her for a traditional dance, demanding only that she return before sunset to
take care of them, she forgets her charge and loses both her magical attire and the
turkeys, who scatter wild into the mountains. Young's art is ideally understated in
suggesting both action and setting through hazy, sun-paled daytime vistas or moody
twilight scenes. The lure of the dance, which is underscored in Pollock's narrative
by the girl's remembering her promise but postponing her departure, is illustrated
with a blazing sunset in one double spread, followed by another showing deep
purple darkness when the girl returns to the empty pen. This is a serious precau-
tionary/pourquoi tale that both adaptor and artist have treated with the dignity it
deserves. BH
PROSE, FRANCINE 
Dybbuk: A Story Made in Heaven; illus. by Mark
Podwal. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[24 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14308-3 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14307-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
The romance between beautiful Leah of Chopski and brilliant Chonon of Klopski
is literally a match made in heaven: the angels decided it forty days before they
were born. Unfortunately, Leah's parents have determined otherwise. They've
arranged for Leah to marry "Mean Old Benya, the most powerful man in Chopski."
In the slyest of East European Yiddish storytelling traditions, the angels get their
way when Leah is inhabited on her wedding day by a deep-voiced dybbuk with a
Klopski accent. "'Why is her voice so strange?' . . . 'A tiny sore throat,' Leah's
mother said. 'No reason to be alarmed.'" Even Rabbi Pinchik's anti-dybbuk
equipment is neutralized ("'Achoo!' Leah sneezed.... And all the candles blew
out") before the Grand Rabbi of Chopski persuades the family to send for the right
groom. The conversational tone of the narrative is light and nimble, while the
paintings have an airy, Chagallian humor that leaves plenty of room for imagina-
tive listeners to float their own details among Podwal's lyrically colored, impres-
sionistic Jewish motifs. It's fun and it's funny-one of those picture books which,
by staying true to an ethnic tradition, reaches beyond it as well. BH
APRIL 1996 
* 277
PULLMAN, PHILIP 
The Golden Compass. 
Knopf, 1996 
[416p]
ISBN 0-679-87924-2 
$20.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Pullman here takes an intriguing break from Victorian thrillers (see The Tiger in
the Well, BCCB 10/90) and contemporary problem novels (see Broken Bridge, 4/
92) with this fantasy, first in a trilogy, in which a young girl follows a big destiny,
the nature of which is unknown-as yet-to her or us. In a world that parallels
our own, Lyra is an orphaned ward of an Oxford college, where she overhears
concerns about "Dust," "the Gobblers," and an "Aurora." That she isn't really an
orphan becomes apparent fairly early on, as she discovers that her father, Lord
Asriel, and her mother, Mrs. Coulter, are locked into some kind of strange cosmic
battle that unfortunately includes the sacrifice of children in its progress. More
precisely: each human being in this world, much like our own of perhaps a hun-
dred years ago but with sometimes startling, sometimes subtle, differences, has a
"damon," an animal-familiar that helps and loves its human, and Mrs. Coulter-
a scary descendant of Andersen's Snow Queen-is commissioning experiments in
which children are separated from their demons. Treachery, tricks, Gypsies, polar
bears, witches, and photography all play a part in the ambitious story, and Pull-
man is particularly inventive in the way he blends not-quite science with not-quite
magic. Although the book sometimes seems overly cerebral-Lyra seems more a
pawn to the plot than a personality, for example-the faithful (and sometimes
nasty, depending on their humans) demons give it some heart; the scene in which
Lyra finds a boy who has been separated from his demon is wrenching. There's
enough resolution in this book to give it unity and a satisfying, if rushed and
abrupt, closure; at the same time, the prospect of the next book (which Pullman
says will be set "in the universe we know") is enticing. RS
RINALDI, ANN 
Keep Smiling Through. 
Harcourt, 1996 
[208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200768-7 
$11.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-201072-6 
$5.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
For fifth grader Ann Frase, the privations resulting from rationing are nothing
new; World War II has merely provided her tightwad father with an excuse to be
close with his money, and her stepmother is loathe to spend anything on her even
in the best of times. The war does immerse Ann in propaganda and patriotic
rhetoric, and when she is forced to do some of the family shopping with a German
neighbor, she is instinctively mistrustful of the woman's warm and gracious man-
ners. However, Ann discovers that her own grandfather may harbor German loy-
alties, and that you can't tell the good guys from the bad guys strictly on the basis
of national origin. The believability of the tale is strained by the presence of the
stock wicked stepmother and the overly-righteous reporter who defends German-
Americans, sounding more like a 1990s ACLU lawyer than a creation of his time,
but Rinaldi paints a credible portrait of a gullible young girl forced to reexamine
her war-bred prejudices. EB
ROBINSON, LEE 
Gateway. 
Houghton, 1996 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-395-72772-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
As Mac relates her thoughts, fears, and wishes into a psychiatrist's tape recorder,
278 
* 
THE BULLETIN
her parents are getting a seriously ugly divorce. They've put Mac, thirteen, right in
the middle of it, thus the psychiatrist, and thus also the interventions of a madcap
but wise court-appointed guardian ad litem, as well as the help of a colorful, courtly,
ex-drunk lawyer, who decides to represent Mac in the custody battle. The good
guys-the guardian, the lawyer, the judge named Judge-are genial stereotypes,
while the bad-Mac's parents, their lovers, their lawyers--oppositely venal or at
best hopeless (Mac keeps telling us that there are good things about her ambi-
tious, superficial mother, but we never see them). The plot turns on several un-
likely legal maneuvers, and the solution (Mac's parents have to take turns staying
with her, rather than Mac dividing her time between two houses) pointlessly con-
trived, because the house is apparently going to be sold. Mad, though, is fun to
listen to, and the general zaniness of the proceedings is a nice alternative to the
frequent dolefulness of the genre. RS
ROCKWELL, ANNE, ad. 
The One-Eyed Giant and Other Monsters from the Greek
Myths; ad. and illus. by Anne Rockwell. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13810-1 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13809-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
This companion piece to The Robber Baby is probably just what newcomers to
Greek mythology want-quickie descriptions of six-headed, snake-haired, one-
eyed, no-eyed, flesh-eating horrors and big, literal pictures to go with them.
Rockwell has ably chosen some of the more terrifying creatures, from stinking
Empusae to brutal Centaurs, and includes just enough juicy detail to either satisfy
the browser or send more thoughtful readers off in search of "the whole story."
Each monster merits at least one, and sometimes two, full-page ink-and-water-
color illustrations, which are engaging hybrids of classical line (a la Greek urns)
and contemporary cartoon. A pronunciation guide and source note are included.
Skip all that Hellenic love, lust, and intrigue; bring on the gruesome stuff. EB
SCHECTER, ELLEN 
The Big Idea; illus. by Bob Dorsey. 
Hyperion,
1996 
[80p] 
(West Side Kids)
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2085-3 
$13.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7868-1043-2 
$3.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Luz's "big idea" is to create a garden out of the trash-filled empty lot she passes
every day in her inner-city neighborhood, and while she finds a sponsor in a citywide
"Green Giants" organization, she has trouble getting her friends and neighbors to
help. Although the book at times belabors its multiculturalism ("iMira! Look at
Shrimp Pazzalini sitting on his favorite stoop, watching Mike and DeVonn, hop-
ing for a turn to pitch"), Luz is an enterprising eight-year-old who makes her
dream come true, corralling her entire community-even, eventually, her very
reluctant best friend Rosie-into the project. Luz's present-tense narration is con-
versational and immediate if message-burdened, and newish readers who enjoyed
DyAnne DiSalvo-Ryan's picture book City Green (BCCB 9/94) will enjoy this
chance to grow (although you should also pass along Mary Quattlebaum's more
individualized story of urban gardening, Jackson Jones and the Puddle of Thorns,
BCCB 3/94). The finished book will include illustrations, and information about
starting a community garden is appended. RS
APRIL 1996 
* 
279
SCHNUR, STEVEN 
Beyond Providence. Harcourt, 1996 
[25 6p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200982-5 
$12.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200981-7 
$6.00 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Twelve-year-old Nathan is struggling to come to terms with life changes: first, his
mother dies, after leaving the family perhaps for good; next his older brother de-
parts the family farm after continuous argument with their stern father; then his
adored cousin Kitty, who came to keep house after Nathan's mother's death, may
be leaving to marry a neighbor. Schnur is good at depicting the insularity and
isolation of a small family farm early in the century (the book seems to be set in the
teens or twenties), and Nathan's bewilderment at the changes that beset his previ-
ously secure life is subtly depicted. The book gets awfully heavy-handed, however,
with its characters (Pa and Eric the artist never rise above stereotype), with sym-
bolism (the white dove that flutters about the pages, the prowling mountain lion
killed in the nick of time), and with the occasional speech (Pa has a three-pager);
the scenes where Kitty and Nathan visit Eric in Manhattan and, more impor-
tantly, Nathan's eventual desire to make the farm his own fail to ring true. There's
some good atmosphere here and some classic family dynamics, but it gets bogged
down; readers in search of a dramatic farm story would be better served by Avi's
The Barn (BCCB 12/94). DS
SHANNON, GEORGE 
Tomorrow'sAlphabet; illus. by Donald Crews. 
Greenwillow,
1996 
[56p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13505-6 $15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13504-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
K is for tomato? Well, sure, when it's "tomorrow's KETCHUP." Too many
alphabet books have become complicated or needlessly ornate beyond the needs of
the preschool audience; here's one that enlarges the basic concept of first-letter
identification with another-change-that is almost within the needs and aims of
preschoolers. Each letter of the alphabet gets a double-spread that illustrates a
transformation: "A is for seed-tomorrow's APPLE," B is for eggs-tomorrow's
BIRDS," and so on. The changes depicted aren't always parallel (acorn is to OAK
TREE is different from seed is to APPLE), and some of the pairings ("U is for
stranger-tomorrow's US," "Z is for countdown-tomorrow's ZERO") are cock-
eyed. It's intriguing but too complicated for preschoolers; while older kids might
enjoy the game element, it is vitiated by placing the answer opposite the puzzle.
All head-on pictures of the object being named, the watercolor illustrations are less
than imaginative, but they do have the perhaps even greater advantage of being
easily identified. RS
SHERMAN, CHARLOTTE WATSON 
Eli and the Swamp Man; illus. by James
Ransome 
HarperCollins, 1996 
[96p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024723-1 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024722-3 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-4
Eli does not want to go to New Orleans for Mardi Gras, where his stepfather, Ari,
is going to "mask Indian," a celebration by African Americans of the Indians who
hid and protected slave runaways. Instead, Eli intends to ride his bike from his
Seattle home to his father's house in Alaska. Eli is eight, and it's the kind of book
280 
* 
THE BULLETIN
where you know he isn't going to get very far, geographically speaking. Although
the "mask Indian" theme is layered onto rather than worked into the story, Sherman
otherwise gives the story a strong folkloric framework: while Eli's three best friends
refuse to join him on his adventure, they each give him a talisman (a marble,
security blanket, and a pet salamander) to help him on his way. It's not long
before Eli runs into the feared "Swamp Man," a homeless man who lives around a
local bog, and to his initial dismay, the man insists upon helping Eli find the
salamander that he had promptly lost. He helps Eli with more than that, of course,
and the prodigal stepson is soon on his way back to his family. Although the story
is predictable and not as substantial as it means to be, Eli is a likable kid, and
readers stepping up from Ann Cameron's Julian stories might want to go along for
the ride. RS
SIMON, FRANCESCA sa.taan -iCsfo 
aN-1 illus. by Keren Ludlow. 
Dial, 1996 
24 p
ISBN 0-8037-1969-8 
$14.99 
R 
4-7 yrs
As their name suggests, the Topsy-Turvy family tends to do things backwards:
they get up at midnight, watch TV standing on their heads, and take their baths in
the bathroom-while scrupulously avoiding the bathtub. One day they help out a
neighbor by babysitting her daughter: after they helpfully set her house to rights
(turning everything upside down) and encourage the little girl to behave properly
(drawing on the walls instead of on the paper), they scare away a perplexed burglar
and return home in triumph. The Topsy-Turvies don't have the zen absurdity of
Allard's The Stupids, and their adventures are, paradoxically, less smart (the car-
toon burglar is particularly out of place here), but the game of inversion is played
out well and is likely to tickle youngsters. The gouache art has a '50s era palette of
dark pink, dusty red, grass green, and baby blue, which suggests that the charac-
ters' doll-like blandness is intentional and ironic. Youngsters amused by the con-
cept of relative norms will appreciate the Topsy-Turvies' inverted point of view.
DS
VOIGT, CYNTHIA 
Bad Girls. 
Scholastic, 1996 
278p
ISBN 0-590-60134-2 
$16.95 
R* 
Gr. 4-6
See this month's Big Picture, p. 253, for review.
WALLACE, 
BARBARA BROOKS 
Cousins in the Castle. Karl/Atheneum,
1996 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-80637-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Poor little Amelia! Papa has died in a far away land, and now sinister Cousin
Charlotte is taking her across the ocean to live with Cousin Basil in America.
Charlotte disappears on the New York dock, and Amelia is kidnapped by kind-
faced old Mrs. Dobbins and locked in a dank basement, only to escape from her
drunken guard and flee to sanctuary with a shipboard girlfriend named Primrose,
who turns out to be an orphan boy nicknamed Rosie. After more treachery and
escapes, Amelia discovers that Charlotte isn't evil, Papa isn't dead, Rosie isn't an
orphan, and life is "like a fairy tale." Amelia is the quintessential gothic heroine, as
helpless as she is hapless, but at age eleven she is too young to be rewarded with the
truly romantic rescue that is the customary climax for this genre. Suspense is
APRIL 1996 
* 281
artificially generated, as the reader is prodded along with an overabundance of
pointed questions: "But who was Mrs. Shrike? How was she connected to Mrs.
Dobbins? Was she a thief as well or just somebody hired by Mrs. Dobbins to guard
Amelia ... ? And if so, why? Why not just let Amelia go?" Middle graders who
crave authentic nail-biters will likely prefer Garfield or Aiken, but there's peril and
drama enough. EB
WHITE, RUTH 
Belle Prater's Boy. 
Farrar, 1996 
[2 08p]
ISBN 0-374-30668-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Gypsy Arbutus Leemaster-nicknamed Beauty-has fairy tale looks complete with
long golden curls, while her cousin Woodrow is cross-eyed, gawky, and awkwardly
clad in "hillbilly clothes" that were hand-me-downs to begin with. Beyond outer
appearances, though, they have a lot in common. Woodrow's mother has disap-
peared without a trace, and Gypsy's father is dead. Beyond these facts, we discover
the cousins' underlying pain just as they discover their deep friendship for each
other during the year Woodrow comes to live with his grandparents, right next
door to Gypsy. Woodrow knows that his mother deserted the family (she took
some of his clothes and money), and Gypsy knows that her father shot himself (she
found his body). Despite these dark themes, much of the novel is light in tone, its
natural dialogue spiked with the jokes Gypsy loves to tell and the stories Woodrow
spins. Both central and secondary characters are vividly realized in a plot that
draws on family dynamics for its tension and energy. The 1950s Appalachian
community itself acquires plenty of personality here; White knows her setting well
enough to poke fun without sacrificing her affection for the small-town atmo-
sphere. She's also supported her characteristically fine style with a sharpened sense
of control developed through two previous books, Sweet Creek Holler (BCCB 10/
88) and Weeping Willow (6/92). BH
WILLEY, MARGARET 
Facing the Music. 
Delacorte, 1996 
[25 6 p]
ISBN 0-385-32104-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Ever since their mother was killed in an accident, Lisa has felt protected by her
older brother, Mark, but after three years he's trying to break away. Naturally he's
upset when Danny, the leader of his garage band, decides that Lisa, with her beau-
tiful, passionate voice, would be just the thing to make their group a success. Lisa
is thrilled, both for the chance to make music and for the chance to be Danny's
girlfriend ("Me, who had never been anyone's girlfriend. Me, who wasn't anybody's
anything"), even when he tells her that because of his friendship with Mark, their
relationship has to be a secret. Lisa is a vulnerable, honest heroine; her brother
(whose account of things is interspersed in Lisa's narration) is sullen but easy to
empathize with. Danny is a snake, but he certainly provides plenty of romantic
and narrative tension. As ever, Willey knows her girls-both character and audi-
ence-and makes credible and close the dilemma of falling for The Wrong Guy
(Chapter Nine: "What I Should Have Known"). The relationships Lisa and Danny
have with each other and with their closed-off father have a prickly resonance,
with some healing promised if not entirely gained in the end. RS
282 
* THE BULLETIN
WILLIAMSON, MARIANNE 
Emma e6Mommy Talk to God; by Marianne and Emma
Williamson; illus. by Julia Noonan. 
HarperCollins, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-06-026464-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
NR 
4-6 yrs
Illustrated by sweeeet and stiff pictures that seem modeled on the authors them-
selves, this book introduces young children to the thought of Marianne Williamson,
"internationally acclaimed author and philosopher." First Emma asks Mommy
where she, Emma, came from, and while Mommy replies "From God, sweetheart,"
the facing illustration shows a bouncing baby Emma shooting down through a
sentimentalized (c.f. the twinkling star in the shadow of a crescent moon) cosmos.
So much for the cabbage patch. Then Mommy explains what God is: "God is all
the love in the world." Replete with Mommy's platitudes, Emma can hardly be
blamed for dreaming about an angel (blonde, winged) who advises Emma about
God and prayer ("He will always be there to take care of you and tell you what to
do whenever you have a question"). This tip comes in handy later when Emma,
tormented at school by a bully who throws sand at her, prays for the boy who, "the
very next day," nicely picks up the sweater that Emma has dropped: "Emma knew
in her heart that God had helped Peter." Even, perhaps especially, the most de-
vout know that it just ain't this easy. However you feel about Marianne Williamson's
current popularity as a guru, you can't believe she tries to put this kind of fatuous
nonsense over on adults. Then again, maybe she does, in which case pray for us
all, Emma. RS
WONG, JANET S. 
A Suitcase of Seaweed and Other Poems; written and illus. by
Janet S. Wong. 
McElderry, 1996 
[48p]
ISBN 0-689-80788-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 3-6
Wong writes of her heritage in this collection, dividing the poems into three sec-
tions-Korean poems, Chinese poems, and American poems-and introducing
each section with a small memoir and explanation. Her poems, generally written
from the child's point of view and mostly free verse, are simple and accessible, and
their images are sometimes vivid (as in "Campfire," when the narrator thinks for a
moment that her mother is going to produce grasshoppers, rather than marshmal-
lows, to toast over the fire). More often, however, the prosaic quality of most of
the poems flattens their impact, and vignettes become merely mild anecdotes with-
out point or further significance. Kids, particularly younger readers, who like their
poetry easy without wanting it frivolous will appreciate the thoughtful but un-
complicated verses here. DS
WOOD, TED Iditarod Dream: Dusty and His Sled Dogs Compete in Alaska's Jr.
Iditaroda written and illus. with photographs by Ted Wood. 
Walker, 1996 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8407-0 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8406-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
The clear blue eyes of a kenneled husky stare out from the dedication page, invit-
ing readers into this you-are-there photo-essay about a 1995 competitor in Alaska's
Jr. Iditarod sled-dog race, a 158-mile version for teenagers of the more famous
1,180 mile race for adults. The book takes fifteen-year-old Dusty from prepara-
tion and practice through the race itself, and photos of Dusty at home (a log cabin
APRIL 1996 
* 283
with seventeen dogs in the front yard) and at high school (six students in all, four
shown here in a Spanish class conducted via telecommunication) establish him as
an ordinary kid with an extraordinary avocation in a magnificent landscape. Full
and half-page photos of Dusty, the dogs, and the setting include some striking
shots of the dogs at work, including one picture of a dog leaping straight at the
camera; local color includes caribou, moose, and a vertiginous view of Mt. McKinley
towering over the family car. The text is clear about the mechanics and hazards of
the race, which Wood keeps in the present tense ("Dusty can't believe it. Two
tangles in less than five minutes") to give the book momentum and ultimately
triumph-Dusty wins. RS
WRIGHT, BETTY REN 
Haunted Summer. 
Scholastic, 1996 
[128p]
ISBN 0-590-47355-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
One of the obliging conventions of ghost stories for kids is that spooks tend to
come out during school vacations, when kids have time to deal with them. Here's
a good example: nine-year-old Abby finds that her summer vacation has taken a
sinister turn when a music box restored to the family house seems to evoke a ghost.
Abby's older brother scoffs, but the summer au pair, Hannah Gray, sees the spec-
tre constantly, and she and Abby try to track down and mollify the troublesome
spirit. Abby's a credible heroine, with her consideration for timid Hannah and her
resentment of her brother's insistent superiority, and her rising to the difficult
occasion is a satisfying bonus. Slight but sufficient, this is a tidy little ghost story
for younger readers, with enough menace to give the story an edge lacking in
Goosebumps. DS
WYLLIE, STEPHEN 
A Flea in theEar; illus. by Ken Brown. 
Dutton, 1996 
[26 p]
ISBN 0-525-45648-1 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Ah, yes, here again are those traditional adversaries the fox and the hound, with
some nice juicy chickens and a horde of biting fleas just to keep things, well, hop-
ping. First the fox sweet-talks the dog away from his chicken-guarding by telling
him how to drown all his fleas; then the dog tricks the fox away from his poultry-
filled den and rescues his charges. The writing sags a bit in places (such as the limp
ending), but most of the time it has a zingy, understated folksiness, especially in
the dialogue between the clearly well-acquainted enemies. The watercolor art walks
the line between caricature and nature drawing; the old spotted dog, with his droopy
ears and sagging flews, mostly belongs in the first category, the gravely shrewd fox
has a toe in both, and the lucent landscapes of sundappled forest and grassy-edged
ponds are simply alluring in their own right; varied and lively compositions keep
the visual side of the story moving along smartly. Tricking the tricky fox is a time-
honored plot (see McKissack's Flossie and the Fox, BCCB 9/86, for a classic con-
temporary version), and this is a nice Disneyesque variant that young listeners
should find aw-flea entertaining. DS
oil
284 
* THE BULLETIN
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 1996
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Karen Cushman for The Midwife's Ap-
prentice (Clarion). The Newbery Honor Books are WhatJamie Saw by Carolyn
Coman (Front Street), The Watsons Go to Birmingham-1963 by Christopher
Paul Curtis (Delacorte), Yolonda's Genius by Carol Fenner (McElderry), and The
Great Fire by Jim Murphy (Scholastic).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to Peggy Rathmann for Officer Buckle and
Gloria (Putnam), written and illustrated by Peggy Rathmann. The Caldecott Honor
Books are Alphabet City, illustrated by Stephen T. Johnson (Viking), Zin! Zin!
Zin! A Violin, written by Lloyd Moss and illustrated by Marjorie Priceman (Si-
mon), The Faithful Friend, written by Robert D. San Souci and illustrated by
Brian Pinkney (Simon), and Tops and Bottoms, adapted and illustrated by Janet
Stevens (Harcourt).
The Coretta Scott King Award will be presented to Virginia Hamilton, author of
Her Stories (Scholastic) for writing and to Tom Feelings for The Middle Passage:
White Ships Black Cargo (Dial) for illustration. King Honor Books for writing are
Christopher Paul Curtis' The Watsons Go to Birmingham-1963 (Delacorte), Rita
Williams-Garcia's Like Sisters on the Homefront (Lodestar), and Jacqueline
Woodson's From the Notebooks ofMelanin Sun (Blue Sky/Scholastic). King Honor
Books for illustration are Her Stories, written by Virginia Hamilton and illustrated
by Leo and Diane Dillon (Scholastic) and The Faithful Friend, written by Robert
D. San Souci and illustrated by Brian Pinkney (Simon).
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is
Houghton Mifflin Company for Uri Orlev's The Lady with the Hat, translated by
Hillel Halkin. The honor books are Star of Fear, Star of Hope by Jo Hoestlandt
(Walker) and Damned Strong Love: The True Story of Willi G. and Stephan K by
Lutz van Dijk (Holt).
The Scott O'Dell Award for historical fiction will be given to Theodore Taylor for
The Bomb (Harcourt).
The Canadian Library Association's Best Book of the Year for Children is Summer
of the Mad Monk by Cora Taylor (Greystone). The Best Book of the Year for
Young Adults is Adam and Eve and Pinch-Me by Julie Johnston (Little). The
Amelia Frances Howard-Gibbon Award for illustration goes to Barbara Reid for
Gifts, written by Jo Ellen Bogart (North Winds).
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Theresa Breslin for Whispers in the Graveyard
(Methuen).
The Kate Greenaway Medal was awarded to Gregory Rogers for Way Home, writ-
ten by Libby Hathorn (Crown).
APRIL 1996 
* 
285
The 1996 May Hill Arbuthnot Lecture will be delivered by Katherine Paterson.
The Margaret A. Edwards Award will be given to Judy Blume.
NCTE's Orbis Pictus Award for Outstanding Nonfiction for Children goes to
The Great Fire by Jim Murphy (Scholastic); Honor Books are Dolphin Man: Ex-
ploring the World of Dolphins by Laurence Pringle (Atheneum) and Rosie the Riv-
eter: Women Working on the Home Front in World War II by Penny Colman
(Crown).
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Holland
ADVENTURE STORIES: Aiken;
Wallace
African Americans: Krull
African Americans-fiction:
Sherman
African Americans-poetry: Wong
African Americans-stories:
Coleman
Alaska: Wood
Alaska-fiction: Meyer
ALPHABET BOOKS: Shannon
Animals-stories: Davol
Anthropology: Jackson
Appalachia-fiction: White
Arizona-stories: McLerran
Art and artists-stories: Kidd
Art history: Dewey; Kidd
Aviation: Denenberg
Babysitting-fiction: Cullen;
Gorog; Wright
Baseball: Andryszewski
Baseball-fiction: Armstrong
BEDTIME STORIES: Ho
BIBLE STORIES: Paterson
BIOGRAPHIES: Andryszewski;
Denenberg; Krull
Birds-poetry: Florian
Birds-stories: Fox
Birthdays-stories: Martin
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Willey
Brothers-fiction: Lynch
Bullies-fiction: Voigt
Child abuse-fiction: de Vries
CONCEPT BOOKS: Cohen;
Shannon
Cousins-fiction: Wallace; White
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Lynch; Jackson
Deafness-fiction: Neufeld
Divorce-fiction: Robinson
Dogs-stories: Wyllie
Dogs: Wood
Dragons-stories: Nash
Ecology: Bang
England-fiction: Berry
Eskimos-fiction: Meyer
Ethics and values: Fox
FANTASIES: Berry; Pullman
Farm life-fiction: Schnur
286 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Farm life-stories: McLerran
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Willey
Fathers and sons-fiction: Cullen
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Anzaldua;
Climo; Ganeri; Kurtz; Pollock;
Prose
Foxes-stories: Wyllie
Friends-fiction: Voigt
Frogs-stories: Goss
Gardening-fiction: Schecter
Ghosts-fiction: Wright
Ghosts-stories: Anzalduia
Growing up-fiction: Ehrlich;
Naylor
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Bunting; Hahn; Holland;
Morressy; Myers; Neufeld;
Pennebaker; White
History, prehistoric: Dewey
History, U.S.: Andryszewski;
Denenberg; Kroll; Holland
Holocaust-fiction: Matas
Homosexuality-fiction: Cart
Indians of North America: Dewey
Indians of North America-folklore:
Pollock
Indians of North America-stories:
Kurtz
Ireland-folklore: Climo
Jews-fiction: Matas
Jews-stories: Prose
Jugglers-fiction: Morressy
Language arts: Shannon
Latinos-fiction: Schecter
Latinos-stories: Anzaldda; Hayes
Literature, English: Hodges
LOVE STORIES: Berry; Coles;
Thomas; Willey
Martha's Vineyard-fiction:
Neufeld
Middle ages-fiction: Morressy
Monsters-stories: Rockwell
Mother and daughters-fiction:
Berry; de Vries
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Williamson
Music and musicians-stories: Goss
Music and musicians-fiction: Willey
MYSTERY STORIES: Coles; Neufeld
Mythology, classical: Rockwell
Nature study: Bang
New York City-fiction: Armstrong
Nigeria: Onyefulu
Pets-stories: Carr
Pittsburgh-fiction: Coles
POETRY: Florian; Nash; Wong
Pregnancy, adolescent-fiction: Pennebaker
Prejudice-fiction: Rinaldi
Prejudice-stories: Coleman
Reading aloud: Florian; Ganeri; Gorog
Reading, easy: Armstrong; Schecter;
Sherman; Wright
Reading, family: McLerran; Williamson
Reading, reluctant: Naylor
Religious education: Paterson;
Williamson
SCARY STORIES: Gorog; Wright
School-fiction: Naylor; Voigt
Shipwrecks-fiction: Bunting
SHORT STORIES: Ehrlich; Gorog
Sisters-fiction: Holland
Sisters-stories: Martin
Sled-dog racing: Wood
Sports: Andryszewski; Krull
Stepfathers-fiction: Sherman
Stepmothers-fiction: Rinaldi
Story hour: Anzaldua; Carr; Climo;
Cohen; Coleman; Davol; Florian;
French; Ganeri; Goss; Hayes; Kidd;
Kurtz; Martin, B.; Martin, J.;
McLerran; Nash; Pollack; Prose; Simon;
Wyllie
Thailand-stories: Ho
Track and field: Krull
Weddings-stories: Prose
West, the-fiction: Hahn
West, the-history: Kroll
World War I-fiction: Myers
World War II-fiction: Matas; Rinaldi
World War II: Andryszewski
'A iL
* Kirkus Reviews Pointer
IV
i
a
d
[Atter] Arthur Log-mild-mannered guard [ot works by
Vincent Van Dog and Henri Muttisse] at the Dogopolis
luseum of Art by day, mural-painting superhero by night-
s mistakenly apprehended when the Mona Woofa is stolen
from the museum; he paints his way out of prison and
succeeds in catching the crooks. The grateful museum
director offers Art Dog a one-man show, during which the
rtist unveils his masterpiece.... Hurd employs a disarming,
eliberately slapdash style, blazing a trail of scrawled charm
across the streets and skies of Gotham; Art Dog is a
superhero for all times."-Kirkus Reviews
Ages 4- 8. $14.95TR 0-06-024424-0; $14.89 LB 0-06-024425-9
Among Thacher Hurd's HarperCollins books
MAMA DON'T ALLOW 
MYSTERY ON THE DOCKS
Ages 4-8. $16.00TR 0-06-022689-7 
Ages 4-8.
$15.89 LB 0-06-022690-0 
$14.89 LB 0-06-022702-8
$4.95PB 0-06-443078-2 
$4.95PB 0-06-443058-8
9 HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd St., New York 10022
1
Sui Sint Tar/
Editf Maude, Tatan
A Literary Biography
ANNETTE WHITE-PARKS
Foreword by Roger Daniels
"Superbly researched, thoughtfully
reasoned, and beautifully written. ...
Will be the foundation for all future
work on Sui Sin Far." -
Elizabeth
Ammons, author of Conflicting
Stories: American Women Writers at
the Turn into the Twentieth Century
"White-Parks retrieves a lost, impor-
tant voice." -
Library Journal
This first full-length biography of the
first published Asian North American
fiction writer portrays both the
woman and her times. In the 1880s
and 1890s, the Eurasian Edith Maude
Eaton worked as a stenographer,
journalist, and fiction writer in
Montreal, often writing under the
name Sui Sin Far (Water Lily).
Today Sui Sin Far is being rediscov-
ered as par of American literature
and history Though her honestyand
determination ed to a life o finan-
cial insecurity ad physical hrdship,
SuiSin Far unknongly bequeathed
to readers nearly a century later a
unique legacy: a bodyl f work reso-
nant with literary meanings and
filled with historical insights into the
lives of Chinese immigrants to North
America.
Illus. Cloth, $34.95
'Mrs. Spring Tragrmanc
and Other -Writing
SuI SIN FAR
Edited by Amy Ling and
Annette White-Parks
"A fine tribute to one of the brave
early mothers of multiculturalism."
-
Publishers Weekly
This volume reprints stories from
Mrs. Spring Fragrance, Sui Sin Far's
one book, which has been out of
print since 1914. Also included are
other previously uncollected stories
and journalistic essays by this extra-
ordinary woman.
During an era of extreme Sinophobia,
the EurasianSu Sin Far (1865-1914)
courageously chose to write for the
Chinese in North America stories that
were humorous, tragic, charming, and
loving - in short, human. Her stories
sympathetically portray a group
caught between worlds, inheritors of
traditional Chinese values who find
themselves thrust into boomingly
meRcantile and extremely race-
conscious cities at the turn of the
century.
Volumes in the Asian American
Experience series
Cloth, $39.95; Paper, $15.95
800/545-4703
I~U~~n~·R·III~BY·anI
PAM
CONRAD
1947-1996
2 HarperCollins Children'Books
I
THE
OLYMPICS
A History of the
Modern Games
ALLEN GUTTMANN
"Here is a book that is as readable as it is profound, casting a
majestic sweep over the Games from 1896." -
G. E. Murray,
Sporting Traditions
"Guttmann's prodigious knowledge of his sources forms the basis
for a wonderfully insightful, judicious and interpretative essay."
-
Steve Gietschier, The Sporting News
In a century of being passed from runner to runner, from stadium
to stadium, from country to country, the Olympic torch has seen
glories, fiascoes, triumphs, tragedies, shattered records and near
misses. All are included in this vivid history of the modern Olympics.
Guttmann sets an interpretive social analysis against a backdrop of
individual victory and heartbreak, behind-the-scenes vying for site
selection, and a blend of famous history and little-known facts
about the Games. 
Illus. Paper, $12.95
Illinois History of Sports series
800/545-4703
UNVA6 
Y FII NI PFSS 
35SoIhIk Sret-haipag 
1612
BII Richard Peck
Th auho kd cant get enogh
of blends high tech and hijinks 
A
into anohe Intnt hit.
*Wtty 
Uat~npaced....W~ho
say tha humoer and science fic-
tion dount mlr-Bols fstard
"Pckcb agi d~mnara~te
bl mulr 
y~~ at depicin realistic
chaates Josh is a sypthtc
savvy narrator; Aaron brings new
vtlity to thre archetype of the4
computer ner."-,*Klrku Reviews
Thka clver aper doesnt miss
a bet."-Pulshr weel
Ages 10 up. 0.8037-1931-0. $14.99
THE GREAPT INTRACTV
> DREAM MACINE
IlialBook
University of linois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RErURN PoSTAGE GUARANEED
MAGINATION AND SCH5oLA 
IPR
THr 
CONTRITe 
O or WOMEN TO
AM 
iCAN YOUTH SWVICtS AND LUTEATME
L«iAyf Til s 4M94 S4ams 1996
Wmu 
co"TfMunncis by
CmWrItT A JtlMs. MAwctArT 
•• 
t Lm S. Cocaitr Am D. CAuo B•nyS 
h••Ame
KAY C. WMcwcA, 
Ame Lubn Am JAme 
Amt HgUn
focus c On tt 
ApwPOAcmtS. ACCOMIpstnMs. AND DTtaiAIno Or TW WOWNt
WHO HAVt htlPtD TO Dtct rount StrviCe 
WuAU 
ntMt 
WI AMt"ICA.
MAcAkrT 
MctLe
Etre Louse PowER
ZenMA SurtuM
MituVA 5AM*oR
betRTA MAW"
Auce JORuan
Liet L SrtARiS
CAnount 1wMs
VInGLMA AtLAMD
AN CAaou Mocat
Avudilble from
The Udiversity of Illinois Press / Journals Department
1325 South Oak Street / Champaign, I 61820
217/3330950
$1.5a 
d M 
0t D
K 
V-ua and Muteraid acceptrd
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
.
III IIH
0N 
1 
:j
,i .
Y :
·r
