ILLI 
NI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
p
Aý
4 
J
"Quick, unforgettable read-alouds for kids
who think they're too sophisticated to listen."
-Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
RAW HEAC~
BLOODY BONES
African-American Tales of the Supernatural
Selected by Mary E. Lyons
*A 
new cast of ghastly characters for lovers of monsters and scary
stories...ln retelling these delightfully eerie and gruesome stories,
Lyons has preserved the richness and immediacy of the African and
African-American oral traditions." -Starred, School Library Journal
"An excellent introduction explains how the stories traveled from Africa
and how they were modified by the influence of life in the Americas...
This collection will be hard for children to resist." -Horn Book
$1 1.95 S8E/0-684-1 9333-7/Ages 10 up
Also by Mary E. Lyons-
SORROW S KITCHEN
The Life and Folk/ore of Zora Neale Hurston
Illustrated with phot
$13.95 SBE/0-884-1 198-9/Ages 12 up
indIcates a rlnlorced hardcover edition
~UCHARLE5 SCRIBN~R'S SONS
Animpftnt of the Macmillan children's 8ool~ Group
880 Third Avenue New Yoift N 10022
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
September 1992
Vol. 46 No. 1
A LOOK INSIDE
3 
THE BIG PICTURE
Amazing Grace by Mary Hoffman and Caroline Binch
4 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
4 
* The Fortune-Tellers by Lloyd Alexander and Trina Schart Hyman
8 
* Tunes for Bears to Dance To by Robert Cormier
17 
* Zomo the Rabbit by Gerald McDermott
21 
* Back Home by Gloria and Jerry Pinkney
26 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
28 SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
* 4
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 54 East Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, U. of II. at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education
Violet J. Harris, Assistant Professor, College of Education
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Carol Fox, Youth Services Consultant, Illinois State Library
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$5.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd.
Single copy rate: $3.00. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint
Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University
Microfilms, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in
microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription
checks should be made payable to the University of Illnois Press. All notices of change of
address should provide both the old and new address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to
University of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1992 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
SEPTEMBER 1992 
* 
3
THE BIG PICTURE
Amazing Grace
by Mary Hoffman, illustrated by Caroline Binch
Grace is a word-and certainly a concept-too little exercised in our culture. Its
definition and etymology take up nine oversize columns ofsmall print in the Oxford
English Dictionary, with several more pages devoted to related words. It has few
precise synonyms, none with such varied resonance. Grace can mean both physical
attractiveness and psychic good will, two qualities that, except in the word grace, are
often considered unrelated or even opposite. Further, gracecan mean both inherent
goodness and forgiveness for the lack of goodness. It can involve granting favors or
rendering thanks for favors received. It implies both giving and getting. The
complexity of the word blesses us with a better understanding of human nature.
Amazing Grace, a classic hymn that celebrates spiritual power, is also the title
of the landmark picture book featured on the first full-color cover of The Bulletin
ofthe Center for Children s Books, newly published by the Graduate School of Library
and Information Science and the University ofIllinois Press at Urbana-Champaign.
Amazing Grace, reviewed in the September, 1991, issue of The Bulletin and selected
for the annual Bulletin Blue Ribbons list, is a dynamic book in both form and
function. The richly illustrated story of a girl whose love of stories empowers her
to overcome race and gender prejudice to do what she dreams, Hoffman and Binch's
picture book demonstrates the potency ofimagination by being potently imaginative.
Like Grace, most children are vulnerable for one reason or another, if only by virtue
of being small and defenseless. Their sturdiest resource, like Grace's, is imagining
themselves anew.
In finding a new home for a 45-year-old journal, we have tried, like Grace,
to imagine ourselves anew. The goal of every one of our reviews is to signal
imagination in children's books, or to criticize the lack where imagination is
missing. It's time for the journal's graphic format to reflect some of its consistent
verbal imagination. Debra Bolgla ofthe University of Illinois Office of Publications
redesigned the journal with a light touch and a keen eye for the features we wanted
to start, including "The Big Picture" and "Professional Connections." (We hope
librarians and teachers will enjoy using the new subject and use index, as well.) To
celebrate our renewal, we could think of no better visual image than Amazing Grace,
pack on her back, setting out to seek her fortune in a pair of seven-league galoshes,
alert to the possibilities of life and literature.
Our current state of grace, like the word itself, is a paradoxical one. We owe
much to Leigh Estabrook, dean of the Graduate School of Library and Information
Science, for her vision in offering us a strong academic setting. Packing up a
collection of books that has inspired generations of University of Chicago students
4 
* THE BULLETIN
brought inevitable sadness, but opening the boxes of books to be reviewed in our
new home brings a fresh sense of energy. What we receive, we can now give more
vividly to readers, for each of our covers will feature an image from a book reviewed
in that issue. Amazing Grace, however, seems timeless enough to appear a year after
publication; her creative development can help us cultivate our own.
Betsy Hearne, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALBOROUGH, JEZ 
Where's My Teddy?; written and illus. by Jez Alborough.
Candlewick, 1992 
[26p]
ISBN 1-56402-048-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
3-6 yrs
Sprightly rhyming couplets accompany little Eddie on his mission through a
watercolored forest to find his lost teddy, Freddie. "'Help!' said Eddie. 'I'm scared
already! I want my bed! I want my teddy!"' Instead, Eddie finds a big teddy ...
and an even bigger bear, who's looking for his own lost pal. Kids, safely clutching
their own bedtime buddies, will have the simple text memorized after three readings,
tops, and the rhyme provides a soothing counterpoint to the anxious story. The
book is oversize, allowing the bear and his teddy to be really big, but here again the
softly contoured browns and greens make these a pair of gentle giants, evoking a
recognition-and empathy-that children will readily feel. RS
ALEXANDER, LLOYD 
The Fortune- Tellers; written and illus. by Trina Schart
Hyman. 
Dutton, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-525-44849-7 
$15.00 
R* 5-8 yrs
The problem with this book is that there's so much to look at you won't want to put
it down. If you're lucky, somebody will read it to you so that you can listen to the
resounding story while you look; if you're clever, in fact, you'll make someone read
it to you while you look (slowly, look again, read it one more time); and if you're
generous, you'll give kids the same experience. The title page opens on a vivid
market scene in Cameroon, where a carpenter sets out for his day's work. "Will I
be hammering and sawing the rest of my days?" he asks himself. No, says a fortune-
teller whom he consults. "Rich you will surely be ... on one condition: that you
earn large sums of money.... You shall wed your true love ... if you find her and
she agrees. And you shall be happy as any in the world if you can avoid being
miserable." We should all have such prophesies-and turn them into the same
satisfying life as the carpenter's. As for the fortune-teller? Ask the runaway ox, the
lion, the hornets, and the giant eagle, all of whom affect his fate beyond the wildest
possibilities of prediction, an irony that should not escape sharp observers old or
young. The trickster's hand is hidden here; it is the author's, and a clever tale he has
turned, proving as adept at a picture book text as he is at complex fantasy series.
What lends the words special significance is the contemporary West African setting
that Trina Schart Hyman has peopled with a witty cast of individualized men,
women, and children. Each double spread bursts with action in the form of physical
SEPTEMBER 1992 
* 5
posture and facial expression. Hyman's linework has always been powerful, but the
colors, patterns, and textures here seem freshly energetic and profoundly warm-
hearted. 
The sceneric detail is rich without becoming cluttered; equatorial
chameleons, it turns out, are just as entertaining as European fairies. In the form
of a funny story, this offers children a vital new world through which to wander. BH
ALLEN, LAURA JEAN 
Rollo and Tweedy and the Ghost at Dougal Castle; written and
illus. by Laura Jean Allen. 
HarperCollins, 1992 
[6 4 p] 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020107-X 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020106-1 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
If Holmes and Watson had been mice, they would have been Tweedy and Rollo. In
this, their second adventure, they are at a Scottish castle, attempting to solve the
mystery of the castle ghost. For a minimalist Conan Doyle-type mystery, it's
surprisingly complete: there are suspects, motives, red herrings, atmosphere, and
even a characteristic (if uncharacteristically brief) lecture on detecting: "The secret
of a great detective is thinking," says Tweedy as he puffs on his pipe. The line-and-
wash illustrations are simple and beginning-reader-suitable, but Allen gets in a
surprising amount of appropriate detail, such as the Dougal family crest with mouse
rampant, and the mullioned windows and aspidistras of a well-run stately home. It
all makes for pleasing perusal and is an engaging introduction to a time-honored and
-tested genre. DS
ASBJORNSEN, PETER CHRISTEN 
The Day Hans Got His Way: A Norwegian Folktale;
ad. by David Lewis Atwell; illus. by Debby Atwell. 
Houghton, 1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-58772-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 6-9 yrs
Aversion of the Norwegian folktale "The Husband Who Was to Mind the House,"
this book joins the ranks of several other adaptations of the same story (e.g., Michael
Hague's). Hans, who thinks his wife has it easy, challenges her to change jobs with
him for a day. "Tomorrow you should go to work in the fields and I will mind the
house." In Asbjornsen's original text, the wife issues the challenge, and this subtle
alteration of the tale changes the story from one about a wise woman to one about
an egotistical man. The rest of the story is the familiar one. While Gertrude toils
in the fields, Hans stumbles through his day in the house making one foolish mistake
after another. The text is often difficult for a young audience: "While she clumsily
struggled to free her nosy self, her feathered fellows ran wildly in every direction
proclaiming this great catastrophe." Warm colors enhance the folk art-style of the
paintings, but check to see if you like what you've already got on the shelf before
selecting this version. KJ
BAILLIE, ALLAN Adrift. 
Viking, 1992 
119p
ISBN 0-670-84474-8 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Flynn's been assigned to look after his little sister Sally at the beach; lost in pirate
fantasies, he doesn't notice that the big crate which the two, along with their cat, are
sitting on has floated away from the shore. That's it for plot, as Flynn tries and fails
to return the crate to shore, staves offsharks, constructs a makeshift sail, catches fish.
Throughout, he tries to comfort his sister and thinks back on their life on the farm,
happy memories that have turned to bitterness since the family, for economic
6 
* THE BULLETIN
reasons, moved to the city. Although the survival theme has appeal, it is statically
rendered, and the extended reveries are a bit whiney and slow the pace. After a day
and night, the crate is borne back to shore; expectably, Flynn matures as a result of
the ordeal and feels ready to face his father's anger. Although the book does not have
the action of Gary Paulsen's wilderness dramas, readers who like to imagine
themselves in perilous circumstances might appreciate this Australian adventure.
RS
BARE, COLLEEN STANLEY 
This Is a House; written and illus. with photographs by
Colleen Stanley Bare. 
Cobblehill, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-525-65090-3 
$14.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
Nestling a photo of an architect's plans into another picture of an overgrown site,
Bare begins her chronology of housebuilding from the ground up. Simple (if
sometimes oddly constructed) sentences accompany clear color photos of the
ground being cleared, foundation-building, flooring and wall construction, siding,
roofing, wiring and plumbing installation, and all the finishing touches necessary
for comfort. "This is the house that now is a home." Although it follows the same
format as Ken Robbins' Building a House (BCCB 4/84), Bare's book is for younger
readers, and more direct than the fictionalized treatment in Joyce Maynard's picture
book New House (BCCB 4/87). A comprehensive glossary and an index are
appended. RS
BLOCK, FRANCESCA LIA 
Cherokee Batandthe Goat Guys. Zolotow/HarperCollins,
1992 
[11 2 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020270 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020269-6 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-
Home alone. Weetzie Bat and the other grownups have gone to Mexico to make a
movie, leaving Cherokee, Witch Baby, and Raphael ChongJah-Love on their own.
Witch Baby, in some obscure fear, has covered herselfwith mud and retreated to the
garden shed, only coming out when her old friend Angel Juan reappears, and
Cherokee, with the help of Weetzie's friend Coyote, who is nominally in charge of
the waifs, makes Witch Baby a pair of wings for her birthday. (If this isn't making
any sense to you, you'd best go read the first two books in this series, Weetzie Batand
Witch Baby, reviewed in the 2/89 and 10/91 issues.) The wings are only the first gift;
the goat pants that follow and a taboo pair of horns stolen by Witch Baby from
Coyote lead the four youngsters into both sexual maturity and great trouble, capped
by an ominous fourth totem that arrives in the mail. While Coyote is a tiresomely
sentimentalized Noble Native American, and the author's rhapsodic segues occa-
sionally verge on self-parody, this is a stronger book than its vague predecessor Witch
Baby, with both the language and the action controlled by the folkloric patterning
that made Weetzie Bat so convincing. Block can effectively turn from swooning
romance to scary cocaine sequences; the darker scenes, in fact, reveal a power in her
writing that's been untested by the charming whimsy for which she has been
celebrated. RS
BoTTNER, BARBARA 
Bootsie Barker Bites; illus. by Peggy Rathmann. 
Putnam,
1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22125-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. K-2
SEPTEMBER 1992 
* 7
Bootsie's mother and the nameless narrator's mother are best friends, so while the
adults visit, our beleaguered heroine is left to Bootsie's tender mercies ("'You're a
turtle!' howls Bootsie. 'And I'm a TURTLE-EATING DINOSAUR'"'). When
Bootsie is scheduled to stay overnight, the narrator finally fights back with her own
dinosaur game, which galvanizes Bootsie into flight. While Bootsie never actually
bites in the book, she's clearly every child's nightmare playmate, and if the ending
is a little too neat, at least it doesn't have the girls becoming friends. The lively
illustrations are line-and-wash, with disciplined, lighthearted colors balanced by
fierce black outlines as Bootsie yanks the narrator's braid or chases her outside the
frame of the picture; Bootsie herself is a beautifully turned out amalgam ofcrinolines
and cruelty. Less conciliatory than Kevin Henkes' A Weekend with Wendell(BCCB
10/86), this is truly a child's-eye-view of a difficult situation, with faceless adults and
looming shadows of dinosaurs. Many youngsters will recognize the threat, and
they'll appreciate the possibility of a solution while enjoying its humorous depic-
tion. DS
BROOKE, WILLIAM J. 
Untold Tales. HarperCollins, 1992 
16 5p.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020272-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020271-8 
$15.00 
R* 
Gr. 6-9
The clever play on traditions that Brooke wove into A Telling of the Tales (BCCB
5/90) is elaborated here in several stories: "A Prince in the Throat," in which a queen
yearns for the days when her husband was a modest frog; "A Beauty in the Beast,"
which surprises readers with its arch role reversal; and two connected stories "A Fate
in the Door" and "A Tale Untold," faintly reminiscent of differences between the
two acts of "Into the Woods," or more accurately in this case, "Into the Computer."
This last-a metadiscursive bag of tricks-will both amuse and challenge fantasy/
sci fi readers as they follow the fate of an author intruding, in the most literal sense,
on his own story. Light wordplay (especially the punning between Beauty and the
Beast) counteracts a baroque complexity of story frames to create some fine-tuned
entertainment. BH
CARPENTER, ANGELICA SHIRLEY 
L. Frank Baum: Royal Historian of Oz; by
Angelica Shirley Carpenter and Jean Shirley. 
Lerner, 1992 
14 4 p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-8225-4910-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
The Oz books were just one facet of L. Frank Baum's writing, and his writing was
just one aspect of a multivarious career. Baum wrote and acted in plays, edited
newspapers, ran a store ("Baum's Bazaar"), and made movies. In addition to the Oz
books, Baum wrote other fairy tales, nursery rhymes, and a series for girls, Aunt Jane's
Nieces, under the name Edith Van Dyne. While there are some dull patches in this
biography, Carpenter and Shirley faithfully chronicle Baum's peripatetic life, and
fans will appreciate the inside look at Oz minutiae, such as the script changes for the
first theatrical production: "Dorothy became a young woman instead of a little girl.
This change allowed her a romance with a newly created character, Dashemoff
Daily, the poet laureate of Oz." Contemporary black-and-white photos add period
flavor, and there are numerous reproductions (also black-and-white) of Denslow's
and Neill's illustrations for Baum's books. A bibliography, a selected list of the
author's works, and an index are appended. RS
8 
* 
THE BULLETIN
CORMIER, ROBERT 
Tunes for Bears to Dance To. 
Delacorte, 1992 
[112p]
ISBN 0-385-30818-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Henry, eleven, longs to give his dead older brother a fitting marker for his grave, but
since Eddie died last year, their father, depressed, has been unable to work and their
mother barely makes enough money for the family to get by. But the bigoted, evil
grocer Mr. Hairston promises Henry the gravestone and more if he will perform one
task: destroying an exquisite toy village carved by Mr. Levine, a refugee of the
Holocaust. Henry has befriended the old man, so Hairston's proposal should
engender a profound dilemma as well as a great temptation; unfortunately, Cormier
stacks his story in a way that allows little real examination of ethical questions.
Hairston is a monster who hates all foreigners and beats his daughter Doris; his evil
is unrelieved and unreal, his smile "like the smile on a Halloween mask." Henry
never has to make a decision about wrecking the woodcarvings: at the moment of
truth, Henry holding mallet high, a rat runs over his foot and turns a moral quandary
into a slapstick accident. The compression of evils-"Deliver us from evil. From
Hitler, yes, from a grocer too"---does justice to neither, and Hairston's fadeaway
from ogre to coward ("Your father's weak, Doris. And he's afraid") dilutes both the
character and the theme. This novel is written in a simpler style (bar the title, an
elliptical quote from Flaubert) and at a younger reading level than most ofCormier's
other books, and the suspenseful storytelling may pull readers to their own
consideration of the questions Henry faces. Let's hope they know that the answers
aren't so easy. RS
CRESSWELL, HELEN 
Almost Goodbye; written and illus. by Helen Cresswell and
Judy Brown. 
Dutton, 1992 
62p 
(Speedsters)
ISBN 0-525-44858-6 
$11.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Collecting "white elephants" for a school sale, best friends Susie and Gumball come
across a magic, wish-fulfilling lamp. That's all you really need to know-it's a time-
and kid-tested story about the disastrous but funny consequences of wishes gone
wrong. The innovation here is in the fluid play between pictures and text,
straightforward narration and cartoon-ballooned dialogue. Cresswell's manic tale
shamelessly plays to the crowd (after becoming invisible, Gumball can't wait for a
peek into the girls' bathroom); Brown's ink-and-wash illustrations have a zippy,
comic-book look that will snap reluctant readers right up. While nobody is going
to defend the Speedsters series as great literature, the entries in it have a tone and
touch that's just right for kids too sophisticated for easy-reader series, but not yet
confident with traditional, pictureless fiction. Not that your good readers will pass
this by-everybody needs a break. RS
CZERNECKI, STEFAN 
TheSleepingBread;by Stefan Czernecki and Timothy Rhodes;
illus. by Stefan Czernecki. 
Hyperion, 1992 4 0p
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-207-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-183-0 
$14.95 
R 
5-7 yrs
Set in Guatemala and illustrated with pictures in the style of cloth art which is
popular there, this is the story of a village baker whose bread will not rise. Only after
San Sim6n comes to the baker in a dream and tells him to find the old blue-eyed
beggar who has been driven from the village does the baker discover that the beggar's
bitter tears, fallen into a water jar, have kept the bread from rising. The villagers then
SEPTEMBER 1992 
* 9
repent their lack of generosity and costume the beggar as their patron saint during
the annual parade. Although this seems to draw on several folk motifs (Elijah
traveling as a beggar, Christ in disguise as a needy child, etc.), no source is cited. As
an original story, it is fairly predictable and slightly puzzling in the detail of the blue
eyes, a trait which San Sim6n seems to share. However, the fable-like quality, the
unusual cultural context, and the intricately patterned illustrations have plenty of
appeal. BH
DUDER, TESSA 
Alex in Rome. 
Houghton, 1992 
[166p]
ISBN 0-395-62879-2 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
In Lane Three, AlexArcher (BCCB 11/89) closed with Alex's successful swim against
rival Maggie Benton that makes her eligible to compete in the 1960 Rome
Olympics; this sequel follows Alex's bid for a medal, competing against such
luminaries as Australia's Dawn Fraser. Actually, Alex in Rome is a sequel to Alex in
Winter, not published in this country. Although the unavailability of the second
book makes the third sometimes unduly puzzling, the swimming scenes are tense
and suspenseful, and the depiction of Alex as a willful, prickly, and hardworking
competitor remains true. However, the author has overcomplicated her story with
a narration that alternates between Alex's journal entries and those of a young New
Zealand expatriate who has been smitten with Alex; at first, it isn't easy to tell who's
talking. The romance never really goes anywhere, even though Tom and Alex do:
much of the book reads like a Rome travelogue, circa 1960. Sports purists may balk
at the results of Alex's race (given that we know, historically, who won the medals);
others may be swamped by the inconclusive plotting and lackadaisical pace of the
storytelling. While the first book-both a thrilling sports story and a tender
romance-stands on its own, this one will probably be limited to Alex's fans, ready
to cheer her on. RS
ERNST, LISA CAMPBELL 
Zinnia and Dot; written and illus. by Lisa Campbell
Ernst Viking, 1992 
[3 2 p]
ISBN 0-670-83091-7 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Zinnia and Dot, hens, break a long, distrustful silence when they begin to brag
about their eggs and themselves, not noticing a weasel wandering by who decides
to take advantage of the quarrel. "It was poultry pandemonium," and then..." their
eggs were gone." All but one, that is, and the two hens begin to argue anew about
whose it is. Unable to reach a decision, both settle their ample bottoms upon the
egg, and it's only another attempted egg-napping that, Solomon-like, brings them
to agreement. "Lucky we were both here," says Zinnia, and the newly hatched chick
gets the loving attention of "not one, but two mother hens." Ernst has an easy
storytelling style and a flair for grouchy dialogue that clucks to be read aloud, and
her line-and-wash paintings, lighted with gentle yellow tones, warm the comedy.
RS
FISHER, LEONARD EVERETT 
Galileo; written and illus. by Leonard Everett
Fisher. 
Macmillan, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-02-735235-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
While the complex nature of Galileo's work seems at odds with a picture book
10 
* 
THE BULLETIN
format, Fisher's weighty, monochromatic tableaux have enough sophistication and
solemnity to make this book acceptable to older readers. 
Fisher is clear in
simplifying Galileo's discoveries for a juvenile audience, managing, within thirty-
two pages, discussion of Copernican theory, specific gravity, the law of the
pendulum, and Galileo's astronomical observations. Paralleling this survey is a
chronicle of Galileo's life, featuring most prominently his ongoing battle with the
Church, and eventual heresy trial and recantation. The black-and-white paintings
are handsome but too much of a tone, and less informative than atmospheric (the
ones of Galileo observing the night sky, in fact, have the most drama). While the
book will probably not find much in the way of a recreational-reading audience, it
could find any number ofhomes in the curriculum, being particularly useful for that
latest bane of librarians, the easy-biography report. RS
FLEISCHMAN, 
PAUL. 
Townsend's Warbler; illus. with photographs. 
Zolotow/
HarperCollins, 1992 
52p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021875-4 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021874-6 
$13.00 
SpR 
Gr. 7-
Dovetailing the lyricism of his poetry with the precision of his historical fiction,
Fleischman here recounts two journeys that took place in 1834: one, by land, of two
naturalists who traveled from Missouri to Fort Vancouver in the Oregon Country;
the other, by air, of a then unnamed group of birds from Central America to the
Pacific Northwest. John Townsend and Thomas Nuthall, respectively obsessed
with fauna and flora, rode the Oregon Trail with explorer Nathaniel Wyeth, and
their miseries, discoveries, and delights could form a book of their own. While
Fleischman's account of this expedition is always both graceful and unflinching, it's
a little too terse to be really involving, with several episodes begging for further
development. The parallel account of the birds that would come to be known as
Townsend's Warblers is even briefer but is a model ofclear, intuitive, nature-writing
that holds its own appeal: "While the birds and animals of the forest floor lived in
perpetual twilight, it was much sunnier in the tops of trees, where the females began
building their nests. It was a task that required many trips, vertical and horizontal."
Although the publisher recommends the book for ages eight through twelve, the real
audience will be older kids and adults who can fill out the text's brevity with an
understanding of the winds that drive both birds and men. RS
GIBBONS, GAIL Say Woof.: The Day ofa Country Veterinarian; written and illus. by
Gail Gibbons. 
Macmillan, 1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-02-736781-9 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
The happy people of Gibbons' world spend a day caring for pets and farm animals.
With all of the romance and none of the harsh facts, preschoolers will learn some
of what veterinarians and their assistants do. On this pleasant day, all the animals
that are tended by the vet get better; even the baby groundhog brought in by a
concerned child gets his broken leg set. ("All is well.") Any difficult terms are
defined within the cartoon-like illustrations. The book ends with general tips on
caring for pets. Although it is a mild depiction ofa vet's duties, this will make a good
addition to the preschool career curriculum. KJ
SEPTEMBER 1992 
* 
11
GREGORY, VALISKA 
Happy Burpday, Maggie McDougal!; illus. by Pat Porter.
Little, 1992 
60p 
(Springboard Books)
ISBN 0-316-32777-8 
$11.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Maggie's best friend Bonkers took her to a White Sox game for her birthday; now
Bonkers' birthday is coming up, and Maggie doesn't have any money for his present,
having spent her savings on hot dogs at the game. This early chapter book effectively
combines school scenes and family moments as Maggie scouts around for an idea
for a present-a big present-that won't cost any money. Although most kids won't
have Maggie's luck (finding in the attic a first edition of Bonkers' favorite comic, for
example) they will rejoice in her ingenuity and appreciate the classroom projects
(and pests, like Cynthia, who brings a diamond ring for heirloom show-and-tell)
that further her quest. Occasional ink drawings look a little young but will help new
readers get the lay of the land. RS
GRIFFITHS, BARBARA 
Frankenstein's Hamster: Ten Spine-Tingling Tales; written
and illus. by Barbara Griffiths. 
Dial, 1992 
[12 8p]
ISBN 0-8037-0952-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
A couple of ghosts, an Egyptian curse, a doomed Boy Scout, an unusually realistic
videotape-these are the kind of ingredients with which Griffiths fills these short
stories. Some don't even involve the supernatural: In "Secrets-or the Curse of
Estragon," it's merely a gullible little brother's belief in his sibling's story that leads
to chaos. Most of the tales, however, are more otherworldly: in "Decorating the
Bridge," a boy who dies after taunting his teacher is reincarnated-as that teacher;
and in "Slipscream" a child finally manages to get rid of his mother's boyfriend-
or does he? The story ideas tend to be a bit convoluted, so that the plotting crowds
out the payoff, and the humor is not always successful. Still, the writing is smooth,
the stories are easily readable, and the preponderance of ironic twists will please
many. The illustrations, controlled and sometimes ornate line drawings, frequently
succeed in evoking a stately Victorian eeriness that the stories never quite attain.
This is a good collection of entry-level creepiness for not-ready-for-Poe readers. DS
GRIMM, JAKOB LUDWIG KARL 
One GifiDeservesAnother;ad. byJoanne Oppenheim;
illus. by Bo Zaunders. 
Dutton, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-525-44975-2 
$13.00 
R 
Gr. 1-3
When the kind but poor brother grows an unbelievably huge turnip, his snotty, rich
brother won't help him transport it to market ("'A poor man like you should grow
small turnips,' scoffed the rich brother's wife"). After the king comes to admire the
enormous vegetable, the poor man decides that it is only "fit for a king" and gives
it to him. In return the king rewards the poor man with riches. The king is just as
generous after the rich brother showers him with gold and jewels. The king gives
him his most prized possession, you guessed it-the turnip. The adaptor has chosen
to end the tale on that ironic note and not continue, as the Grimms did, with the
greedy man plotting his kind brother's murder. Children will appreciate the justice
of good rewarded in this upbeat version. 
The watercolor and pen cartoon
illustrations are comical and vivid, the faces very expressive. The best study of
human nature is a picture of the greedy brother sleepless in bed, imagining the
wealth that the king is about to give him. This has the humor of a "Fractured
Fairytales" episode and could become a storyhour favorite. KJ
12 
* THE BULLETIN
HALL, BARBARA 
Fool's Hill. Bantam, 1992 
[160p]
ISBN 0-553-08993-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Stifled in a small-town Virginia community where her parents set rigid behavior
standards out of a concern for the family reputation, fourteen-year-old Libby Burke
determines to join the inside crowd of teenagers. The price turns out to be high, and
Libby learns to forego categorizing her peers as she observes them more deeply: an
old friend cannot accept new ways; a flashy new friend betrays her; a tough biker
turns into a tender boyfriend. Like Hall's fine novel Dixie Storms(BCCB 7/90), this
tackles a large cast with energy. The family dynamics are subtle, and the theme of
maturation is realized through credible storytelling. Although a few points in the
first-person narrative become overtly analytical ("Like Millie said, there was no right
or wrong way to be. There was just life... "), more often the motifs emerge through
vivid scenes such as the one when Libby throws a rock through a school window or
later rebuffs the advances of a popular boy taking her for a "walk" in the woods.
Readers will empathize with the protagonist's yearning to belong, on the one hand,
and break out, on the other. She's a strong character and deserves the satisfying
resolution she forges for herself. BH
HARRISON, BARBARA 
A Twilight Struggle: The Life ofJohn Fitzgerald Kennedy; by
Barbara Harrison and Daniel Terris. 
Lothrop, 1992 
159p 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-688-08830-9 
$18.00 
R* Gr. 6-12
More compressed but no less eloquent and well documented than Judie Mills'
biography of Kennedy (BCCB 6/88), Harrison and Terris' book has focused
selectively on detailing incidents that acquire an almost metaphorical significance
in representing the statesman's life. The twilight of the title refers to the thematic
paradoxes of Kennedy's idealism and practicality, dedication to peace and fierce
competitiveness, energy for life and sense of tragedy, family loyalty and flagrant
infidelity. This approach allows the authors to deal honestly with the man's flaws
as well as his greatness, for the light and shadow were integral aspects of the same
personality. Though the price of a sharp focus is the exclusion of some relevant
information (Jack's boyhood rivalry with his favored older brother, for instance, is
heavily emphasized over his important relationship with his sisters), the text is
generally well balanced in treating the interplay of personal and political informa-
tion. Readers will emerge with a synthesis of facts to help them consider both
criticism and adulation of the thirty-fifth president. The style is involving, the
photographs and book design are carefully considered, and the bibliographical essay
and listing are helpful. An extensive chronology of events and source notes for
quotes offer further guidance to researchers. BH
HEIDE, FLORENCE PARRY 
Grim and Ghastly Goings-on; illus. by Victoria
Chess. 
Lothrop, 1992 
[24 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-08322-6 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-08319-6 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-5
Heide and Chess, collaborators on Tales for the Perfect Child(BCCB 11/85), team
up again for a gleefully gross and ghoulish collection of poetry. These poems
generally revolve around food ("What You Don't Know about Food" deserves to
SEPTEMBER 1992 
* 
13
become a classic) or monsters of fearsome orality and appetite (notably the
fascinatingly repellent "Hungry Jake"-"one day by some mistake/ he ate himself"),
subjects guaranteed to keep young readers' interest. The verses achieve a controlled
frightfulness paralleled by Chess' lividly colored and meticulously drawn grotesque-
ries, who grimace cheerfully next to each poem. These could also be read aloud to
younger monster fans-anybody fond of Silverstein's "The Slithergadee" is a good
candidate. Besides, where else are you going to learn about the evil secret mission
of rubber bands, or how monster mothers brag about their offspring? DS
HENRY, 
MARGUERITE 
Misty's 
Twilight; illus. 
by 
Karen 
Haus
Grandprd. 
Macmillan, 1992 
143p
ISBN 0-02-743623-3 
$13.95 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Dr. Sandy Price, respectable mother of two and owner of thoroughbreds, harbors
a secret dream: to own a Chincoteague pony. She and her children, caught up in
reading Misty of Chincoteague, attend Pony Penning Day and the subsequent
auction on Chincoteague, and they buy not one pony but four. One of these is
Misty's granddaughter Sunshine, and she soon produces a perky pinto filly named
Twilight. Twilight is a talented handful, and Sandy has her trained first for cutting,
them jumping, then finally for dressage, in which the pony still competes. The
story's a little unfocused, with much rehashing of Misty in the first half and
characters coming and going during Twilight's checkered training career, so it's not
always easy to concentrate on Twilight herself. It's still an engaging horse story,
however, as Twilight battles "pinto prejudice" in her various competitions. Fans of
Misty and her dynasty will enjoy the more recent glimpse of Chincoteague
(although they may, like Sandy, feel they "just can't see the stuffed Misty") and the
exploits of a beloved pony's descendant. Illustrations are variable in quality: there
are some lively ink sketches of the ponies, but the black-and-white watercolor is
smudgy and the human figures awkward. DS
HIGGINSEN, VY 
Mama, I Want to Sing; by Vy Higginsen with Tonya
Bolden. 
Scholastic, 1992 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-590-44201-5 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Doris, at eleven, is a star of the choir in her father's church; his sudden death,
however, takes away her musical gift and causes Doris to sink into private misery.
This novel, set in 1940s Harlem, tells of Doris' eventual recovery and her subsequent
determination to become a successful popular singer, much to her devout mother's
dismay. Although the story is sentimental and predictable, and the writing is
somewhat naive, fans of such books as The Soul Brothers and Sister Lou will
appreciate the accessible evocation of a mid-century African American community.
Doris' fights with her mother, secret experiments with make-up and slinky clothes,
and her eventual triumph at the famed Apollo Theater are all crowd-pleasing
elements, as are the glamorous-if unlikely-prologue and epilogue that show us
Doris Winter, superstar and gracious lady. RS
HIRSCHFELDER, ARLENE B., comp. 
Rising Voices: 
Writings of Young Native
Americans; comp. by Arlene B. Hirschfelder and Beverly R. Singer. 
Scribner's,
1992 
115p
ISBN 0-684-19207-1 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
14 
* THE BULLETIN
Sixty-two poems and brief essays by Native American young people are organized
into sections on identity, family, homelands, ritual and ceremony, education, and
"harsh realities." As literature, the selections are uneven, ranging from the subtly
crafted to the flatly didactic; but as a social statement, they are consistently powerful,
especially as the contemporary work becomes informed, in the course of the book,
by earlier accounts of forced education in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. Each piece is followed by a description of the writer, his or her tribe, and
the context in which the piece was written-many were previously published for
contests or small student anthologies, especially under the direction of Mick
Fedullo. Varied in subject, level, and tone, this book is well worth discussion among
older elementary, junior high, and even high school students who can empathize
with both the resistance and the commitment that energize these voices. BH
HOFFMAN, MARY 
Amazing Grace; illus. by Caroline Binch. 
Dial, 1991 
26 p
ISBN 0-8037-1040-2 
$13.95 
R* 
4 -8 yrs
This month's Big Picture. For original review, see the September, 1991, issue of
The Bulletin.
HOPKINS, LEE BENNETT, comp. 
Questions;, illus. by Carolyn Croll. 
Zolotow/
HarperCollins, 1992 
[6 4 p] 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022413-4 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022412-6 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 1-3
As Karla Kuskin recently showed in her I Can Read collection Soap Soup (BCCB 6/
92) poetry can be an easy introduction to the printed word; the rhymes and short
lines provide quick reward, and the brevity is comforting to those still daunted by
Chapter One. The range of Hopkins' selections is broad in terms of sophistication;
a new reader not quite ready for "Who Has Seen the Wind?" can still appreciate
"How much wood would a woodchuck chuck?" As the title indicates, the theme is
"questions"; Kuskin, Aileen Fisher, Eve Merriam, Mother Goose, and Hopkins
himself are among the poets whose work is included (occasionally excerpted).
Croll's watercolor illustrations are rounded, soft, and sweet, individually attractive
but, taken as a whole, a little bland. RS
HURWITZ, JOANNA 
Ali Baba Bernstein: Lost and Found; illus. by Karen
Milone. 
Morrow, 1992 
[9 6 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11455-5 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11454-7 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Ali Baba Bernstein (nW David Bernstein, first appearing in TheAdventures ofAli Baba
Bernstein, BCCB 6/85) returns with more credible and charming adventures: he
finds a one-hundred-dollar bill, takes care of his neighbors' dachshund, and finds
his own way to Macy's when he and his mother are separated. The humor is gentle
and mostly situational, and Hurwitz treats the dignified Ali Baba with appropriate
respect, including the precise and periodic repetition ofhis age in years, months, and
days. Lessons in daily living and human nature appear (as when Ali Baba's false
report, while in a National Park, of seeing a bear comes back to him in a thousand
variants), but Hurwitz avoids moralizing at the expense of the story. Readers will
enjoy this perennially engaging young hero, and when he finally gets his long-
desired dog they'll feel he has really earned it. DS
SEPTEMBER 1992 
* 
15
IRWIN, HADLEY 
The Original Freddie Ackerman. 
McElderry, 1992 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-50562-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Trevor Frederick Ackerman describes his family as made up of Real-Parents, Other-
Parents, "three thems and two little its." In order to avoid spending the summer
where he doesn't feel wanted, Freddie chooses to visit his two unknown great-aunts
on Blue Isle, Maine. He never imagined there would be such a place, without TV
and malls, so right away he starts planning his escape. Actually, he does little more
than subside into Walter Mitty-like daydreams that interrupt the flow of the story,
but the depiction of Freddie as a love-starved yet self-absorbed twelve-year-old is
realistic and subtle. It's typical of Freddie that he doesn't check into the details
before selecting Blue Isle for the summer, nor does he realize until almost too late
what interesting old ladies his aunts are. By the time the summer is over, not only
has Freddie grown fond of his great-aunts, but he's also gotten into some really
wonderful scrapes. KJ
JOHNSON, STACIE 
Sort of Sisters; created by Walter Dean Myers. 
Bantam,
1992 
[16 0p] 
(18 Pine Street)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-29719-8 
$3.50
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-12
Like Sweet Valley High, this first book in a projected series is "created" by a well-
known author but written by other hands. Also like that series, this one looks like
it's going to be a familiar blend of home drama, school stuff, and romance-the
difference here, and a welcome one, is that the cast is largely African-American.
Casting is stock: there's the good girl, her best friend, the nice boy, the bad (but sexy)
boy, and the self-centered glamor queen. The tone is a little too virtuous, but the
writing is better, with more touches of humor, than most series, and the ethnicity
of the characters is more than a matter of skin-tones, with discussions of race and
racism naturally worked into the story. Given the fact that a first book in a series
has a lot of characters to introduce, there's too much plot (including a rivalry
between cousins, a school fund-raiser, and a basketball competition); still, one has
the sense that things might settle down in book two, The Party. RS
KELLOGG, STEVEN 
The Christmas Witch; written and illus. by Steven Kellogg. 
Dial,
1992 
[4 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1269-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1268-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Gloria (appropriately named, as it turns out) is hardly a model student at Madame
Pestilence's Academy for Young Goblins and Witches. 
She smiles too much
(students are expected to scowl at all times), she forgets her spells; worst of all, after
being inspired by an angelic visitation, she determines to become a "Christmas
witch" and goes off on a benevolent mission. This confounding of Christmas and
witches may put off some adults, while the bald didacticism of the story may bother
others; most kids will probably just enjoy Gloria's heroics as she brings together the
feuding Valdoons and Pepperwills in a spirit of Christmas kindness. The picture-
book audience will also enjoy Kellogg's where-do-I-look-first paintings of Christ-
mas trees and treasures, with the ominous swirl of Madame Pestilence's witch-cloak
providing some leavening menace. RS
16 
* THE BULLETIN
KONIGSBURG, E. L. 
Amy Elizabeth Explores Bloomingdale's; written and illus. by E.
L. Konigsburg. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1992 
[3 2 p]
ISBN 0-689-31766-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Actually, Amy Elizabeth never does make it to Bloomie's; nevertheless, she and her
Grandma have a fine time anyway, sampling the customs (getting the Times on
Sunday), trials (poop-scooping) and delicacies (Rumplemayer's hot chocolate) of
New York City. Konigsburg's story is savvy and snappy, accompanied by sophis-
ticated-yet warm-paintings that convey a great deal of the fun a grandmother can
have entertaining a visiting tourist from Houston. However, the tone of the text is
annoyingly arch, with disingenuous quips ("In Houston we don't have to leave
home to do the laundry. We do it one load at a time and don't watch") that young
listeners might find patronizing were the humor not so obviously directed over their
heads. Amy Elizabeth's remark about "grandmothers and primary caregivers"
trying to get taxis is cynically amusing to adults, but when you laugh, don't be
surprised ifyour listeners feel left out ofan inside joke. The full-color, double-spread
pictures (and accompanying filmclip-like sidebars) show the real story: an in-
trigued, sometimes exhausted little girl and patient grandma having a fine time
together. RS
KRAMER, STEPHEN 
Lightning, illus. with photographs by Warren Faidley. ISBN
0-87614-659-0
Avalanche, illus. with photographs by Patrick Cone. 
ISBN
087614-422-9
Each book: Carolrhoda, 1992 
48p 
(Nature in Action) 
$12.95
R 
Gr. 4-7
Dramatic, well-placed, and well-employed color photographs take center stage in
both these books, which provide clear scientific information about kid-intriguing
natural melodrama. Avalanche concerns itself with snow avalanches only, describ-
ing the way avalanches are formed and progress, efforts made to forestall them,
and-vicariously thrilling-how to survive a snow slide. Lightning explains how a
thunderhead develops, how lightning results from negatively and positively charged
electrons, kinds of lightning, and safety information. The photos in Lightning,
especially, have a scary fascination; it's too bad there's no information on how the
pictures were taken. Both books include helpful diagrams to supplement the text
and photos; both also append "fascinating facts" and a glossary. The lack of indexes
and bibliographies is unfortunate. RS
LEIGHTON, MAXINNE RHEA 
An Ellis Island Christmas; illus. by Dennis
Nolan 
Viking, 1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-670-83182-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Like Jeanette Winter's Klara's New World, reviewed below, this is a picture-book
portrait of a little girl's immigration to America from Europe. Krysia, in Leighton's
book, is from Poland, traveling with her mother, brothers, and one of two beloved
dolls (Mama made her choose) to join Papa, who has gone ahead to New York. The
journey is long, the food on the ship "was not like Mama's," everybody gets seasick.
"It was disgusting. It smelled so bad." But the family arrives at Ellis Island, where
Papa is waiting and a special Christmas present is revealed. Krysia's perspective is
SEPTEMBER 1992 
* 
17
honest and childlike, graced with the kind of detailing readers will appreciate, as in
Krysia's first taste of a banana: "This was good for cows, not for people, I thought,
but I ate it anyway." Nolan's somber-toned watercolors are well-drawn, a bit static,
but appealing in their focus on a little girl pointing over the rail to the Statue of
Liberty or gazing at the lights on an Ellis Island Christmas tree. RS
LESLIE-MELVILLE, BETTY 
Elephant Have Right of Way: Life with the WildAnimals
ofAfrica. Doubleday, 1992 
4 8p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-385-30622-9 
$15.00 
NR 
Gr. 3-5
Kids will enjoy the many color photos of animals in the luxurious setting of the
author's Kenya home; unfortunately, the account here of her various wild-animal
adoptions is patronizing to both readers and the Africa that Leslie-Melville professes
(over and over) to "love." "I loved all the Africans I met, they were all so nice and
gentle." 
The anecdotes about warthogs underfoot and giraffes peeping into
windows are, of course, amusing, but Leslie-Melville's view of animals seems
sentimental and anthropomorphic to the point of inanity; confessing that she does
not like lions, for example, she writes "I think they are terrible parents and are also
lazy and dumb. They're beautiful, but being beautiful on the outside is not enough.
Being beautiful on the inside is what counts-and it turns you into looking pretty
on the outside too." Her views on endangered species and the African economy are
equally naive and rather paternalistic: 
"Every month now we bring over three
thousand African schoolchildren to the education center, free, to let them feed the
giraffes and to teach them that without the animals, there will be no tourists, and
without tourists they won't be able to get jobs." Friendly wild animals and tourists
on safari-in all, a blissful-blissed-out-vision of Africa. RS
MCDERMOTT, GERALD 
Zomo The Rabbit: A Trickster Tale from West Africa; ad.
and illus. by Gerald McDermott. 
Harcourt, 1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-299967-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 3-7 yrs
In a pared-down version of a popular West African trickster tale, Zomo the Rabbit
supplicates Sky God for wisdom: ".. . it is not so simple," says Sky God, charging
Zomo to bring him the scales of Big Fish, the milk of Wild Cow, and the tooth of
Leopard. Of course, Zomo complies, proving his courage and good sense-but not
his caution, the third component of wisdom. Sky God's parting gift is a warning,
"better run fast," which Zomo has done ever since. Like the spare text, the shapes
here are boldly controlled-ideal for sharing with a group of very young children.
Because of their rich patterns and sharp color contrasts, the images in the gouache
paintings, although simple, never become simplistic. A sly humor pervades the
animals' expressions, especially as Wild Cow charges into action, and Saturday
morning cartooners will appreciate the slapstick of Leopard's rolling down an
ornately designed hill to his full-page bump against a rock. There's also graphic
humor in details such as Leopard's tooth and Wild Cow's milk flashing as white as
Zomo's tail. Although there are no source citations, McDermott has included a
brief note about Zomo's relatives. Storytellers will enjoy pairing this with Joel
Chandler Harris' "Miss Cow Falls a Victim to Mr. Rabbit" or "Brother Rabbit
Submits to a Test." BH
18 
* THE BULLETIN
MAGORIAN, MICHELLE Not a Swan. Geringer/HarperCollins, 1992 
[384p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024215 
16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024214-0 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
A sweeping, occasionally sprawling, novel of a young girl's maturation in World
War II England will find a ready audience among Flambardsor even Little Women
fans. Roe, seventeen, and her two slightly older sisters have been evacuated to a small
seacoast cottage, where they are ostensibly to stay with a Miss Hutchison while their
actress mother goes on an E.N.S.A. tour. But Miss Hutchison has been drafted, and
the three girls are on their own. Margot, the oldest, is the responsible Meg March
figure, Letty is Amy, and Roe of course is Jo: awkward, tomboyish, more interested
in reading and writing than she is in boys or housekeeping. Roe finds a diary hidden
in their small cottage; it tells a melodramatic tale of an unmarried woman who was
locked up in a mental institution after giving birth to the child of her soldier-lover.
In ways intriguing if unconvincing, Roe finds the events of the diary paralleling her
own life, as she has her first love affair, befriends an unwed mother-to-be, and
discovers her power as a writer. Although the plot is an adolescent fantasy (capped
by a ludicrous closing revelation) the characters are distinctive and rough-edged, and
the scene where Roe loses her virginity, or later, when she assists her friend's
childbirth, etch some realism into the sentimental story. Like the author's Back
Home (BCCB 11/84), this is an excessive novel, with the qualities that tip it over
the edge being precisely those that readers will enjoy most. RS
MANTINBAND, GERDA 
TheBlabbermouths; illus. by Paul Borovsky. 
Greenwillow,
1992 
24 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10604-8 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10602-1 
$14.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Aside from the fact that the title alone will make kids laugh, this has a folkloric
storyline that will hold their attention till the last page, by which time a farmer's wife
has convinced a magistrate that her husband is too crazy for anyone to believe his
wild tales about finding a chest of gold. (Except, of course, that the story is true and
the two live happily ever after.) How did he find the gold? How did the secret
spread? How did his wife convince everyone not to believe him? Read and find out,
but whet your appetite on the prospect that the farmer's wife must convince her
husband that the sky has rained doughnuts, and that the king's soldiers have passed
by with long iron beaks that pick-pick-picked on the washtub under which he was
hiding. Cartoonist Borovsky has upped the fool's-tale ante with wry color pencil
graphics that poke fun at the narrative at the same time as they illustrate it. The
figures are too small to show up well with a large group, but storytellers can steal the
plot, while the book itself will entertain a wide age range of siblings in a family
context. BH
MARKLE, SANDRA 
The Fledglings. Bantam, 1992 
16 5p
ISBN 0-553-07729-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
After her mother dies in a car accident, orphaned fourteen-year-old Kate refuses to
live with relatives she knows slightly and likes not at all. She runs away to North
Carolina, where her newly discovered Cherokee grandfather, her father's father,
lives, but she finds the old man chilly and unwelcoming at first. The two are brought
closer in an incident involving the poaching of birds of prey, and throughout the
SEPTEMBER 1992 
* 
19
summer, as the illegal capture of the birds continues, Kate tames a fledgling eagle
and gets to know and appreciate both her grandfather and her Cherokee heritage.
The book works best at the melodramatic level, when Kate is capturing poachers or
fleeing through the forest; her education in Cherokee ways is not always convincing,
making it a much less successful strand of the story. There are sentimental notes,
but there's some briskness to counteract them ("How'd you get to be so old so
stupid?" Kate's grandfather asks her at one point). Readers fond ofJean Craighead
George's wildlife and wilderness books will enjoy the forest setting and the
conservationist theme. A glossary of Cherokee words and phrases is appended. DS
MARTIN, RAFE 
A Storyteller's Story; illus. with photographs by Jill Krementz.
ISBN 0-913461-03-2
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Best Wishes; illus. with photographs by Carlo Ontal.
ISBN 1-878450-20-4
YOLEN, JANE 
A Letter from Phoenix Farm; illus. with photographs by Jason
Stemple. 
ISBN 1-878450-36-0
Each book: 
Richard C. Owen, 1992 
32p 
(Meet the Author) 
$12.95
R Gr. 1-3
Just the ticket for those librarian-perplexing assignments for autobiographies at the
second-grade level, this series provides first-person accounts and photos of three
well-known picture book authors. Each talks about life, family, pets; there are a few
glimpses into the writing process; the color photos in each book have a candid
snapshot quality that contributes to the friendly informality of the text. "I read,
read, read, whenever I can," says Jane Yolen, and all the authors similarly contribute
a boost for the written word. Taken as an overview of authors' lives, the series is
somewhat rosy: none of the authors holds a first or even second job; all have plenty
of time for daydreaming on woodsy, picturesque walks. 
Cynthia Rylant in
particular makes writing seem like a snap: "before I get up again, I've written a new
picture book. And I always know whether it's good or not. I just know." Otherwise,
Yolen gives a picture of a very busy lady, and Martin conveys just how long a
manuscript can gestate: " Will's Mammoth took either three years or thirty seconds
to write!" Bibliographies of the authors' books are included, as are maps showing
where each author lives. RS
MITCHELL, JONI 
Both Sides Now; illus. by Alan Baker. 
Preiss/Scholastic,
1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-45668-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
NR 
5-8 yrs
Oh, Joni. They've paved paradise and-whoops, wrong song, this is the one about
the ... caterpillars? Illustrator Baker has transformed Mitchell's famous 60s song
into a sentimental cornucopia of caterpillars, butterflies, beetles, ferns, sunsets, and
clouds. The clouds, at least, have the advantage of appearing in the song, the lyrics
of which provide the text for this picture book. Forget the fact that "Both Sides
Now" is not a song about metamorphosis, biological or otherwise (likewise, forget
the fact that it's not a song about bugs). The real problems here are that the pictures
have no story to tell (to be fair, seventeen metaphors about hope versus pessimism
do not a story make); only occasionally have anything to do with the text appearing
on a given page ("And if you care don't let them know" shows two caterpillars
mooning at each other amidst the twinkling stars, the "ice-cream castles in the air"
resemble stalagmites); and are eye-poppingly ugly, stuffed with frou-frou and
20 
* THE BULLETIN
flowers and filigree ("The dizzy dancing way you feel" is illustrated by an appropri-
ately queasy double-spread painting of many butterflies fluttering about a crescent
moon). Although there are an increasing number of picture books that take their
texts from songs, few have survived the transition from lyric to narrative medium.
Oddly, there's no music included here, and the words read aloud (as opposed to
sung) do not reveal this gifted composer at her finest. But music or not, pictures or
not, what six-year-old is going to identify with "it's life's illusions I recall, I really
don't know life at all"? The bouncy "Big Yellow Taxi," ecologically aware, less
lugubrious, and lots more fun, might hold more promise. RS
MURPHY, 
JILL Jeffrey 
Strangeways; written 
and 
illus. 
by Jill
Murphy. 
14 0p 
Candlewick, 1992
ISBN 1-56402-018-5 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
In this medieval comedy, young Jeffrey Strangeways plays an unlikely hero. Ever
since Jeffrey's widowed mother has broken both arms and is unable to produce
knitting for sale, eleven-year-old Jeffrey has had to earn the family's living. No
commoner's job for Jeffrey, nothing less than the path to knighthood will do. He
proves he's knight material by bravely charging off to rescue his new friend, Sir
Walter, from a giant one-eyed ogre named Grobb. Funny anachronisms pop up
throughout the story-Sir Walter drinks Earl Grey tea and works for the "Free
Lance Rescue Services Limited," Sir Cedric (the boss knight) gets tipsy from his long
lunches at his club, and Jeffrey has to walk five miles to the next village if he wants
an evening paper or a bag of groceries. If young readers' knowledge of history isn't
sharp enough to catch these jokes, they'll certainly recognize the humor in the many
pen-and-ink illustrations that frolic around the text. The happy ending is no surprise
in this light-hearted story. KJ
PEEL, JOHN 
Uptime, Downtime. Simon, 1992 
24 2p
ISBN 0-671-73274-9 
$14.00 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Michael and Karyn have lived with their uncle since the death of their parents, but
they are stunned to overhear him tell his girlfriend that the last thing he wanted was
two children. Afraid of displacement, the two children wish themselves elsewhere
and find that their wishing can send them through space and time (to Stonehenge,
at first). As they explore their newfound ability to travel anytime and anywhere they
meet Jason, a boy from the future, and Gwen and Becky, from the past, and together
they encounter historical personages, dinosaurs, and trouble. Although the idea is
fun, the plot lacks cohesion, being merely a series ofjaunts, and the emotional mini-
dramas (Michael and Karyn's misunderstanding of their uncle, Gwen's difficulty in
making friends) are labored and unlikely. All the kids end up staying in contem-
porary America (the adults adjust with unlikely ease to the true story of Gwen's,
Jason's, and Becky's origins), which overlays the story with a "now-is-better"
temporal chauvinism unusual in a time-travel story. This one is only for diehard-
but not purist-fans of the genre. DS
PILKEY, DAV 
When Cats Dream; written and illus. by Dav Pilkey. Jackson/
Orchard, 1992 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08597-X 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05997-9 
$14.95 
R 4-7 yrs
SEPTEMBER 1992 
* 21
This visually exuberant homage to Chagall (with prominent nods to Whistler,
Rousseau, Picasso and Miro) demonstrates some of the best and liveliest picture
book art this year (proving, like DePaola's Bonjour, Mr. Satie(BCCB 3/91), that the
highest form of imitation can be inspiration). Pilkey's cats dream and dance and
pounce in a wildly colored dream world where a fishbowl becomes an ocean, the dog
is always asleep, and the cats "can eat up the sun and swallow the stars." Unfortu-
nately, like Lane Smith's The Big Pets (BCCB 3/91), and like many other dream
books, there is no plot here, just a free-floating series of images, occasionally too
whimsical, ofwhat cats dream about. Maybe, though, it doesn't matter: a rear view
of a large purple cat, outfitted in necktie and cowboy boots, ponderously sailing
through the sunlight, seems a story all its own. RS
PINKNEY, GLORIA JFAN 
Back Home; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. 
Dial, 1992 
[4 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1169-7 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1168-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Like Donald Crews' Bigmama's (BCCB 11/91), this depicts a city child's summer
trip south to stay with country relatives. The graphic evocation of a past time and
place radiates from lightfilled watercolors dappled with a blend of hues. The
holding power of the story depends primarily on a friendship that develops between
visiting Ernestine and the older cousin whom she yearns to please. This child's-eye
view of North Carolina in the 1930s hints of neither poverty nor racism; the focus
is on overalls, goats, peaches, and family dynamics. Ernestine's truck ride to the
tumbledown cabin where she was born proves an episodic highlight. She's young
enough to declare, with sweeping conviction, "Someday... I'm going to fix it up."
An experience not even marred by bug bites, this is about as happy as memories get,
especially visualized through the haze of Pinkney's euphoric pastorale. BH
POLIKOFF, BARBARA 
Life's a Funny Proposition, Horatio. Holt, 1992 
[103p]
ISBN 0-8050-1972-3 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Horatio lives with his mother and his father's father (known as
O.P., for Old Professor), playing chess and enjoying the company of his dog Silver
Chief. He's still adjusting to his father's death two years ago and the family's
subsequent move to a small Wisconsin town, so when O.P.'s beloved dog Mollie
dies, Horatio and his grandfather are both shaken. Although the Shakespeare
allusions and quoting seem a bit contrived, Polikoffs treatment of grief for dog and
Dad, and the linkage of the two, is honest and unsentimental. While capable ofgreat
tenderness, the understated writing style is both bracing and poignantly funny
(Horatio wonders about his dentist mother "Did she floss the night his dad died?")
in a manner welcoming and unusual for a book dealing with parental death. Readers
will also enjoy Horatio's quietly blossoming friendship/romance with a friend's
animal-loving sister. Capable of bringing tears but not wallowing in them, this is
a matter-of-fact book that leaves Horatio (and the reader) with a realistic mixture
of sadness for losses past and pleasure in the daily gains of growing up. DS
22 
* 
THE BULLETIN
RINALDI, ANN 
A Break with Charity: A Story ofthe Salem Witch Trials. Gulliver/
Harcourt, 1992 
[2 8 8 p]
ISBN 0-15-200353-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Rinaldi here retells the famous events of seventeenth-century Salem through the
eyes of Susanna English, a fourteen-year-old envious of the girls who secretly gather
in Reverend Parris' kitchen to hear their fortunes told by Parris' slave Tituba (whose
own story is told in Ann Petry's Tituba of Salem Village, reviewed in the January,
1965, issue). 
As Rinaldi explains in a scrupulous and informative afterword,
Susanna is a historical character, although her witness to the mischief is the author's
fabrication. Similarly, the facts of the novel are taken from history; what Rinaldi has
sought to do is to explore the motivations of the afflicted girls, the "witches," and
the townspeople in order to construct a plausible thesis for why twenty innocent
people were executed (four others died in prison) upon the "crying out" of a group
of hysterical teenage girls. Early on, Ann Putnam admits to Susanna that the girls
know that their accusations are spurious and insures Susanna's silence with a threat:
"We will cry out on your parents .. .We will name them as witches." This is great,
scary stuff, and Rinaldi is just the writer to do it justice. Some of the author's other
historical novels have teetered on melodrama, but here the impetuous storytelling
is entirely in keeping with the frenzied nature of the tragedy. The girls, their power
blossoming in all the attention, seem like a Lois Duncan sorority, but then, they
would, and the suspense is convincing, naturally evolving from the historical
material. RS
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Best Wishes; illus. with photographs by Carlo Ontal.
See review under Rafe Martin, above.
SALISBURY, GRAHAM 
Blue Skin of the Sea: A Novel in Stories. 
Delacorte,
1992 
24 2p
ISBN 0-385-30596-6 
$15.00 
R Gr. 9-
Eleven short stories, set in Hawaii's Kailua-Kona between the years of 1953 and
1966, chronicle incidents of importance in the maturation of Sonny Mendoza,
whose mother is dead and whose father mourns her by retreating emotionally. In
terms of action and persona, each story stands on its own, but the sum of the parts
is a sustained sequence of adventures involving characters that deepen with each
appearance. Sonny, his cousin Keo, his Aunty Pearl (a full-blooded Hawaiian), his
father, and his two uncles figure variously but consistently in episodes that range
from school fights to adolescent romance to shark hunting and other life-or-death
situations on land and sea. Through all this runs the protagonist's search for an
elusive memory that holds the key to his primal terror of ocean water, which makes
him and others doubt his place in the macho culture of a fishing village. While
rendering the locale with cinematic clarity, Salisbury has an ability to portray peer,
family, and community dynamics in a way that projects these gripping rites of
passage beyond their unusual setting. BH
SEPTEMBER 1992 
* 23
SCOTT, ELAINE 
Look Alive: Behind the Scenes of an Animated Film; illus. with
photographs by Richard Hewett. 
Morrow, 1992 
6 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09937-8 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09936-X 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
This book takes the reader behind the scenes of the filming of the television special,
"Ralph S. Mouse". Although puppet animation is a complicated topic, the process
is explained very clearly in this narrative. There is even a physical example of
animation, a juggling flip-book mouse located in the lower corner of every right-
hand page. Terms like "pre-production," "budgets," and "pixilate" are defined and
then described in detail. The reader will learn that before the filming of Ralph S.
Mouse began, two film makers got the idea, permission from author Beverly Cleary,
and sponsors for the project (which cost an amazing $10,000 per minute). The
black-and-white photos supplement the text nicely, but they are sometimes fuzzy.
This book is detailed enough for the technically-minded and clear enough for the
neophyte. KJ
SHALANT, PHYLLIS 
Shalom, Geneva Peace. 
Dutton, 1992 
[192p]
ISBN 0-525-44868-3 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Feeling like an outsider in her posh private school, eighth-grader Andi becomes
intrigued with glamorous Geneva, a fellow student in Hebrew school. "I guess you
could say she looked mature... even her lips curved." Readers will figure out before
Andi that Geneva is both trouble and troubled, but that won't stop them from
empathizing with Andi's thrilling new double life, which includes such escapades
as driving. Shalant, author of The Rock Star, the Rooster, 6&Me, the Reporter (BCCB
2/90) and The Transformation of Faith Futterman (BCCB 5/90), knows how to
work an appealing young-teen theme, but neither plot nor characters resort to genre
cliches. Most kids in YA books (as opposed to many kids in real life) grow up in a
completely secular setting; Andi and Geneva's involvement in their temple (and
Geneva's desperate crush on the new assistant rabbi) brings a fresh and welcome
reality to teen fiction. RS
SILVER, NORMAN 
No Tigers in Africa. Dutton, 1992 
242p
ISBN 0-525-44733-4 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Selwyn and his family have left South Africa for England, but he spends this novel
(styled, like many a problem novel, as a therapeutic exercise suggested by a
counselor) discovering that he cannot leave his past behind. From the beginning,
Selly lets us know that he killed a black man back in Johannesburg; it's not until the
end that we learn the circumstances. Although the book has a self-congratulatory
air that admits little distance between author and narrator, the voice is angrily
authentic, and the theme of the fusion between political injustice and private despair
is compelling and convincing. RS
SKURzyNsKI, GLORIA 
Here Comes the Mail; written and illus. with photographs by
Gloria Skurzynski. 
Bradbury, 1992 
[33p]
ISBN 0-02-782916-2 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Fledgling letter writers, and also those who just appreciate a good tale of what-
happens-next, will enjoy this photodocumentary of a letter sent by Stephanie in
24 
* THE BULLETIN
Santa Fe to her cousin Kathy in Salt Lake City. Color photos and brief text follow
the letter from addressing and stamping ("Lick this, please, Minnie," says Stephanie
to her dog), through the various slots and gurneys and complicated sorting machines
of the Santa Fe post office, into a truck, into the air, and into the hands of Salt Lake
City mail carrier Cindy, who takes the letter to Kathy: "Look what I got in the mail!"
The sequencing is easy to follow, particularly because the K-A-T-H-Y that Stephanie
scrawls on the envelope is visible in many of the pictures of the letter's journey. This
may take the mystery out ofwhat can seem like magic, but at the same time, it shows
the rewards of both sustained effort (on the part of many) and delayed gratification.
An appendix describes how the Postal Service would like one to address letters (block
letters, no commas, prescribed abbreviations); it also includes the welcome reassur-
ance that "If you can't follow all these rules, don't worry." RS
STEIG, WILLIAM 
Doctor De Soto Goes to Africa; written and illus. by William
Steig. 
DiCapua/HarperCollins, 1992 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205003-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205002-8 
$15.00 
R 
4-6 yrs
"DR D SOTO 
BEG YOU COME TO DABWAN WEST AFRICA 
AM
ELEPHANT WITH UNBEARABLE TOOTHACHE 
NO DENTIST HERE
CAN HELP 
WILL PAY TEN THOUSAND GOLD WALULUS 
PLEASE
MUDAMBO." Who could resist? Certainly not a mouse so goodheartedly ethical
that he once saved a fox from the agonies of a decaying molar (and from unseemly
carnivorous intentions). 
Unfortunately, the De Sotos solve one problem-
borrowing a piece of tusk from the stuffed walrus in the Museum ofNatural History
for Mudambo's reconstruction--only to be stopped cold by Dr. De Soto's
kidnapping at the hands of a rhesus monkey. Here things get obviously contrived,
but it makes for good melodrama, while the watercolor pictorial sequels to Doctor
De Soto (BCCB 3/83) maintain a tooth-in-cheek composure that keeps the action
in line. After the dentist's rescue and Mudambo's recovery, the De Sotos decide to
travel a bit with some of those lovely walulus. Where will their next picture book
take them? Well, there are a lot of animals with teeth in this world. BH
THOMPSON, JULIAN 
Gypsyworld. Holt, 1992 
[229p]
ISBN 0-8050-1907-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
"Sell your kids to the gypsies," reads the advertisement, and while some dismiss the
words as a promotion for a movie, others, well, do just that. This is a trademark
Thompson trick, a band of angels betrayed by the adult world, with only each other
to count on. Five kids (three bought, two kidnapped) are taken by the mysterious
Josip and Marina to "Gypsyworld," a sort of Edenic alternate earth, for an
"experiment." Although the author still demonstrates a penchant for annoying
parenthetical asides and the substitution of italics for irony, his storytelling here is
taut, as is the suspense: just what do Josip and Marina, seemingly kind, have in
mind? The kids are a funny mixture of good intentions and adolescent pratfalls; the
tone is jaunty; the conclusion is unfortunately sanctimonious, allowing neither
characters nor readers their due. It's, like, too. .. easy. RS
SEPTEMBER 1992 
* 
25
WINCKLER, SUZANNE 
Our Endangered Planet: Antarctica; by Suzanne Winckler
and Mary M. Rodgers. 
Lerner, 1992 
64 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-2506-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Despite its stuffy series format and unappealing double-column text, this book is a
useful summary of Antarctica's ecology, with plenty of well-placed maps and color
photos. Chapters cover geology and climate, plant and animal life, explorations,
and current environmental problems and plans for abating them. Appended
material includes a directory of organizations concerned with Antarctica, a glossary,
and an index. RS
WINTER, JEANETTE 
Klara's New World; written and illus. by Jeanette
Winter. 
Knopf, 1992 
[4 1p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90626-6 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80626-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 5-8 yrs
Paralleling the journey of Leighton's An Ellis Island Christmas, reviewed above, but
taking place at an earlier time, Klara's immigration brings her and her parents from
famine-ridden Sweden to Minnesota during (according to the author's note) the late
1860s. While the tone of the text and colors of the paintings are essentially cheerful,
Klara's ocean crossing is hard, with sadness for home, seasickness, and death
crowding "the promise of a new life." Arrival in America brings another stage in the
trip, as the family travels by steamboat, train, and a long walk through a forest to
their homestead, where old friends from Sweden are waiting. Less sentimental and
more immediate than Leighton's book, this has a great sense of story, with paintings
energized by strong patterning, richly saturated colors, and expressively portraited
and postured characters. Klara's bright yellow hair provides a focus for each picture,
and details of trees, parcels, waves, and jostling crowds are equally vibrant. The last
view of Klara's new cabin, deep in the snowy, moonlit woods makes a cozy
conclusion. RS
YEH, CHUN-CHAN, ad. 
Bawshou Rescues the Sun: A Han Folktale, adapted by
Chun-Chan Yeh and Allan Baillie; illus. by Michelle Powell. 
Scholastic,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-590-45453-6 
$13.95 
R 4-7 yrs
A Han folktale with mythical aspects, this recounts the journey of a larger-than-life
hero, Bawshou, to free the sun from its captivity by the King of Devils. Accompa-
nied by a golden phoenix, guided by a star representing the spirit of his dead father,
and helped by poor villagers along the way, Bawshou overcomes all obstacles and
uses a magic packet of earth to create a thousand islands across the East Ocean. At
last he finds the devils' cave and restores the sun to the sky, where it is greeted each
day by his father, the morning star, while his mother waits forever at home on the
West Lake in Eastern China. Such powerful ingredients are, to some extent,
confined by the illustrations here, which seem almost too pretty in their crowded,
bright-hued composition; what strengthens the art is dark outlining around the
figures and some dramatic silhouetting against colored rice paper. In any case, the
story is well worth reading aloud and will generate its own images among listeners.
Although the first author is a well-known scholar, no source note is given for the tale.
BH
26 
* THE BULLETIN
YOLEN, JANE A Letter from Phoenix Farm; illus. with photographs by Jason
Stemple.
See review under Rafe Martin, above.
YOLEN,JANE 
LettingSwifiRiver Go; illus. by Barbara Cooney. 
Little, 1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-96899-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Yolen's nostalgic but direct text and Cooney's similarly toned watercolors tell the
story of the deliberate flooding of the Swift River towns of western Massachusetts
to provide the expanding city of Boston with a reservoir, the Quabbin, in the 1930s
The historical background is true; Yolen creates, in her free -verse story, a little girl,
Sally Jane, whose family lives in one of the villages, and is forced to move in face of
the water. The tone is a little too serene for what must have been a momentous event,
and there could be more tension between the text and the art, always quiet and at
its most beautiful in a blue-washed double spread of the rising water and the
subsequent picture ofa now-grown SallyJane and her father rowing on the reservoir.
Although the book lacks the depths (and wit) of the Provensen's similarly themed
Shaker Lane (BCCB 10/87), the pictures and story deserve credit for the fact that
there is no falsely sentimental opposition between rural bliss and urban greed; at the
same time, one strains to hear the sound of the bull-dozing and dam-building. In
the end Sally, recalling some long-ago advice of her mother, lets her memories go,
"down into the darkening deep"-an acceptance more in tune with adult sensibili-
ties than with childhood immediacies. RS
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
In this new monthly feature section of The Bulletin, you'll find bibliographies,
reviews of new professional books, abstracts of research articles that have implica-
tions for working with children and books, and other information we hope will be
useful.
This month, we'd like to tell you about the 34th Allerton Institute, sponsored
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science at the University of
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. Held each year at the historic Robert Allerton Park
near Monticello, Illinois, the conference is located on 1,500 acres ofwoodland, with
a 20-room Georgian mansion where conference activities are held. Conference
directors Betsy Hearne and Roger Sutton, whose organization of the 34th Allerton
Institute marks their transition with The Bulletin of the Center for Children 's Books
from the University of Chicago to the University of Illinois, have enlisted a
knowledgeable group of speakers. "Evaluating Children's Books: A Critical Look"
will begin with a panel discussing "Censorship, negative criticism, glitzy trends,
SEPTEMBER 1992 
* 27
growing publishers' output, and other shadows on the landscape of children's book
reviewing." Ilene Cooper from Booklist, Betsy Hearne from The Bulletin, Trevelyn
Jones from School Library Journal Joanna Long from Kirkus Reviews, and Anita
Silvey from Horn Book will exchange information and opinions on issues in
reviewing children's books.
Other participants will include Isabel Schon on Spanish language and
Hispanic materials, Betty Carter on nonfiction, Dorothy Briley on the impact of
reviewing on publishing, Janice Harrington and Janie Schomberg on using reviews
for collection development in public and school libraries, Violet Harris on evaluat-
ing books for whole-language learning, Hazel Rochman on reviewing and
multiculturalism, Cathryn Mercier on textual criticism, and Barbara Kiefer on
visual criticism.
The program features topics of interest to public and school librarians as well
as teachers in elementary, junior high, and high school. The purposes of the
Institute are to update professionals on the current trends in, and increasing
sophistication of, children's literature; to debate the problems and possibilities of
evaluating the 6,000 new books published annually for children; and to exchange
ideas about the aesthetic, social, and political aspects of analyzing and using
children's books. In a period when more juvenile books are being published than
ever before-and being published for trade store consumption as much as for library
and education markets-professionals need to think hard and critically about
evaluation. This conference will feature information and a forum for discussing not
only selection criteria, but also ideas about how to reconsider and apply them in new
ways. We hope you'll join us for a lively debate.
The institute will be held October 25-27. For a detailed outline of the
Institute schedule and information about registration, fees, and lodging, write to:
Dr. Jeff Sands
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Office of Continuing Education and Public Service
302 East John Street, Suite 202
Champaign, IL 61820
28 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this new index,
which will appear in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type
refer to subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-
CAPS refers to genres and appeals. In no way meant to be a cataloging aid, this rather
idiosyncratic index is instead intended to lead readers to those books reviewed that
could fill a particular gap in a collection; to help teachers and librarians find books
that might be useful in various school or recreational settings; and to help in those
requests for a "love story" or a "scary story". In the case of subject headings, the
subhead "stories" refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those
books intended for independent reading. Although subscriber response to The
Bulletin's format, features, and reviews is always welcome, we would especially like
to hear your comments about the usefulness of this new index and your advice for
ways it could be expanded or improved. Please direct your suggestions to executive
editor Roger Sutton at the editorial office address found on page two.
Africa, West-folklore: McDermott
Afr ican-Americans-fiction:
Higginsen; Johnson
African-Americans-stories: Pinkney
Animals, wild: Leslie-Melville
Antarctica: Winckler
Astronomy: Fisher
Aunts-fiction: Irwin
Australia-fiction: Baillie
Baum, L. Frank: Carpenter
BEDTIME STORIES: Alborough;
Pilkey; Yolen
BIO GRAPHIES:Carpenter;
Fleischman; Harrison; Martin;
Rylant; Yolen
Birds: Fleischman
Birthdays-fiction: Gregory
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Baillie
Brothers-stories: Grimm
Bullies-fiction: Cormier
Bullies-stories: Bottner
Butterflies-poetry: Mitchell
Cameroon-stories: Alexander
Careers: Gibbons; Martin
Cats-stories: Pilkey
Chickens-stories: Ernst
China-folklore: Yeh
Christmas-stories:Kellogg;
Leighton
Cliques-fiction: Hall; Rinaldi
Death-fiction: Polikoff; Salisbury
Dentists-stories: Steig
Dreams-stories: Pilkey
Earth Science: Winckler; Kramer
Ecology: Winckler
Ellis Island-stories: Leighton
Ethics and values: Cormier; Hall;
Silver; Thompson
EVERYDAY LIFE STORIES:
Gregory; Hurwitz; Johnson
Explorers and exploring: Fleischman
FAIRYTALES AND FOLKTALES:
Asbjornsen; Brooke; Grimm;
McDermott; Yeh
Fathers and sons-fiction: Salisbury
Fortune-telling-stories: Alexander
FUNNY STORIES: Cresswell;
Murphy
Galileo: Fisher
Geography: Winckler
Grandparents-fiction: Markle;
Polikoff
Grandparents-stories: Konigsburg
Guatemala-stories: Czernecki
Gypsies-fiction: Thompson
Hawaii-fiction: Salisbury
HISTORICAL FICTION: Cormier;
Duder; Leighton; Magorian;
Rinaldi; Winter; Yolen
SEPTEMBER 1992 
* 29
History, U. S.: Fleischman; Harrison;
Rinaldi; Winter; Leighton
Holocaust-fiction: Cormier
Horses-fiction: Henry
Housebuilding: Bare
Husbands 
and wives-stories:
Asbjornsen; Mantinband
Immigrants-fiction: Cormier
Immigrants-stories: Leighton;
Winter
Jews-fiction: Cormier; Shalant
Kennedy, John Fitzgerald: Harrison
Kenya: Leslie-Melville
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Murphy
Letter-writing: Skurzynski
Literature, children's: Carpenter;
Martin; Rylant; Yolen
LOVE STORIES: Hall; Magorian
Mice-fiction: Allen
Mice-stories: Steig
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Higginsen
Music and musicians-fiction:
Block; Higginsen
MYSTERY STORIES: Allen
Native Americans: Hirschfelder
Native Americans-fiction: Markle
New York City-stories: Konigsburg
Norway-folklore: Asbjornsen
Olympic Games-fiction: Duder
Pet care: Gibbons
Pioneers and Settlers: Winter
POETRY: Heide; Hopkins; Mitchell
Postal Service: Skurzynski
Rabbits-folklore: McDermott
Reading aloud: Heide; Hurwitz;
Murphy
Reading, beginning: Allen; Hopkins
Reading, easy:. Cresswell; Gregory;
Martin; Rylant; Yolen
Reading, reluctant: Johnson
Rivers-stories: Yolen
Rome-fiction: Duder
Rural life-fiction: Hall; Markle
Rural life-stories: Pinkney
Winter; Yolen
Saints-stories: Czernecki
Salem Witchcraft Trials-fiction:
Rinaldi
SCARY STORIES: Griffiths
SHORT STORIES: Griffiths;
Salisbury
Sisters-fiction: Block; Magorian
Social issues: Silver; Yolen
South Africa-fiction: Silver
Story hour: Asbjornsen; Alexander;
Bottner; Ernst; Grimm; Kellogg;
Mantinband; McDermott; Steig;
Yeh; Yolen
Summer vacation-fiction: Irwin
SURVIVAL STORIES: Baillie
Swimming-fiction: Duder
Teddy bears-stories: Alborough
Television: Scott
Time travel-fiction: Peel
Utopias-fiction: Thompson
Veterinarians: Gibbons
Weather: Kramer
Wishes-fiction: Cresswell
Witchcraft-fiction: Rinaldi
Witches-stories: Kellogg
World War II-fiction: Magorian
Writing: Hirschfelder; Martin,
Rylant, Yolen
Charloftte Zolotow
THE SEASHORE
BOOK
Paintings ly Wendell Minor
"A young boy, who has never seen the sea, asks his mother
to describe it. From there, Zolotow carefully chooses her words
to create a poem full of the colors, sounds, and sights of a day at
thle beach. Minor's softly detailed photoreal [full-color] renderings
reinforce the gentle mood of the quiet story so that readers,
like the boy, can close their eyes and be there too."
-School Library Journal
"Mrs. Zolotow is a wonderful writer, her words have a special
lilt that lingers long after the book is closed." 
-New 
York Times
Ages 3-8. $15.00* (020213-0); $14.89t (020214-9)
HarperCollins ISBN prefix: 0-06. *Trade ed. tLibrary ed. Publisher's prices only and in no way reflect the prices
at which available from any other source
SHarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
*"Sparkles 
with the deep emotions
shared by children and dads."*
DADDIES
Written and illustrated with black-and-white
photographs by Adele Aron Greenspun
A"Young and old will discover a joy in studying the
faces and catching the glow that radiates between sons
and daughters and dads." 
-Booklist, starred review*
"Beautifully composed black-and-white photographs
reveal tender moments between fathers and their
children....The ethnic and geographic representation
heightens the universality of the theme, and the poetic
narrative is ideal for sharing aloud."
-School Library Journal
0-399-22259-6 
$15.95 ($20.95 CAN) 
All ages
PHILOMEL BOOKS
Member of The Putnam & Grosset Group, 200 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
© 1992 The Putnam & Grosset Group
*"A model of what foreign-language
alphabets should b 
The Bu"letin
(starred)
"In exuberant illustrations with vibrant
13/0-688-09725-1
19
Ages
c`-
"'An PxrPllp nt hnirn
AM(
FOB
Written an
in full cokl
Keiko IK
*"Cheerful, ener
getic illustrations
decorate the simp
but charming tale
a youngster's sea
for a loving paren
endearing waterc
paintings are bolc
bright...[a] satisfyii
story with appeal
illustrations and a
happy ending."
-School Library .
starre
*'A warmhearted contemporary
surprise ending for the time-honored
formula of a little creature searching
the animal kingdom for its appropriate
mother....Just right for the preschool
group or beginning reader."
-Kirkus Reviews, pointer review
'A fetchingly illustrated animal
story with a profound message,
endearingly and subtly delivered:'
-Publishers Weekly
"Parents and teachers can use this
simple, thoughtful tale to introduce
the subject of adoption." -Bulletin of
the Center for Children's Books
0-399-21841-6
$14.95 ($19.50 CAN) Ages 3-6
Also by Keiko Kasza-
THE PIGS' PICNIC
0-399-21543-3 
$13.95 ($18.50 CAN)
Sandcastle paperback:
0-399-21883-1 
$5.95 ($7.75 CAN)
WHEN THE
ELEPHANT WALKS
0-399-21755-X 
$13.95 ($18.50 CAN)
THE WOLF'S
CHICKEN STEW
0-399-21400-3 
$13.95 ($18.50 CAN)
Sandcastle paperback:
0-399-22000-3 
$5.95 ($7.75 CAN)
G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS
Member of The Putnam & Grosset Group
200 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
@ 1992 The Putnam & Grosset Group
, ,
it/i7
'"A grand compilation of rhymes and chants from the children's own
tradition: riddles, games, wishes and taunts; poems about love, food,
school, or animals; parodies, nonsense, and stories, [all with] fasci-
nating supporting material. It's hard to imagine a child who wouldn't
greet this treasure trove with enthusiasm." -Kirkus Reviews
'"A marvelous book that is sure to become a classic if children have any
say in the matter. Schwartz has gathered children's folk poetry heard
wherever kids are having fun. Truesdell's big-eyed, animated, and
humorous characters tumble, goof, and guffaw across the pages in
ideal tandem with the poetry. Once the kids discover this outrageous
volume, it will always be checked out." -SLJ
"Move over your copies of Shel Silverstein... and make room for
Schwartz's collection. Wonderful for reading, singing, and laughing
out loud, this book is strongly recommended." -The Horn Book
All Ages. $15.00* (022757-5); $14.89t (022758-3)
HaeCollins ISBN prefix 0-06 Trade ed. tLibra 
ed. 
HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
Publisher's price only and in no way reflects the price at 
n arper 
ollS 
l 
re 
oo
which available from any other source. 
10 Easi 53rd Street, New York 10022
New!
A great mix o
knowledge! S
interest are v
group of teen
trip with thei
(Washington
Francisco) th
considerable
HIGH NOOP
(415) 88.
THE ASSOCIATION 
OF
AMERICAN UNIVERSITY PRESSES
D I R E C T 0 R Y 1991-1992
The Association of American University Presses has for over fifty years
worked to encourage the dissemination of scholarly research and ideas.
Today the 102 members of the AAUP annually publish over 8,000 books
and more than 500 periodicals. This directory offers a detailed introduc-
tion to the structure and publishing programs of AAUP member presses.
Among its useful features are:
1 Information on 102 university presses in the U.S., Canada, and overseas
U Complete addresses, phone and fax numbers
U Names and responsibilities of key staff
U Subject area guide, with 136 categories, indicating which presses
publish in a given area
U Advice for authors on the submission of manuscripts
Distributed for the Association of American University Presses
The University of Chicago Press
5801 South Ellis Chicago, IL 60637
1- 11 ..... 
- 1 ......... 
.....
"Lively, sensitive, and
immensely funny poetry
for children."
-X. 
J. KENNEDY
PINK
MOt/i"TT A D"
JLd IYAIL 
%IF.JL/
Poems by
Annie M. G. Schmidt
Translated by Henrietta Ten Harmsel
Illustrated by Timothy Foley
"Annie Schmidt's poems are a lot of fun. . . . Pink Lemonade will
make delightful bedtime reading for American children."
-MADELEINE 
EENGLE
"Having grown up w
I cannot express hov
Americans-especia
will now have Annie
available in the supe
Henrietta Ten Harms
ISBN 0-8028-4050-7
64 pages
Cloth, $14.95
35 
At your bookstore, or call 800-253-7521 
FAX 616-459-6540
2 35  
B. EERDMANS PUBLISHING CO.
EEý 
255 JEFFERSON AVE. S.E. / GRAND RAPIDS, MICHIGAN 49503
ozens of creative and lively ideas for storytelling,
reader's theater, poetry, crafts, games, and exhibits.'
A Potpourri of Storytelling Treasures
With just the right mix of unconventional but effective teaching ideas,
entertainment, and good literature, Read for the Fun of It features:
" Puppets
O Creative Writing
" Reader's Theater
" Games
" Booklists
" Magic.
Easy-to-Follow Pro cts
Librarians, teachers, parents, and other adults working with
children will welcome the multitude of ready-made ideas for bringing
children and books together:
f Developing Lifelong Reading Habits
O Ways to Show, Tell, Read, and Write Stories
O Making Poetry Come Alive 
6
O Lively, Effective Book Programming.
Delightful Reproducible Illustrations
Read for the Fun of It also features illustrations
and reading slogans which can be
reproduced as:
O Posters
" Certificates 
< Ž
" Awards
" Bookmarks 
,Al " -/
O Flyers. 
•, • 
i 
.
More Favorites
by Caroline Feller Bauer
PRESENTING READER'S
THEATER
250 pp. 1987 ISBN 042420748.3 LC 87-2105
$42 U.S. and Canada, 
$47 other countri.
CELEBRATIONS
Read-Aloud Holiday and
Theme Book Programs
301pp. 1965 ISBN 0-8242-0704 LC85-714
$42 U.S. and Canada, 
$47 other countries.
THIS WAY TO BOOKS
376pp. 1963 ISBN -8242-0678,- LC 82-19 5
$42 U.S. and Canada, 
$47 othier 
lcountries.
STORYTELLING WITH
CAROLINE FELLER BAUER
Videocassette 28 minutes 1986
ISBN 04242-0740-8
Full ColorVNHS 
with Viewer's Guide.
$86 U.S. 
and Canada, 
$99 othler counries.
To Order Call Toll-Free
1.800-367-6770.
Outside of the U.S. and Canada,
call 1-212-588-8400.
Telefax 1-212-590-1617.
THE
P" 
-L A. LJ.LLIL)IA.-L .5. LtD. VV ~JJ J~. ~JA.
THE TAINOS
The People Who Welcomed Columbus
By FRANCINE JACOBS
Illustrated in black and white by Patrick Collins
*'"A historical narrative that should be required
reading for the Quincentennial." -Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books, starred review
A"A clear, readable portrayal of the extinction of an ethnic group.
The well-researched text describes the early beginnings of the Taino
culture as distinct from their Arawak ancestors, and details the daily
lives of these gentle people." -School Library Journal, starred review*
'A tightly focused account...of the indigenous people on the islands 
,
Columbus named San Salvador and Hispaniola...well researched,
readable, and valuable for its contribution to understanding the full 
2
significance of the early encounters between the old world and
the new." 
-Kirkus Reviews
(-
0-399-22116-6 
$15.95 ($20.95 CAN) 
Ages 10-14 
2
G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS
Member of The Putnam & Grosset Group, 200 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
vCCdA 
Av 
»r» 
-I* 
yl 
__
-- 
i 
/""1 • • i----I•il'--I • • • • I/I/I 
II I• 
• II
Edited by Geraldine DeLuca and Roni Natov, Brooklyn College
Volume 15, Number 2 presents various aspects of gen-
derissuesinchildren'sliterature. Contentsindclude: Two
Newbery Medal Winners and the Feminine Mystique *
Missing in Action: Confederate Females in Civil War
Novels * Searching forGreat-Great-Grandmother: Pow-
erful Women in George MacDonald's Fantasies * The
Miracle of the Web: Community, Desire, and Narrativity
in Charlotte's Web/ * The Cult of Peter Rabbit A Barthes-
ian Analysis* Return to the Island of Mist * 'A humble
Spirit under Correction': Tracts, Hymns, and the Ideol-
ogy of Evangelical Fiction for Children, 1780-1820 * plus
Q&A with Russell Hoban, a discussion of children's
books about Hiroshima, and reviews of Awakened by the
Moon by Leonard Marcus; Caught by Jane Schwartz; and
Literacy con Carino by Curtis Hayes, Robert Baruth, and
Carolyn Kessler.
Published two times a year In June and December
-- 
Send orders to: Journals Division
THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS
701 W. 40th Street, Suite 275
Baltimore, MD 21211-2190
Please enter my subscription to The Lion and the Unicorn.
0 $18.00 individuals 
0 $32.00 institutions
Please send me 
copies of Vol. 15#2 only.
O $10.00 individuals 
0 $17.50 institutions
0 Check or money order enclosed made payable to JHUP
Q Bill Visa 
0 Bill MasterCard 
Exp. Date
Acct #
Signature
Name
BEYOND
SEXISM
GENDER
ISSUES
BEYOND
SEXISM
GENDER
ISSUES
BEYOND
SEXISM
GENDER
ISSUES
Address
City/State/Zip+4
Prepayment required. MD residents please add 5% sales tax. Add $2.50
postage for Canada and Mexico; $4.40 outside N. America. Credit card
orders call toll-free 1 -800-537-JHUP or fax 1-410-516-6998. 
EA2
Cited by Library Journal as one of its
"Best Sci-Tech Books" of 1989
Ninety-nine Gnats,
NHts 
rnd 
bihhlers
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
Univ
54Eas
Cham
U.S.A.
i
versity of
ast Greg
mpaign, I
USA.
i
/etyfllir
t Gregoy
aign, I6
r_
Nits, and Nibblers
May R. Berenbaum
Illustrated by John Parker Sherrod
'This is a witty and enlightening account of the life-
kitchen sink to maggots in apples and lice on body
hair.. 
. This book is a delight for general readers
who wish to make better sense of their everyday ob-
servations on insects without having to plod through
the technical details of an entomological textbook."
-
Scott D. ffawke, Science Books & Films
SECOND CLAss
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
; 
~Ui+c~Jrrrl 
Nilrlrlprjv~
NitsllqkM 
andilk 
Ni 
bb•II~ 
lersil
May R. Berenbaum
Illustrated by John Parker Sherrod
"This is a witty and enlightening account of the life-
slyl 
of common insectslIUi 
li 
, IUfrom cockroaches in thel
kitchen sink to maggots in apples and lice on body
hair .... This book is a delight for general readers
who wish to make better sense of their everyday ob-
servations on insects without having to plod through
the technical details of an entomological textbook."
-
Scott D. Hawke, Science Books & Films
University of Illinois Press 
SECOND CrASS
54 Essr Gregory Drive 
POSTAGE
Champsign. IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
I
"This delightful collection of 99 insect cameos is
designed to enlighten the lay person about a few of
our most abundant fellow voyagers on this planet...
This illuminating book may turn the disgust with
which many people greet these fascinating creatures
to curiosity and admiration." -
Library Journal
Illus. Paper, $10.95
Order toll free 800/545-4703from
i
Iety 
fllinono
mpin L 61
AD
r~
'"lhis dcli;$htfui collection of 99 insect cameos is
Unhrerslty of Illinois Press
54 East G~ 
Dfive · Champaign, IL 61820
FIVL~ ~U
University of Illinois Press
54 East Gregory Drive * Champaign, IL 61820
s~ylc oI unrtrnun nlscx;o, 
mnrr cor;nrura;nes rn tm:
'"lhis dcli;$htfui collection of 99 insect cameos is
Unhrerslty of Illinois Press
54 East G~ 
Dfive · Champaign, IL 61820
I
'"lhis dcli;$htfui collection of 99 insect cameos is
Unhrerslty of Illinois Press
54 East G~ 
Dfive · Champaign, IL 61820
is Press 
SECOND Css
rive 
POSTAGE
1820 
pD
