T H E
B U L L E T I N
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
May 2012
Vol. 65   No. 9
2715 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD 21218 • 1.800.548.1784 • 410.516.6987 • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
The Bulletin of the  
Center for Children’s Books
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
issn: 0008-9036 / e-issn: 1558-6766
Children’s literature*
R. H. W. Dillard, Editor-in-Chief 
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, Editors
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
issn: 0092-8208 / e-issn: 1543-3374
Children’s literature 
assoCiation Quarterly*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, Editor
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
issn: 0885-0429 / e-issn: 1553-1201
The lion and the uniCorn
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman,  
and Naomi J. Wood, Editors
An international theme- and genre-centered  
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion  
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
issn: 0147-2593 / e-issn: 1080-6563
*Please direct inquiries and orders to the ChLA:  
www.childlitassn.org.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
ChiLDreN’S LiterAture
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
May 2012
Vol. 65 No. 9
443  the BIg PICture
 
  Bitterblue  by Kristin Cashore
444  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
446 •  Losers in Space  by John Barnes
457 •  The Fault in Our Stars  by John Green
468 •  Froi of the Exiles  by Melina Marchetta
477 •  The Pregnancy Project: A Memoir  by Gaby Rodriguez and Jenna Glatzer
478 •  One Special Day  by Lola M. Schaefer; illus. by Jessica Meserve
488  Professional ConneCtions
489  subjeCt and use index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Claire Gross, Reviewer (CG)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $93.00; combined print & electronic $130.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $16.50 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $11.99. Single copy rate: $10.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2012 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Bitterblue ©2012 by Natalie C. Sousa and used by permission of Dial Books for 
Young Readers.
May 2012 • 443
the BIg PICture
Bitterblue
by Kristin Cashore
With the glut of YA fantasy series published in recent years, the chances that a 
single series has to rise above the others are slim indeed. Fortunately, with this 
latest installment, the Seven Kingdoms series (Graceling, BCCB 1/09, and Fire, 
BCCB 3/10) accomplishes that feat and much more. Framing her interrogations 
of strength, virtue, love, and even narrative within a compelling and brilliantly 
developed tale, Cashore manages to create a story that transcends the genre with 
its emotional and philosophical weight. 
Eight years ago, a dagger through the mouth brought King Leck’s tyranni-
cal rule over Monsea to an abrupt end, and his estranged daughter Bitterblue, only 
a child, was crowned queen. Now eighteen, the young queen is still floundering, 
trying to help her country recover from the decades-long reign of her madman 
father, an epoch in which Leck used his mind-controlling Grace (a superhuman 
ability) to commit atrocious acts and keep his people in a constant state of mental 
fog and ignorance. Buried under mysteriously endless paperwork and with the 
distinct impression that her advisors are hiding something from her, Bitterblue 
ventures out into her kingdom disguised as a commoner only to discover that in 
the poverty-stricken streets of the city, the effects of Leck’s cruelty are still felt. 
Even more devastating is her realization that the “forward-thinking” policies of her 
advisors and the supposed truths she has adhered to in the recent years are doing 
more harm than good. 
The book masterfully builds upon events in Graceling and Fire while 
offering a fresh perspective through Bitterblue, a young woman whose desire to 
effectively rule her country is complicated by her innocence and naïveté. Whereas 
the other installments are steeped in heady romance and tightly plotted action, 
the tension here centers primarily on the destructive secrecy that has flourished in 
Leck’s wake, both in the royal court and among its subjects. Fans of the first two 
volumes may initially be surprised by the slower pace, but the political intrigue 
eventually leads to a revelation so shocking and tragic that it launches the tale from 
mere political thriller into an examination of the power of story as both a road to 
redemption and an obstacle to truth. The cast of supporting characters (including 
returning fan favorites) is superbly developed, while the various subplots, particu-
larly Bitterblue’s romantic entanglement with a street thief, allow readers a more 
complete picture of the young queen and the challenges that face her. 
Taken as a whole, the series examines an intriguing intersection of gender 
expectations, personal autonomy, and political power. Each book features a powerful 
female protagonist that defies traditional stereotypes of femininity while simultane-
444 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
ously subverting the trope of the kick-butt heroine. Just as each finds her power from 
a different source, the women are similarly varied in their vulnerability, and their 
choices tend to reflect both aspects of their character. Of the three, Bitterblue will 
perhaps be the most relatable to teen readers, as she lacks the supernatural abilities 
of Graceling’s Katsa and Fire’s Fire and must use only her will and intellect while 
reckoning with her demons. 
Additionally, this installment seamlessly ties together themes of storytell-
ing and narrative introduced in the previous books, leaving readers with plenty to 
ponder in regards to the truths we choose to acknowledge and those we ignore. 
Regardless of what they end up taking away from it, however, fans will find them-
selves thinking of Bitterblue and her efforts to right the wrongs of the past long 
after they leave the Seven Kingdoms. (See p. 450 for publication information.)
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor
andrews, jesse Me and Earl and the Dying Girl. Amulet/Abrams, 2012 295p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0176-4 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-10
Greg Gaines, a self-proclaimed loser, maintains a distant but friendly relationship 
with all the high school cliques, but he has one real friend, Earl, a super-short, 
perpetually angry, trash-talking, chain-smoking guy who shares his passion for 
making short, incomprehensible films. Greg’s history with girls is a series of epic 
fails, and that doesn’t change when his mother insists that he reach out to a girl 
he went to Hebrew school with who now has cancer; it’s a mitzvah, she tells him, 
which he defines as a “colossal pain in the ass.” His conversations with Rachel are 
as awkward as his ones with Earl are crude, but eventually both boys warm to the 
idea of making her laugh. It doesn’t always work because, let’s face it, a girl who’s 
dying can’t always be cheered up, and Greg’s account of his senior year is therefore 
both funny and poignant. His attitude toward his reader is often confrontational 
and abrasive, a tone that is explained in the end, where he reveals that the entire 
narrative has been an admissions essay for film school in which he’s daring them 
to take them as he is—an ordinary guy, maybe even sub-ordinary, who didn’t learn 
an uplifting lesson from watching his friend die but who still has hope that he 
might turn into someone that he likes someday. The narration is interspersed with 
screenplays, annotated lists, and pointed snark, and the overall tone is one of wry, 
May 2012 • 445
self-protective cynicism that is Greg’s best answer to a question he poses early on: 
“How is it possible to exist in a place that sucks so bad?”  KC
angleberger, tom Fake Mustache; illus. by Jen Wang. Amulet, 2012 [208p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-0194-8 $13.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
When twelve-year-old Lenny Flem, Jr. lends his best friend, Casper, ten dollars to 
purchase the Heidelberg Handlebar #7 fake mustache at a local gag shop, he has 
no idea he’s just become an accomplice in Casper’s plot for world domination. In 
the days following, a mysterious man with some impressive facial hair (as well as 
rather tall shoes) steamrolls his way into the governor’s seat, takes over the Heidel-
berg Novelty Company—the nation’s leading manufacturer of voting booths—and 
launches a presidential campaign. Lenny, of course, knows the guy with the killer 
crumb-catcher is his potentially sociopathic pal in disguise, but the general populace 
has fallen under the mustache’s hypnotic sway, leaving it up to Lenny and his new 
friend (and former child TV star), Jodie O’Rodeo, to save the day. Angleberger 
goes straight for the absurd here, avoiding any lengthy setup that might explain 
Casper’s actions and instead following in the footsteps of M. T. Anderson (Whales 
on Stilts, BCCB 4/05, etc.) by introducing a wacky premise followed by an even 
wackier storyline. Sly jabs at both the electoral process and the world of adults in 
general come fast and furious, and kids will delight in the various ways in which 
Casper exploits his power over grownups (using school librarians to rob the Federal 
Gold Reserve is a particularly brilliant move). The transition in perspective from 
Lenny to Jodie in the middle of the book requires a little readerly readjustment 
but also serves to give this cross-gender appeal. The 2012 campaign season just 
got a little hairier.  KQG 
babbitt, natalie The Moon over High Street. di Capua/Scholastic, 2012 148p
ISBN 978-0-545-37636-5 $15.95   
Ad Gr. 4-6
A chance encounter with a wealthy old man forces twelve-year-old Joe Casimir 
to reconsider his future as an aspiring scientist in this new novel from celebrated 
author Babbitt. Mr. Boulderwall, a millionaire of his own making and owner of 
Midville’s largest factory, is closing in on retirement and looking for an heir to 
his legacy; while trying to round up a neighbor’s dog, Joe impresses the old man, 
prompting an invitation to tea at the Boulderwall mansion on High Street. The 
meeting eventually leads to Boulderwall’s offer to adopt Joe, pay for an expensive 
education, and generally give him a promising future, something Joe’s struggling 
grandmother and guardian can’t guarantee. In return, Joe would have to agree 
to live in the mansion, learn the old man’s business, and give up on his dream of 
becoming an astronomer. Quiet, folksy prose infuses this contemplative tale with 
a fable-like quality that makes the somewhat unbelievable premise feel natural and 
lends an archetypal authority to the simple, unadorned characterizations. Although 
Babbitt avoids depicting Mr. Boulderwall as a complete villain, his single-minded 
focus on wealth and the legacy of his family name is presented in direct contrast 
to Joe’s affability and the genuine earnestness of his values; it’s relatively clear early 
on what Joe’s choice will be, and the inevitability of his decision leaves little room 
for young readers to consider what they might do in Joe’s position. Still, there’s 
446 • The BulleTin
a gentle coziness to the entire endeavor that fans of Babbitt’s previous works will 
immediately recognize and that may win her some new fans as well. 
barnes, john Losers in Space. Viking, 2012 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-670-06156-3 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
In 2129, 96% of the population live on a fixed income for which they do no work; 
1% are violent offenders who are locked away; and 3% are eligible for employment 
in jobs that the robots can’t do, such as professions that require special talent, or the 
creation of images that attract lots of media attention. Since this last group can earn 
100 times more than the minimum, and since children of that group can’t inherit 
their parents’ wealth unless they too become celebrities, some kids will do anything 
to become famous, bucking for celebrity status by accumulating a statistically cal-
culated number of hits on social media. Derlock Slabilis comes up with a plan to 
stow away with friends on a transport ship to Mars, betting that the resulting media 
will ensure that they are celebrities for life. The problem is that Derlock has other, 
more nefarious plans, plans that turn his friends into foils and put them in mortal 
danger. Following an accident that maybe isn’t an accident, the group is left alone 
on a spaceship they must learn to operate, but the most difficult part is learning to 
cooperate with one another, as each member of the group has a distinct personality 
laced with attitude that doesn’t necessarily play well with others. A strong-willed 
girl named Susan, one of the transport’s passengers, is the focalizer here, deftly 
navigating the interpersonal tensions; Barnes keeps those tensions taut indeed as 
he manages to create complex mini-dramas, but he also offers biting social satire 
and crafts an ending that leaves readers wondering whether Susan might not just 
be as much of a sociopath as Derlock himself. As with all good science fiction, the 
science is plausible if not yet possible, and Barnes provides “notes for the interested” 
explaining technical points. This is geek-lit at its best; fans of Battlestar Galactica, 
Firefly, and Star Trek will be queuing up.  KC
bently, Peter The Great Sheep Shenanigans; illus. by Mei Matsuoka. Andersen/
Lerner, 2012 28p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-8990-3 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-8991-0 $12.95   
R 5-8 yrs
In this rhyming story from Britain, wolf Lou Pine is determined to get his furry 
little mitts on some succulent sheep. After his initial stealth attack results in an 
encounter with the ultra-buff Rambo the Ram, Lou decides that what he needs 
is “a sheepy disguise/ to give those dumb muttons a nasty surprise.” His various 
attempts at concealment involve white paint from a road-striping machine, a spin 
in the cotton-candy vat at the fair (“He looked in the mirror and felt his heart 
sink./ He’d ended up dizzy and sticky and PINK!”), and, finally, a sweater, which 
he bullies Red Riding Hood’s grandmother into knitting for him. Gran, however, 
ensures that the sweater will unravel by the time Lou reaches the sheep, and sure 
enough he meets up again with Rambo, who “aimed his big horns at the wolf’s 
derriere/ And sent him skedaddling up in the air./ ‘Ouch! My behind!’ howled 
Lou as he flew . . ./ And landed kersplat in a big pile of poo!” Bently’s carefully 
constructed text works effortlessly as a readaloud, and the persistent but inept Lou, 
May 2012 • 447
the boxing-gloved Rambo, and the pile of poo all squarely hit the primary-grade 
funnybone. Matsuoka’s art slightly resembles that of Brian Karas with its dot-eyed 
characters and textured backgrounds (including some crisp, high-energy patterns), 
and big-nosed, pale gray Lou is endearing even if he is the antihero. Kids will be 
diverted by Bently’s skillful and risible rhymes and by Matsuoka’s droll depictions 
of Lou’s antics, and they’ll wolf this one down.  JH
biCk, ilsa j. Drowning Instinct. Carolrhoda Lab, 2012 343p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-7752-8 $17.95  
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-8726-8 $12.95   
R Gr. 9-12
When the policeman asks Jenna how she fell through the ice and nearly drowned in 
the lake near her teacher’s house, she won’t tell him. When he leaves her a recorder, 
though, she starts talking, describing her memories of nearly dying in a fire at her 
grandfather’s house when she was young, her parents’ on-again off-again romantic 
closeness, her father’s brutally controlling behavior, her difficulty fitting in at her 
new school, her longing for her absent brother, and finally her relationship with her 
teacher, Mr. Anderson. The tale that emerges has numerous heroes and villains, but 
they are often contained within the same person, and the moral messiness disallows 
easy distinctions. At the center of it all is Jenna herself, whose keen need for love 
is met only by people who betray, neglect, and lie to her, even when they, too, are 
simply seeking genuine affection. Jenna’s narration spins out multiple mysteries 
and consistently dares her imaginary listener to condemn her romantic relation-
ship with her teacher, who matches her need for need. In fact, her defiant tone 
and refusal to be a victim even though she has been victimized is what ultimately 
keeps her afloat, making this a compelling study of brokenness that persists across 
generations and of salvation by unconventional means.  KC
bobet, leah Above. Levine/Scholastic, 2012 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-29670-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-39220-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
The underground city of Safe offers sanctuary to the Sick, the Freaks, and other 
rejects from the world Above. Matthew was the first of a generation to be born there 
and has been raised by Atticus, a Freak with crab claws for hands, who is one of the 
founders of Safe. As the appointed Teller, Matthew is responsible for the histories 
of the city and its residents, but the tale takes a terrible turn when Corner, the 
one and only exile from Safe, returns with an army of venomous shadows, killing 
Atticus and scattering the other Freaks through the underground tunnels and up 
Above. There, Matthew and his friend Ari, a broken and troubled shape-shifter, 
uncover the true origins of Safe, and Matthew’s role shifts from historian to judge 
and executioner as he rights past wrongs and attempts to build a new Safe. Richly 
nuanced, this complicated tale touches on notions of security, truth, and autonomy 
with just a hint of romantic love. Matthew’s narration oscillates between a folksy, 
slang-ridden casualness and a poetic stream of consciousness, abundant in imagery 
and metaphor; the combination is disconcerting at times but also furthers the story’s 
ethereal, illusory quality. Each of the characters is painfully, endearingly flawed, some 
of them irredeemably so; Corner’s story of rejection, acceptance, and then rejection 
again is particularly compelling, and the author deftly blurs the line between villainy 
448 • The BulleTin
and vulnerability without excusing Corner’s horrific acts. A disjointed timeline and 
differing perspectives are neatly handled through Matthew’s role as Teller, and his 
stories speak to the idea that history is shaped by what it omits as well as what it 
includes. The ultimate price for the return to Safe is a high one, and readers will 
be left wondering not only what asylum is worth but also who deserves it.  KQG
bunting, eve Ballywhinney Girl; illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. Clarion, 
2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-55843-1 $16.99   
R* 5-8 yrs
Maeve is out in the Irish bog with her grandfather when, while cutting a strip of 
peat from the ground, he unearths a body: “Run on home and tell your ma. Tell 
her to phone the Ballywhinney police.” Having delivered the message, Maeve 
hustles back to the scene of the assumed crime, but the police recognize at once 
that this isn’t a murder victim but a mummy. Archaeologists are summoned and 
the sergeant urges Maeve to go on home, but she’s having none of that. She hangs 
on the archaeologists’ every word as they suggest Grandpa’s find is probably a girl, 
about a thousand years old (“I gasped. A girl! A girl like me, a thousand years ago 
dead and dropped into this quiet place. Who was she? What had happened?”). The 
remains are carefully removed, the police keep the family informed of the where-
abouts of the Ballywhinney Girl, and Maeve takes some comfort in the report that 
the dead child was found to have flowers beside her, “the kind that line the lanes of 
Ballywhinney.” Seeing the mummy as an object on exhibit in a glass museum case 
brings Maeve to tears; only when she returns home, sets a rock on the original burial 
site, and imagines Ballywhinney Girl returning to walk in the moonlight does she 
bring peaceful closure to the episode. Here Bunting acknowledges children’s strong 
interest in the mysteries—and grotesqueries—of death, but also credits her young 
audience with an equally strong sense of awe, respect, and sympathetic imagina-
tion. Maeve’s voice and the natural flow of dialogue make this a pleasure to read 
aloud, and McCully’s watercolor scenes capture a placid landscape and cozy home 
suddenly jolted from the quotidian into the extraordinary. A closing note remarks 
on other “bog body” discoveries that inform this fictional tale.  EB
burt, marissa Storybound. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-06-202052-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Una loves the library, where she can daydream about a life better than the one she 
lives in foster care. One day, she comes across a book with her name in the title, 
and upon reading it, inexplicably finds herself in a cave with a boy and girl who 
talk and dress oddly and who seem to be preparing to fight a dragon. The world 
Una has entered is called Story, and its young inhabitants attend school to learn 
how to be characters in particular genres. Something has gone dangerously amiss, 
however, and Una, like others before her who have been “Written In” to Story, is 
in grave danger. Not all of the details are made clear, which is understandable as 
this is the beginning of a series; unfortunately, this narrative has too many gaps for 
readers to actually understand the root of the conflict and what is needed to right 
the wrongs. Although the premise of a world where school consists of classes in 
villainy and heroism is very appealing, character development and world-making 
are clearly less important than action scenes here; what development does happen 
May 2012 • 449
takes place on the run, literally, which leaves readers trying to figure out how Una 
and the others will respond to the next plot twist with little context for doing so. 
Readers with a background in metafictive fantasies such as Funke’s Inkheart (BCCB 
3/04), however, will recognize many of the elements here: a talking cat who knows 
a lot if only someone would listen; a girl and boy team piecing together a mystery 
that has eluded grownups; a world under threat of literal erasure as its books are 
being destroyed; a few peers and teachers who may be friends or foes, time will tell; 
and a teacher who is decidedly a foe but may simply be acting on bad information. 
This opening volume provides a fairly sketchy setup, but these elements have a 
good chance of cohering nicely as the series progresses.  KC
Caletti, deb The Story of Us. Simon Pulse, 2012 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2346-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2348-0 $9.99 
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
“I hated change,” says Cricket. “Hated it and was bad at it.” Unfortunately for 
Cricket, she’s currently facing a lot of change: her mother is about to get remarried, 
her family is moving out of their old home as a consequence, and Cricket herself 
is anxious and uncertain about departing for college. Worst of all, she’s in limbo 
with her adored long-term boyfriend, Janssen, who’s also her brother’s best friend. 
As Cricket, her extended family, her mother’s fiancé, and his family gather at an 
oceanside inn to prepare for and celebrate the wedding, she contemplates how 
they all got there and pours out her heart to Janssen in long, retrospective emails. 
As usual, Caletti’s writing possesses both vigor and perceptivity, with characters 
brought to vivid life in a quick turn of phrase. Cricket is a credible result of her 
family and history, a girl desperate to see her mother (who has a history of walking 
out on men) happily wed but also frightened of any move out of stasis for herself. 
The letters to Janssen are less successful than the rest of the book, however; their 
length and contemplative meandering slows down the pace, and Janssen’s implau-
sible perfection, even in retrospect, undermines the reality of the rest of the story. 
There’s a romantic appeal in their tracing of Cricket and Janssen’s relationship, 
though, and the fact that Cricket can’t get past her demons even with this perfect 
guy illustrates her dilemma. Readers uncertain about their own upcoming big 
moves into adulthood may relate to Cricket’s anxiety and applaud her negotiation 
of a difficult transition.  DS
Cannon, a. e. Sophie’s Fish; illus. by Lee White. Viking, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01291-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Young Jake has rashly agreed to look after the pet fish of his classmate Sophie for a 
weekend, an agreement he is now second-guessing: “What if Yo-Yo gets hungry and 
wants a snack? What kind of snack do fish like to eat?” Each increasingly outlandish 
“what if” leads to further anxiety, until Jake comes to a new conclusion: “When 
Sophie rings my doorbell, I’ll tell her to take Yo-Yo back home. No fish allowed at 
this house, I’ll say.” Sophie’s arrival and subsequent declaration about the ease of fish 
care (all he needs is to be fed twice a day) reassures Jake that “babysitting Sophie’s 
fish will be a snap!” The last page reveals Yo-Yo to be an enormous, spiky-toothed 
anglerfish, causing Jake to pause yet again: “Or not.” Bespectacled, ginger-haired 
450 • The BulleTin
Jake is a sympathetic figure, and the worrywarts among the audience will entirely 
understand his mounting anxiety even as they chuckle at the clever ending and at 
illustrator White’s amusingly rendered scenarios. White’s art combines scratchy lines 
of brown ink with moody washes of watercolor and clean-edged collage elements, 
sometimes in surprising places; the sensibility is polished yet loopy, with creative 
compositions and rib-tickling scenes of Jake’s imaginings. The final reveal of Yo-
Yo’s true form is slyly hinted at on the next-to-last page, as viewers spot the edge 
of a very large fishbowl indeed in Sophie’s little red wagon. Pair this with LaReau’s 
Ugly Fish (BCCB 7/06) for a set of fishy stories with surprising endings, or use it 
as a light-hearted introduction to acquiring a class fish.  JH
Cashore, kristin Bitterblue. Dial, 2012 [576p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3473-9 $19.99 
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 453, for review.
Corriveau, art 13 Hangmen. Amulet/Abrams, 2012 342p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0159-7 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-8
The title refers not to an unlucky number of grisly executionaers but an address 
(fictional) in Boston’s North End—a down-at-the-heels brownstone that has been 
willed by a great uncle, Zio Angelo, to Tony DiMarco on his thirteenth birthday, 
on the condition that he doesn’t sell the house and that he sleep in the attic bed-
room. Along with the legacy comes another gift, an original Ted Williams baseball 
cap, which is to be kept in the “place of honor” in the attic room. As soon as the 
DiMarcos are established in their new digs, Tony finds they are up to their collective 
eyebrows in a mystery concerning Zio Angelo’s probable murder by the next-door 
neighbor who covets their house. The baseball cap is the first key to unlocking the 
mystery, as it puts Tony into contact with Angelo as a thirteen-year-old, who in turn 
makes contact with the previous thirteen-year-old occupant of 13 Hangmen, and 
so on back through generations to the Revolutionary War and a connection with 
a “treasure” hidden by Paul Revere. Corriveau merrily ransacks historical episodes 
and figures (e.g., the Great Molasses Flood, the Underground Railroad, Boston 
mayor John F. “Honey Fitz” Fitzgerald) and spins, twists, and manipulates their 
stories to advance the DiMarco family mystery. The result is a novel that agilely 
balances humor and tension and comes clean in the end regarding the many liber-
ties taken with the historical record. The villain is punished, the DiMarcos prosper, 
and readers will be sufficiently delighted with the righteous outcome to forgive the 
improbable tidiness of the happy ending.  EB
Cross, sarah Kill Me Softly. Egmont, 2012 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-323-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-324-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
At fifteen, Mirabelle commits her first act of rebellion by running away to Beau 
Rivage, the hometown of her late parents and a place expressly forbidden by her 
strict, overprotective godmothers. Among the fairy-tale themed casinos and skeevy 
hotels, Mira meets a host of teens with strange characteristics (a girl whose mouth 
May 2012 • 451
drips jewels, a boy who can seemingly enchant animals), each bearing a birthmark 
that curses them to fulfill a role in a particular fairy tale; Mira shares a similar mark, 
in the vague shape of a spinning wheel. Before she can play out her fate as Sleeping 
Beauty, however, she falls in love with Felix, a boy marked as a villain whose role 
would inevitably cost Mira her life, unless she can change both their destinies. Like 
the superhero teens of Cross’ debut, Dull Boy (BCCB 9/09), Mira and her friends 
are an entertainingly motley group forced to deal with extraordinary circumstances. 
The author throws them together in a way that emphasizes the heartbreak of each 
fairy tale: the Huntsman, for example, is hopelessly in love with Snow White even 
as he knows he will be asked to kill her, while Blue, Felix’s brother, actively resists 
Mira’s friendship (despite his affection for her) for fear that it would lead to her 
becoming another victim of Bluebeard’s curse. Unfortunately, many of these more 
dark, subversive elements are left behind as the story increasingly focuses on Mira’s 
relationship with Felix and then Blue, leading to a conclusion where the happiness 
is forced and the loose ends are multiple, with the fates of both Felix and Mira’s 
parents remaining undisclosed. A paranormal romance that has the girl choosing 
the nice guy over the broody bad boy, however, is a rare gem these days, and read-
ers may find that enough to be enchanted by Beau Rivage and its residents.  KQG
davis, aubrey, ad. A Hen for Izzy Pippik; illus. by Marie Lafrance. Kids Can, 
2012 32p
ISBN 978-1-55453-243-8 $16.95   
R 6-9 yrs
When young Shaina finds a hen in her yard—a sign and a broken crate suggest that 
it has fallen off a truck and belongs to a chicken farmer named Izzy Pippik—she 
decides to care for it herself until Mr. Pippik returns for it, as Shaina is certain he 
will. Having fallen on hard times, her family and fellow townspeople are less thrilled 
with this plan; they see the hen as a potential source of food and resist when Shaina 
insists that all the hen’s eggs and offspring also belong to Izzy Pippik and are thus off 
limits. Although there is considerable grumbling, Shaina’s wishes are respected, and 
the ever-growing flock of chickens soon attracts tourists to the town, resuscitating 
business and prospects. The belated arrival of Izzy Pippik momentarily throws the 
town off balance, but he generously gives up his claim to the hen and her offspring, 
and everyone rejoices, including Shaina. According to the jacket flap, this offbeat 
folkloric story is “based on an ancient tale from the Babylonian Talmud and the 
Hadith of the Prophet Mohammed.” Spirited dialogue and melodic description 
(“They [the chickens] toppled trash cans, fought for food and cackled from morning 
to night”) warmly evoke the voice of an oral storyteller and make this a pleasure to 
read aloud. Lafrance’s elegant illustrations (rendered in pencil and digitally colored) 
feature quiet tones of pale olive greens, aquas, blues, browns, and grays, with accents 
of red in the hen’s comb, Izzy Pippik’s truck, and Shaina’s perky hair bow. There’s a 
hint of Lois Lenski in the old-fashioned sensibility and simplified figures and faces 
of the townspeople, and Shaina is particularly winning with her long dark braid 
(that seems to have a life of its own) trailing out behind her. Young listeners who 
passionately yearn for fairness will admire Shaina’s integrity (though some may cry 
“Finders keepers!”) and relate to her plucky optimism, and animal-loving kids will 
be particularly charmed by the idea of a town teeming with tame chickens.  JH
452 • The BulleTin
davis, tanita s. Happy Families. Knopf, 2012 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96966-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86966-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98457-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
The lives of high-achieving high school siblings Justin and Ysabel were disrupted 
when their father came out to the family as transgender and moved away; now, six 
months later, they are spending spring break with their father as their parents work 
on finding the way forward for their family. Davis, author of Mare’s War (BCCB 
9/09), probes a complicated set of dynamics with compassion, poignancy, and deeply 
felt emotion, drawing readers into an intimate portrait of a loving family in the midst 
of an unsettling and difficult transition. Her writing is incredibly nuanced, and the 
deceptively straightforward prose conveys multiple levels of narrative and character 
development, making the story accessible to early teens but complex enough to 
engage older readers. The relationship between the parents in particular is skillfully 
conveyed; even as seen only through the eyes of Justin and Ysabel, who alternate 
as narrators, the history and love the adults share shines through, and both emerge 
as dynamic characters in their own right. The understated inclusion of religion—
which is central to the family’s identity but remains in the background as a positive 
rather than an oppositional force—is notable for its easy matter-of-factness, as is 
the similarly soft-pedaled detail that the Nicholases are African American, making 
this one of only a few LGBT books for youth to feature characters of color. The 
book is remarkable, though, not for its rarity but for its quality, and readers will 
be swept up in the (often familiar) micro-dramas of family conflict and rooting for 
each character to get what they need as they, like Justin and Ysabel, get to know 
this particular configuration of family.  CG
engle, margarita The Wild Book. Harcourt, 2012 130p
ISBN 978-0-547-58131-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-7
This lyrically composed novel in verse, based on the life of the author’s grandmother, 
is set in Cuba in 1912, when eleven-year-old Fefa is first diagnosed with “word 
blindness,” or dyslexia. While the doctor treats the diagnosis as an irrevocable and 
untreatable scar, Mamá responds by giving Fefa a blank book and the instructions 
to use it for writing: “Throw wildflower seeds/ all over each page . . . Let the words 
sprout/ like seedlings,/ then relax and watch/ as your wild diary/ grows.” It is not 
an easy task: Fefa is mocked by her siblings, dizzied by the glowing white pages, 
and frightened about the possible consequences of her inability to read. In the end, 
however, Fefa’s slow and observant style of reading saves the family from a danger-
ous situation. The plotting, though carefully constructed, is secondary here to the 
remarkable, intimate depiction of Fefa’s struggle with dyslexia; Engle is masterful 
at using words to evoke this difficulty, and even those readers unfamiliar with the 
condition will understand its meaning through her rich use of imagery and detail 
(“The skin of a frog/feels just as slippery/and tricky as a wild/inky word”). An au-
thor’s note provides information about the real life Josefa de la Caridad Uría Peña 
as well as some basic information about dyslexia.  HM
May 2012 • 453
feder, sandra v. Daisy’s Perfect Word; illus. by Susan Mitchell. Kids Can, 
2012 85p
ISBN 978-1-55453-645-0 $14.95   
R Gr. 2-3
Elementary-grader Daisy is sad to learn that her beloved teacher, Miss Goldner, 
will be moving away at the end of the school year due to her recent engagement. 
When her classmates decide to give engagement gifts to Miss Goldner, word-lover 
Daisy chooses to give her teacher a unique present: a perfect word. Thus begins 
her search for “a word that was right for kids and teachers, perfect loudly or softly, 
and not too long or too short. Plus, it would be full of fun.” After much trial and 
error, Daisy finally finds the perfect word—“giggle”—and it is a hit not only with 
Miss Goldner but with her entire class, all of whom end up acting out Daisy’s gift 
by dissolving into helpless laughter. Although there’s not a lot of substance to this 
slim chapter book, it’s a well-crafted story and a useful step up for kids just ready 
to move beyond easy readers and into longer titles. The large font and Mitchell’s 
frequent and attractive monochromatic illustrations (Daisy is a wide-eyed, curly-
haired cutie, and everyone looks rosy-cheeked and cheery) help make this more 
approachable for less confident readers, while dyed-in-the-wool word lovers will 
revel in the vocabulary focus. Feder’s Daisy and her world are sweet and gentle in 
the best sense of both words, and Daisy’s observations credibly reflect both her 
tender age and her love for language (“Samantha’s words fell like little presents on 
Daisy’s ears”). “Daisy’s Wonderful Word Lists” and “Daisy’s Golden Glossary” are 
included and could serve as inspiration for kids to create similar lists.  JH
florian, douglas Poem Runs: Baseball Poems and Paintings; written and illus. 
by Douglas Florian. Harcourt, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-68838-1 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 2-5
Fifteen poems celebrate the opening of a new baseball season, pay tribute to many 
of the field positions (and even the much-resented umpire), and bring the season 
around to its bittersweet but inevitable conclusion. Not all poems rise to the high 
bar Florian has set in much of his previous work, with a few stumbles in the scansion 
(“I block with my belly,/ I nab with my knees./ Throw me jars of jelly./ I’ll grab 
them with ease”) and a few punchlines that don’t quite showcase Florian’s custom-
ary sparkle (“Catch a ball lightly./ Jump up and jog./ Warm yourself up/ Like a 
fireplace log”). The roughly textured mixed-media paintings on paper bags are a 
goofy pleasure, though, with players in impossible stretches across the double-page 
spreads as they demonstrate their particular skills. Middle-graders may be better 
pleased with Charles R. Smith, Jr.’s Diamond Life or the Lee Bennett Hopkins 
collection Extra Innings, but this could have considerable appeal for the younger 
end of the target audience.  EB
frederiCk, heather vogel Once Upon a Toad. Simon, 2012 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-8478-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-8707-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
After her astronaut mother is called up for an emergency space mission, twelve-year-
old Cat is forced to quickly pack up and move in with her dad and his new family 
hundreds of miles away from anything she knows. Her stepsister Olivia seems bent 
454 • The BulleTin
on making Cat’s stay as miserable as possible, but that changes shortly after Cat’s 
quirky aunt Abyssinia comes for a visit. Suddenly, Olivia is spouting jewels and 
flowers when she talks, while Cat’s every utterance produces a bevy of toads; as it 
turns out, Aunt Aby is a fairy godmother, albeit an “occupationally challenged” 
one. The results of her latest muddled spell gain national media attention, and soon 
both Cat and Olivia are on the run, evading nosy government scientists and greedy 
civilians while trying to track down the kidnapper who is holding their younger 
brother hostage in exchange for Olivia’s bounty. This adaptation of Perrault’s classic 
“Toads and Diamonds” blends fairy-tale magic with middle-school antics to an 
enjoyable if unsurprising outcome. The book moves quickly from setup to action 
once Aunt Aby shows up, and the adventure amps up as the girls road trip along the 
West Coast, make a pit stop in Las Vegas, gain an eccentric cast of supporters, and 
of course, triumph over the bad guys, saving their brother and breaking the curse in 
the meantime. There’s a clever connection between Olivia’s various moods and the 
flora she spews, but otherwise this is a straightforward tale of sibling rivalry, cured 
by magical intervention, between two mostly likable girls. Even readers unfamiliar 
with the original tale will correctly foresee the happy ending, but that doesn’t make 
it any less deserved—or satisfying.  KQG
frederiCks, mariah The Girl in the Park. Schwartz & Wade, 2012 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96843-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86843-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89907-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Outgoing, big-hearted Wendy breezes into the posh Alcott School in New York 
City from Long Island, but she can’t catch a break from the popular girls; she’s rich 
enough, but too “bridge and tunnel” for them to accept as one of their own. She’s 
the first person to ever be kind to Rain, though, encouraging her to talk in spite of 
the speech difficulties caused by a cleft palate. She and Rain drift apart, however, 
as Wendy begins to take her revenge on the mean girls by hooking up with their 
boyfriends. One night, Wendy doesn’t return from a party where she made a public 
show of going after the queen bee’s guy, and when she is found dead in Central 
Park the next morning, rumors fly. Rain is determined both to find her killer and 
to make sure Wendy isn’t simply cast as a party girl who deserved her fate, but 
sifting clues leads her to multiple wrong conclusions and fits of conscience. Rain’s 
memories of her friendship with Wendy appear in flashbacks that interrupt the 
present flow of the narrative, but they are arranged mostly chronologically so that 
readers can piece together the sequence of events. The mystery unravels amidst a 
sensitive exploration of Rain’s coming to terms with her own quiet, demure person-
ality, with its flaws and its advantages measured against Wendy’s extroversion and 
desire for recognition and love. The crime itself offers up multiple suspects before 
a triumphant resolution tinged with melancholy, a conclusion that highlights the 
fact that while growth is certainly possible, some people, unfortunately, never make 
it past the slights of high school.  KC
May 2012 • 455
george, madeleine The Difference Between You and Me. Viking, 2012 262p
ISBN 978-0-670-01128-5 $16.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Jesse cuts her hair short with scissors, wears scuffed fisherman’s boots to school 
every day, and skips pep rallies to cover the school in flyers for the National Or-
ganization to Liberate All Weirdos, of which she is the sole member. Emily is a 
popular, closeted overachiever who serves on student council and rigidly controls 
and compartmentalizes every aspect of her life. They have nothing in common, 
but they’ve fallen into a secret relationship that is mostly about making out. 
Then Jesse makes a new friend in fellow weirdo Esther and gets involved in her 
campaign against the big-box grocery store that’s trying to move into town—the 
same company whose sponsorship of the prom is Emily’s pet project. George does 
a splendid job of imbuing even the most unlikable characters with sympathetic 
complexity; Emily in particular could easily become a villain, but George portrays 
her with enough nuance that readers will feel for her even as they hate how she 
treats Jesse. The balance of relationship drama, community-protest narrative, and 
satiric high-school-survival tale is deftly navigated, with each plot supporting the 
rest as all build to an emotional conclusion. Its thematic underpinnings—letting go 
of your first relationship, being true to yourself, negotiating your countercultural 
identity, standing up for what you believe in—give the book considerable depth, 
but George maintains a light touch, with plenty of humor and sweetness making 
this a joyful read. This is a warm, complex, hopeful, and original addition to the 
expanding canon of LGBTQ youth literature.  CG
gePhart, donna Olivia Bean, Trivia Queen. Delacorte, 2012 278p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98952-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74052-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89940-9 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Brainiac Olivia Bean has watched Jeopardy! every evening since she was a little girl, 
but the nightly tradition just hasn’t been the same since her father and fellow trivia-
phile took off for California two years ago. When the show announces auditions 
for Kids Week, Olivia is intent on making the cut, not only to compete but, more 
importantly, to get a plane ticket out to the show’s taping in L.A. with the hopes of 
meeting up with her estranged dad. Now that she’s twelve years old, however, this is 
Olivia’s last chance to play the kids’ round, so she’s willing to accept help from just 
about anyone, including both the patronizing whiz kid next door and her mother’s 
annoying boyfriend, who also happens to be a pretty smart librarian. Mathletes, 
geography bee-sters, and kids who’ve answered the siren’s song of debate club will 
immediately relate to Olivia’s passion for knowledge (and the social ostracizing that 
sometimes accompanies it); just about all readers, regardless of their study habits, 
will recognize her struggles to fit in, particularly as the dynamics in both her family 
and school life shift. Gephart offers Olivia’s father little redemption when he fails 
to even show up for the taping, but Olivia’s determination in spite of his neglect 
will have readers rooting for her success. A tender, funny portrayal of a girl learning 
to appreciate both what she has and what she has to offer, this will appeal to both 
the brains and hearts of readers.  KQG
456 • The BulleTin
graff, lisa Double Dog Dare. Philomel, 2012 290p
ISBN 978-0-399-25516-8 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-6
When the fourth-grade media club takes a vote to determine who will take over 
as the anchor for the school news show, it’s a tie between Francine, who has been 
working hard for the position all year, and new kid Kansas. When Kansas men-
tions his propensity for doing dares, the kids decide to stage a dare war, with the 
winner earning the anchor’s seat. The dares, which range from somewhat mild 
(Kansas has to howl like a wolf any time someone says his name) to downright 
cruel (Francine has to eat the contents of eighty-seven ketchup packets), rapidly 
establish the two of them as sworn enemies. It turns out, however, that Francine 
and Kansas have something in common: both are in the early, very confusing stages 
of dealing with divorcing parents. The chapters alternate between the two voices, 
and as the story progresses, readers will undoubtedly take to both kids. Graff (The 
Thing about Georgie, BCCB 4/07) is particularly gifted at creating characters, deftly 
developing both their internal and external personalities. While this could have 
easily diverged into a silly plot-driven description of the many dares, it is instead a 
thoughtful and thought-provoking examination of the two protagonists. Relation-
ships with secondary characters (particularly Kansas’ tutu-wearing six-year-old sister, 
who desperately wants to believe that their dad is coming back) give the readers 
further understanding of the cast. Fans of Andrew Clements’ school-based fiction 
(No Talking, BCCB 10/07, etc.) will readily warm to this story and its ultimately 
satisfying ending.  HM
grant, miChael BZRK. Egmont, 2012 389p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-312-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-313-0 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
In this techno-thriller, the latest scientific leap is nanotechnology—specifically, biots, 
tiny creatures linked directly to a human brain. With these biots, spying, assassina-
tion, and mind control are now possible on a microscopic level. Two teens—Sadie, 
whose just-murdered family invented the technology and Noah, whose older brother 
has been institutionalized as a result of his work with biots—are inducted into 
BZRK, one of only two organizations involved in nanotech. As BZRK’s nemesis 
sets into motion a plot to kill off major world leaders and take over the planet, Sadie 
and Noah are plunged into battle on two simultaneous, interactive fronts: the nano 
and the macro. With thrilling chase scenes in the macro and fascinating, grotesque 
detail in the nano, Grant brings a vivid imagination and video-game sensibility to 
his numerous action sequences. Unfortunately, the characters are flat, with most 
defined by a signature idiosyncrasy, and the nonwhite characters are particularly 
reductively treated. The fact that both sides of the conflict are represented by people 
who seem entirely lacking human empathy, however, does add some intriguing 
moral ambiguity to the mix. The elaborately conceptualized nano battlegrounds 
and gamer-meets-Bond exploits, however, are the main attraction here, and for 
some readers, that may be enough to carry the show.  CG
May 2012 • 457
green, john The Fault in Our Stars. Dutton, 2012 313p
ISBN 978-0-525-47881-2 $17.99   
R* Gr. 9-12
The support group for young people with cancer isn’t exactly Hazel’s favorite place, 
but attending it fulfills her parents’ desire to see her get out more. It’s there that the 
sixteen-year-old meets Augustus, who is cancer-free after “a little touch of osteo-
sarcoma” and is mainly there to support a friend. Augustus is verbose, intellectual, 
challenging, and, Hazel admits, hot, and he’s also immediately smitten with Hazel, 
herself no slouch in the smarts department. Though deeply taken with Augustus 
in return, Hazel resists a serious relationship; she’s already keenly aware of the tor-
ment her parents have gone through and the grief they’ll suffer when her cancer 
eventually kills her, and she can’t imagine willfully subjecting somebody else to that 
kind of loss. Augustus wins her over, though, eliciting a response from her favorite 
author and even arranging a trip to Holland to meet the reclusive man, but once 
there the couple realizes that cancer will cut short their time together even sooner 
than they’d thought. Green perfectly realizes the mannered yet emotional stylings 
of his young characters, allowing them to be poignantly human even as they’re 
authentically overintellectual in a way that many well-read, idea-loving teens will 
recognize as their wishful goal if not their actuality. Existential questions take on 
a particular urgency for people looking death in the eye, and the book feelingly 
explores the desire for meaning in a life that’s not going to last long enough for 
concrete achievement. Underneath it all, however, is a love story, a sometimes 
smartmouthed, sometimes tender tale of accumulating beauty and epic gesture, a 
story that comes down firmly on the side of “worth it all” no matter how soon it 
ends. Readers looking for a grand passion involving real people will rejoice even 
as they weep.  DS
harrison, david l. Cowboys: Voices  in  the Western Wind; illus. by Dan 
Burr. WordSong/Boyds Mills, 2012 42p
ISBN 978-1-59078-877-6 $17.95   
R Gr. 4-7
Twenty-two poems, partnered with sweeping oversized portraits, trace the lives 
of nineteenth-century cowpunchers; after wrangling cattle on the ranch in Texas, 
they join up with a cattle drive, ride herd on the critters across the miles, and then 
deliver them to the railhead in Abilene, Kansas. The poems, almost all free verse, 
are short-lined and colloquial, speaking in the voices of the cowboys themselves, 
sometimes in dialogue. The poems have a you-are-there immediacy that, at their 
best, conveys the flavor and rhythms of the cowboys, guys teetering between danger 
and boredom (“Ever see a real gunfight?/ Curly says he saw one once/ in Abilene,” 
one says to another as they shoot at cans). The three-quarter spread and full-page 
illustrations follow the school of famous Western painter Charles Russell in their 
dusty photorealism; thoughtful, dramatic compositions, with strong figures contrast-
ing with the pale skies, add energy to the evocative poses of eager, tired, hopeful, 
and regretful cowpokes. The book design is artistic in its own right, the scuffed 
beige of the page backgrounds extending the earthtoned, sun-bleached plains, while 
curly Ponderosa-style-font titles adorn and introduce the poems. Compact though 
it may be, this is a more evocative distillation of the Chisholm Trail experience than 
many longer books achieve, and it’ll make a lively companion to factual titles such 
458 • The BulleTin
as Albert Marrin’s Cowboys, Indians and Gunfighters (BCCB 3/94). A closing note 
provides more information.  DS
hathaway, jill Slide. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2012 250p
ISBN 978-0-06-207790-5 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Ever since her mother died, Vee has developed a condition where she passes out 
for brief periods of time; though she is diagnosed with narcolepsy, what really 
happens is that she slides into the consciousness of another person. During one 
sliding episode, she witnesses a murder that has been made to look like a suicide, 
and she is determined to find out who the killer is. Meanwhile, her personal life 
is going a little haywire: her best friend, Rollins, is acting distant, a new boy has 
arrived in school and turned her head, she finds out that her father had an affair 
before their mother died, and her sister may be next on the killer’s list. While the 
details are occasionally implausible, most readers will find the flaws forgivable in 
light of the page-turning drama, readable prose, and thoughtful characterization. 
Vee is a sympathetic protagonist with too much on her plate, and her conflicted 
feelings regarding her best friend and her new boyfriend, her distant father and 
her partying sister, and her mysterious condition are well drawn and credibly tied 
to her grief over losing her mother. The loose ends tie up a bit too conveniently 
in the end, but readers will be satisfied when Vee ends up with the right boy, no 
matter how it happens.  KC 
hayes, joe, ad. and comp. The Coyote Under the Table/ El coyote debajo de la 
mesa; ad. in English and Spanish by Joe Hayes; illus. by Antonio Castro L. Cinco 
Puntos, 2012 133p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-21-4 $19.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-06-1 $12.95   
R Gr. 5-8
Veteran storyteller Hayes follows up his notable collection The Day It Snowed Torti-
llas with another set of ten stories drawn from the New Mexican Hispanic tradition. 
Young readers might recognize a few familiar tales, including regional variations of 
“Cinderella” and “Puss in Boots,” while the lesser-known stories operate in a familiar 
folkloric fashion, introducing heroes and heroines, tricksters and villains, magical 
transformations, and ending ultimately in happily ever after (for the most part). 
Humor plays a big part here, and many of the bad guys meet their fate in rather 
comedic ways: the three annoyingly persistent suitors in “Caught on a Nail,” for 
instance, are nearly scared out of their pants (literally) by a clever heroine, while a 
young boy obtains the means to make his greedy, lazy master dance for his supper 
in “The Man Who Couldn’t Stop Dancing.” Each story is told in English and 
Spanish (with the two translations on facing pages) and accompanied by a single, 
black and white tableau, usually depicting the climactic scene; the softly detailed 
art has an intricacy and drama unusual in non-picturebook illustration. Source 
notes are included for each tale, making this an excellent resource for storytellers 
as well as a delightful addition to the 398.2s.  KQG
May 2012 • 459
hiaasen, Carl Chomp. Knopf, 2012 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96842-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86842-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89895-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Since money is tight for the Cray family, teenaged Wahoo Cray brokers a deal 
when the reality TV series Expedition Survival! wants the help of Wahoo’s wildlife-
wrangler father in gathering animals. Though it’s soon apparent that the show’s 
attention-loving star, Derek Badger, is more comfortable in a plush hotel than in 
the Florida swamps where the Crays live, Wahoo and his father stick with the show 
as it moves into the Everglades, and they’re soon accompanied by Tuna, a classmate 
of Wahoo’s, who’s escaping her drunken, abusive father. When a bad thunderstorm 
approaches, a defensive bat attacks Derek (who then becomes convinced he’s turn-
ing into a vampire), and Tuna’s father comes after her with a revolver in hand, 
wilderness shenanigans ensue. As usual with Hiaasen, there’s a folkloric element 
to the characters, many of whom who are purely good or purely bad, while an 
easygoing optimism makes the mishaps comic and ensures the darker elements 
never overpower the story. Wahoo is a good guy with an enviably cool life (even 
if it did lose him a thumb to a ’gator a few years ago) and cool family, so he’s con-
vivial company, and there’s additional joy to be had from the book’s sly debunking 
of the miracles of reality survival TV. Hiaasen is an exuberant writer of place and 
advocate of the natural world, and despite the amusing satire of the media, this is 
at its heart actually an old-fashioned adventure story satisfyingly concluding with 
just deserts all around.  DS
hillenbrand, will Kite Day: A Bear and Mole Story; written and illus. by Will 
Hillenbrand. Holiday House, 2012 30p
ISBN 978-0-8234-1603-5 $16.95   
R 3-5 yrs
A windy blue sky and the smell of the air convince Bear that it’s “Kite Day,” and 
he and his friend Mole work together to construct a lovely yellow one which soars 
“up. Up. Up” until a storm hits and snaps the kite’s string. The two friends rush 
to extricate their storm-battered creation from a tree but change their minds when 
they see where it has landed: right above a nest of baby birds, who are now sheltered 
by its cover. With lively, short sentences, ear-pleasing word choices, repetition of 
particular words and phrases (“Splat. Splat Splat. Rain pelted the broken kite”), 
and a simple but dramatic situation, this is a perfect fit for an attention-challenged 
preschool audience; the bold colors and simple but striking compositions of the 
mixed-media illustrations also make this a splendid selection for group viewing. 
Tiny, pale gray Mole with his rosy cheeks and toes is a fine illustrative foil to the 
exuberant big, brown Bear, and the two friends, while visually quite different, are 
united by their shared task and by their colorful overalls. Bring this out on a breezy 
day to inspire a session of kite-making or wind exploration, or share it as part of a 
kite-themed storytime.  JH
460 • The BulleTin
hobbie, holly Gem; written and illus. by Holly Hobbie. Little, 2012 28p
ISBN 978-0-316-20334-0 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
This otherwise wordless account of a toad’s adventures is framed by letters from 
and to a grandmother, ostensibly the book’s creator, suggesting the story is based on 
her granddaughter’s experience. Between the two letters, Hobbie’s skillful pictures 
trace a toad’s spring adventure from his exuberant emergence from the earth, to his 
frightening encounters with cars and a predatory bird, to courtship and fatherhood, 
and, finally, to a safe haven in the author’s garden where he is caught and then 
freed by a young girl. Although some adult assistance may be needed to connect 
the images as a continuous linear story, the watercolor and ink pictures themselves 
are a pure and verdant delight. Attractive spring greens and yellows predominate in 
Hobbie’s carefully composed illustrations, and her toad’s mien and body language 
are realistic yet highly expressive, whether he’s reeling from a close call with a car 
or contentedly posing with his numerous offspring. Wiesner’s similarly wordless 
Tuesday (BCCB 5/91) would be a natural (if fantastical) counterpart to this tale; it 
could also kick off a nature study of toads or be shared as a welcome reminder of 
spring and of the truth that, like all wild animals, “toads are not pets. They want 
to be free, like everything does.”  JH
hubbard, kirsten Wanderlove; written and illus. by Kirsten Hubbard. Dela-
corte, 2012 335p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90785-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73937-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89751-1 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Stung by a bad breakup and her friends’ backing out of what was supposed to be a 
post-graduation backpacking trip around Europe, Bria decides to do the most un-
Bria-like thing she can think of: she signs up alone for a tour to Central America. 
When she finds out her traveling companions are a group of middle-aged tourists 
rather than the young, carefree backpackers on the brochure, she’s thoroughly 
disappointed even though, with her suburban background and rule-bound nature, 
she’s more like the rest of the group than she’s willing to admit. Enthralled by the 
insouciance of real backpackers, with their drawstring pants, coconut-shell rings, and 
artfully messy hair, she breaks from her tour group and joins a girl named Starling 
and her brother Rowan to pursue what she considers a more authentic traveling 
experience. The discussions of the mind-expanding properties of traveling off the 
beaten track are programmatic at times, and Bria’s thirst for a more interesting and 
dramatic life occasionally plays out in her self-presentation as well: her narration’s 
vague hints of possible boyfriend abuse overdramatize what’s revealed to be ordinary 
meanness, and the conclusions she jumps to about Rowan’s bad-boy past end up 
as much ado about mostly nothing. Fortunately, the patiently realized love story 
between Bria and Rowan overshadows the snobbery implicit in the distinction 
between real backpackers and mere poseurs. Bria’s responses to gimongous bugs, 
scary boat rides, and smelly, rickety, unreliable buses succeed admirably in bridging 
the gaps between armchair dreamers and their fantasy adventures.  KC
May 2012 • 461
inzana, ryan Ichiro; written and illus. by Ryan Inzana. Houghton, 2012 288p
ISBN 978-0-547-25269-8 $19.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Ichiro, raised by his Japanese mother in New York City after his American father 
dies, is viewed as an outsider no matter which country he’s in. While visiting 
Japan, he gets to know his grandfather for the first time, and the pair develops a 
sweet, awkward rapport as Ichiro explores his roots, grapples with the history of 
the atom bomb, and struggles to comprehend the horrors that historically divide 
his two parent countries. When Ichiro sets a trap for the creature that has been 
stealing persimmons from the tree in his grandfather’s backyard, he unwittingly 
snares a tanuki, a mythical shapeshifter, and finds himself pulled underground 
into the world of the gods. Like the human world, the underworld is divided 
and at war with itself, and when Ichiro is imprisoned with the long-captive god 
of war, he learns the senseless history of the conflict. The allegory in this graphic 
novel is not subtle, but the narrative nevertheless offers a powerful commentary 
on war and peace mediated through a sympathetic hero and a generous dose of 
adventure. Inzana employs confident, rounded lines in a palette that starts with 
basic black and white, accents it with sepia, and uses brighter colors sparingly for 
maximum impact, usually to denote the presence of a significant or supernatural 
narrative element. The layout is dynamic, using the oversized pages to full effect 
and conveying sweeping motion across the gutters and page turns. The folkloric 
elements, though unfortunately unsourced, add a madcap fantasy-adventure tone 
that will broaden the book’s already considerable appeal.  CG
jaffe, miChele Ghost Flower. Razorbill, 2012 [368p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59514-396-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
After having escaped the foster-care system, Eve is lying low and working at a coffee 
shop. When brother and sister Bain and Bridgette dangle a $100,000 proposition in 
front of her, she’s not really in a position to say no, even if what they are proposing 
is pretty sleazy. It turns out that she looks exactly like a cousin of theirs who disap-
peared three years ago, coincidentally on the night Eve’s best friend Liza apparently 
committed suicide. The siblings want Eve to impersonate their cousin long enough 
to collect her sizable inheritance, and then the three will split the money and Eve 
can go back to her own life. Bridgette’s the master planner, but Eve has plans of 
her own, especially as she learns how manipulative this family really is. Things get 
really complicated when she starts getting strange phone calls and messages from 
Liza’s ghost and begins to piece together a story that is much more sordid than she 
imagined. Fans of Jaffe’s previous mysteries will not be disappointed as this com-
plicated tale unfolds; Eve is an appealing character with more heart than she gives 
herself credit for, while Bain, Bridgette, and the rest of the extended family suffer 
from a coldness that settles any doubt as to why the cousin left in the first place. 
Much more serious than Jaffe’s Bad Kitty (BCCB 4/06), this offering’s emotional 
tone resembles that of Rosebush (BCCB 12/10), as soul-searching, family drama, 
and social critique inflect the suspenseful mystery with contemplative undertones. 
Whodunit and, in fact, what exactly was done and to whom are cleverly plotted 
with multiple surprises even for seasoned crime-fiction fans.  KC 
462 • The BulleTin
kaboom! Go Out and Play!: Favorite Outdoor Games from KaBoom!; illus. by 
Julianna Rose and with photographs. Candlewick, 2012 [104p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5530-3 $11.99 
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-5
Dozens of group activities—requiring little equipment beyond chalk, balls, make-
shift bases, and a crew of kids—are organized here under general headings of Tag, 
Hide-and-Seek, Ball, Team, Sidewalk, Circle, Race, “Other,” and No Rules games. 
Each category features short, concise rules for games that will send Grandma smil-
ing down Memory Lane, from Ghost in the Graveyard to Mother, May I, from 
Duck, Duck, Goose to Hot Potato. A box at the bottom of each item recommends 
number and age of players, as well as space (only specified as small, medium, large) 
and materials required. The brevity and simplicity of the instructions make this a 
handy title for primary and middle-graders to consult when seeking diversions on 
their own, but the suitability of games for children as young as five means adults 
will want to take a look as well. While not all games offer equal value, kids who can 
zip past the homiletics on how good exercise is for you will certainly dig up a few 
incentives here to gather up a gang and get moving. A list of websites for further 
investigation is appended. EB
karo, aaron Lexapros and Cons. Farrar, 2012 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-374-34396-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
High school senior Chuck Taylor’s OCD leads him to keep track of how often he 
masturbates (573 times last year), to walk the exact same route to school every day, 
spin his combination lock exactly fourteen times after he’s locked it, and do the 
classic hand-washing thing like so many other OCD sufferers. His parents find him 
a psychiatrist, but he is resistant to the idea of therapy and antidepressants. When 
a new girl, Amy, shows up and captures his fancy, he at first he manages to hide 
his symptoms from her and genuinely does try to address his triggers; when her 
beloved dog gets a little too aggressively friendly and tries to share a cupcake with 
him, however, he can’t handle it, and he freaks out. Rejecting her dog is the same 
as rejecting Amy as far as she’s concerned, so Chuck is at a turning point. Despite 
everyone telling him that he needs to want to get better for himself, he knows that 
he’s doing it all for Amy, but that works for him. The strength here is the easygo-
ing relationship between Chuck and his nerdy best friends, portrayed in honest, 
credible dialogue that effectively conveys their affectionate closeness. The plotting, 
however, runs toward cliché and contrivance in both Chuck’s self-actualization (his 
confrontation with the school bully) and his romantic tribulations (Amy’s immedi-
ate liking of him and his rom-com regaining of her affections). Readers with OCD 
may find inspiration here to get help, though, and readers without the disorder will 
develop a greater level of understanding while enjoying a standard nerd-meets-girl, 
nerd-loses-girl, nerd-becomes-hero-and-gets-his-first-kiss romantic comedy.  KC
May 2012 • 463
kasza, keiko Silly Goose’s Big Story; written and illus. by Keiko Kasza. Putnam, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25542-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Goose is a great storyteller, spinning yarns about pirates, kings, and dinosaurs for 
him and his buddies (Beaver, Porcupine, and Squirrel) to playact, but there’s a 
problem as far as his pals are concerned: Goose is always the star. His friends want 
a fairer arrangement, but Goose insists, “They are my stories, so I’m the hero!” 
When Wolf happens upon the critters, Goose ends up caught, and, in an attempt 
to save himself, he tells “the biggest story he ever told,” this one about Wem, a 
Wolf-Eating Monster who has apparently returned to the forest. Wolf is incredulous 
until he spots what appears to be a spike of hair towering above the treetops and 
hears loud footsteps and a voice crying, “Yum, yum, I smell a wolf!” Wolf runs for 
it, Goose is saved—thanks to his three friends who, together, brought Goose’s story 
to life (“I was Wem’s hair,” says the porcupine modestly), and everyone is pleased 
that Goose’s pals have finally gotten to be the heroes. Kasza’s fluid text contains 
plenty of humorous touches (“‘So you’re the hero, huh?’ Wolf chuckled. ‘More like 
a hero sandwich to me!’”), making this a smooth and amusing readaloud selection, 
although the vocabulary and short sentence structure put it within reach of many 
young independent readers as well. While Kasza’s gouache illustrations are more 
serviceable than stellar, her animals are appropriately animated in their expressions 
and posture. Kids will easily recognize and relate to the friendship dynamics going 
on here, and the clever outsmarting of the Wolf by Goose and his pals will surely 
please young listeners and readers.  JH
kooser, ted House Held Up by Trees; illus. by Jon Klassen. Candlewick, 
2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5107-7 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 3-5
A little house sits in the middle of a cleared lot, dense woods on either side, and 
provides a home for a father and his two children. After the kids grow up, the 
father moves away, leaving the place uninhabited and up for sale. Gradually, the 
house wears and weathers, and the neighboring forest trees drop seeds that begin 
to sprout. Those under the roof’s drip line grow with particular vigor, shooting 
up along the walls and actually holding the dilapidated structure together; eventu-
ally their interweaving and continued growth lifts the little house entirely off its 
foundation and into the trees. Poet Laureate emeritus Kooser writes with quiet 
particularity, and his descriptive prose is filled with the rustle of wind through the 
trees. Klassen’s art is simply beautiful, the leafy trees making a lacy pattern against 
the walls of the house, strong verticals of trees delicately textured by slender grasses 
and pale dotty imprints of leaflets; the cream pages and emphasis on browns in 
the pigments suggests a sepia-toned historical photograph, while there’s a strong 
graphic sensibility in the designerly compositions. Ultimately, though, there’s a 
significant audience problem: this is a lengthy, text-heavy setup for a highly poetic 
image rather than an actual story, so it’s well over the head of the pre-reading 
picture-book audience; even older readers are going to have a hard time gaining 
traction because ultimately, even with the arresting art, this is more of an adult-
appealing descriptive vignette than a book. It’s nonetheless a lovely vignette, so it 
could divert readers of a thoughtful bent or inspire some youthful artists to create 
their own poetic blends of word and image.  DS 
464 • The BulleTin
lambert, josePh Annie Sullivan and the Trials of Helen Keller; written and illus. 
by Joseph Lambert. Disney Hyperion, 2012 92p
ISBN 978-1-4231-1336-2 $17.99   
R Gr. 4-8
Lambert’s graphic novel focuses on the early years of the relationship between Helen 
Keller, who had been blind and deaf since she was a toddler, and her live-in teacher, 
Annie Sullivan, a young woman whose own visual impairment and pedagogical 
instincts gave her insight on how to reach and educate the unsocialized child. Many 
readers will already be familiar with the story, particularly the famous breakthrough 
moment at the water pump and Helen’s insatiable curiosity and rapid accrual of 
vocabulary and syntax. Perhaps less known, however, is the bitter episode on which 
this title ends, in which Helen and Annie are accused of plagiarism after Helen’s 
published story, “The Frost King,” is discovered to be a close retelling of another 
work. Lambert relies heavily on a layout of sixteen frames to a page, a stylistic 
choice that allows him to slow the action and zero in on the painstaking effort 
involved in acquiring and transmitting information by finger spelling, an effect 
that’s informative if a touch monotonous. More successful is the book’s frequent 
use of an amorphous suggestion of Helen’s shape on a black background, which 
helps the reader assume Helen’s paradoxically sightless “view.” A bibliography is 
included, but readers will be more immediately drawn to the closing notes, which 
coordinate with specific passages to supply additional background. Suggest this 
title in conjunction with Lawlor’s Helen Keller: Rebellious Spirit (BCCB 9/10) and 
Delano’s Helen’s Eyes.  EB
lawson, julie Ghosts of the Titanic. Holiday House, 2012 168p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2423-8 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-8
As a sailor aboard the Mackay-Bennett in 1912, seventeen-year-old Angus Seaton was 
asked to help haul in the victims of the Titanic, retrieving their corpses from the sea 
and cataloging their belongings for later identification. In a moment of exhaustion, 
Angus mistakenly pocketed the small purse of a dead girl, a mistake that eventually 
cost him his sanity as the girl’s ghost continually haunted him, crying for her dead 
child, until his death decades later. A century after the sinking of the unsinkable 
ship, twelve-year-old Kevin, a Titanic fanatic, learns that he and his family have 
mysteriously inherited Angus’s Halifax home. After finding the purse in the old 
house’s basement, Kevin begins seeing the ghost himself, and it is only after he is 
transported to the decks of the sinking Titanic that he discovers his family’s true 
lineage and can finally put the spirit to rest. The book shifts between the setting 
of Angus’s story and Kevin’s modern-day world, providing access points for both 
history buffs and readers who like their stories in the here and now. Kevin’s chapters 
have a snappy, brisk pace, and while the emphasis on dialogue precludes any deep 
detail of character or place, there’s something eminently appealing about Kevin’s 
class-clown persona and his impassioned interest in this one bit of history. Appro-
priately, Angus’s chapters carry more of the emotional weight, offering a compelling 
portrait of a weathered old man beaten down by grief and regret. Disaster fans will 
glom onto the historically accurate and vivid details of the victim-identification 
process, and readers of Sally M. Walker’s recent Blizzard of Glass (BCCB 12/11) 
will appreciate the mention of the other Halifax disaster both in the story and in 
the author’s note.  KQG
May 2012 • 465
lebox, annette Circle of Cranes. Dial, 2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3443-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Suyin lives in a small, poor village in China; she’s part of an ethnic minority 
known for their needlework, but since her mother’s mysterious absence, her father 
has refused to let her learn the craft. Then an outsider appears, promising riches 
if the village sends a worker to America, and Suyin is chosen. LeBox infuses her 
contemporary parable of the plight of undocumented sweatshop workers in New 
York’s Chinatown with elements of the crane wife folktale. Even as Suyin struggles 
with harsh work conditions and exploitative bosses, she periodically enters a magi-
cal parallel world in which she discovers her heritage as a crane woman, part of an 
ancient sisterhood currently in dire straits due to the fate of Suyin’s mother. Only 
by proving her worthiness will she be able to transform from girl to crane, save the 
sisterhood, and gain the power needed to save her friends in the sweatshop. The 
book has strong curricular value, with concise and accessible explorations of labor 
politics, exploitative economies, and global immigration issues; in addition, the 
information about heritage crafts and feminine subcultures in China is fascinat-
ing. The thread of female solidarity and friendship is a significant appeal factor, 
giving the book a great deal of warmth, and readers will be gratified that Suyin 
and her compatriots achieve their dreams despite the odds. An author’s note gives 
additional background on both folkloric influences and contemporary American 
sweatshop practices.  CG
leedy, loreen Seeing Symmetry; written and illus. by Loreen Leedy. Holiday 
House, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2360-6 $17.95   
R Gr. 2-4
This well-organized introduction uses a host of natural and manmade objects, as 
well as purely geometric designs, to illustrate horizontal, vertical, and rotational 
symmetry. The presentation builds logically, demonstrating first how viewers can 
imagine “folding” objects along a center line to test whether each half is a mirror 
image of its mate. Only once these foundational concepts have been well established 
does the discussion turn (so to speak) to the more challenging idea of rotation, 
where pinwheels, snowflakes, hubcaps, flower petals, and even several letters are 
“spun” around a central point and the matches in the rotation are counted. Leedy 
offers a number of fine-print teasers along the way, encouraging readers to consider 
whether all animals are symmetrical, to examine words for different types of sym-
metry in their lettering, to identify rotational symmetry in a display of buildings 
and furniture. End matter includes answers and explanations, a glossary, several 
simple activities, and a discussion of the relationship between symmetry and other 
math concepts. There’s no particular charm to either the figures or the layout of 
the Photoshop illustrations, but kids will probably be too caught up in flipping, 
folding, and turning to care.  EB
466 • The BulleTin
lewin, ted Puffling Patrol; written and illus. by Ted and Betsy Lewin. Lee & 
Low, 2012 [56p]
ISBN 978-1-60060-424-9 $19.95 
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Using text, field sketches, and full-page watercolor illustrations, husband and wife 
team Ted and Betsy Lewin detail their visit to the island of Heimaey (off the coast of 
Iceland). They accompany two child members of the “Puffling Patrol” (who rescue 
newly hatched puffins that become disoriented and lost on their way to the sea) 
and observe as the children find, care for, and release the baby pufflings. Although 
the Lewins’ narrative is somewhat dry, the clear writing and measured tone help 
make this exotic event accessible for children who have no prior knowledge of this 
locale or annual event. Kids will also appreciate the child-hero aspect of the tale, 
and animal lovers will particularly enjoy following the details of the puffling rescue 
and release process. Occasionally, stiffly posed human figures or garish coloring 
cause the otherwise effective full-page watercolor illustrations to stumble, but the 
field sketches (done in pen and ink and watercolor) are wonderfully vigorous and 
expressive with just a minimum of detail; the two different illustrative styles clash 
more than complement, but kids eager for the puffling details may not be bothered 
by the visual mismatch. The Lewins’ outsider perspective gives this title a slightly 
different approach than McMillan’s photo-illustrated Nights of the Pufflings (BCCB 
3/95), which drops readers right into the action; while McMillan’s is the more grip-
ping account of the two, the Lewins’ book is certainly a useful companion title. 
End matter includes additional facts about puffins and the island, a bibliography, 
and a helpful glossary and pronunciation guide.  JH
lindaman, jane Zip It!; illus. by Nancy Carlson. Carolrhoda, 2012 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-5592-2 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-9198-2 $12.95   
Ad 5-8 yrs
As Joe and his father prepare to run some errands, Joe notices that his dad has for-
gotten to zip his pants. He then tries repeatedly to inform his dad of the faux pas, 
only to find himself constantly interrupted and ignored by his chatterbox father. 
As they run around town, others start to notice Dad’s zipper (it’s hard not to, since 
he’s wearing red valentine boxers under his gray trousers) and begin to snicker 
while Joe turns bright red. In the end Joe uses the intercom at the grocery store 
to get his father’s attention, and his somewhat humiliated dad readily responds to 
the announcement. There is not a whole lot of plot here, and since the main point 
is also the story’s central joke (and it’s pretty implausible), the comedy wears thin 
fairly early on. Ongoing language jokes (“Let’s zip out of here,” “Let’s zip through 
this list,” etc.) add an element of zany irony to the tale, and kids who can’t get 
enough of underpants humor will appreciate the repetition as sly references to the 
ongoing problem. Carlson’s colored-pencil illustrations play on the madcap tone 
of the text, with the boy’s countenance growing increasingly more embarrassed 
while the dad just keeps talking and talking and talking. Compositions are a little 
overcrowded and the figures stilted at times, but there’s an amiably cartoonish note 
to the visuals. Kids who have been on the talking end of trying to get a parent’s 
attention may warm to Joe’s trials and have a chuckle at poor Dad’s expense.  HM
May 2012 • 467
lorentz, dayna No Safety in Numbers. Dial, 2012 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3873-7 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Just another Saturday at the mall: the Latino guy is being chased down by the 
school jocks; the gorgeous Asian girl is shopping with her feisty little sister and 
proud grandmother; the star quarterback’s younger brother is looking to fit in; the 
African-American senator is having “family day” with her husband and attitude-
charged teen daughter. All that’s missing is the requisite disaster to launch this pat 
cast into an ensemble drama. And within a few dozen pages, it hits—news of a 
biotoxic “bomb” that has detonated in the ventilation system. The senator takes 
charge and immediately makes the wrong decision—to quarantine the shoppers—
before she has full information on the nature or severity of the threat. Once the 
decision’s in effect, though, all they can do is make the best of a bad thing as media 
sources are cut off, misinformation begins to fly, and the crowd moves into riot 
mode as more and more shoppers show flu-like symptoms and are dragged off to 
a medical station in a converted office supply store. Meanwhile, there’s not much 
for a cast of panicky, hormonally charged teens to do other than shop, hook up, 
try and fail to escape, and now and then muster a bit of concern for their families 
and fellow victims. Most readers will be able to fill in the plotlines for each of the 
four main teen voices, and the only surprise comes at the novel’s cliffhanger, when 
the senator discovers that the government has been withholding vital information 
about the seriousness of the disease. Set-piece thriller diehards will probably follow 
the course of the contagion with interest and look forward to what promises to be 
a more substantive sequel.  EB
lyga, barry I Hunt Killers. Little, 2012 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-316-12584-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Lobo’s Nod is a quiet, unassuming place, but it is about to gain national media at-
tention when a serial killer begins using the sleepy town as hunting grounds—the 
second time this has happened in less than a decade. Suspicion has fallen on Jazz 
Dent, teenaged son of the notorious Billy Dent, a murderer responsible for 124 
deaths and former resident of Lobo’s Nod. Jazz sets out to prove his innocence not 
only to his suspicious neighbors but also to himself, since he’s not entirely certain 
that a childhood under the care of a psychopath hasn’t made him into a monster. 
He is sure, though, that his insider knowledge of Billy’s crimes might help crack 
the case, particularly when it becomes clear that the police have a copycat on their 
hands. While the descriptions of both Billy’s killings and the subsequent crimes are 
unequivocally gory, the real chills come from the psychological wounds inflicted 
upon Jazz by his father. Readers get an intimate look at the mind of a serial killer 
while experiencing Jazz’s manipulation by his dad; his resulting inability to trust 
his emotions is understandable and disorienting, since his motivations are always 
suspect, to both himself and the reader. Unfortunately, his tendency toward navel-
gazing clashes with the more traditional crime procedural aspects of the book and 
slows the pace. Though the book never delivers on the title’s promise in this volume, 
it does suggest the possibility of a seque, so readers looking for vigilante justice may 
wish to wait for future installments.  KQG
468 • The BulleTin
lynCh, Chris Sharpshooter. Scholastic, 2012 187p (Vietnam)
ISBN 978-0-545-27026-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
The second entry in Lynch’s Vietnam series (I Pledge Allegiance, BCCB 12/11) is 
not a continuation of the first book’s story of the four high school buddies who 
pledged to enlist together, but rather a shift in perspective from Morris, who opened 
the series, to Ivan Buczyk, who inherits a gung-ho embrace of military service from 
previous generations of Buczyk soldiers. Raised as a small-game hunter, Ivan earns 
his coveted slot in the marksman program: “I am here to kill, and I know that. I 
am fine with that. I am all over that.” His dreams of blazing heroism are put on 
hold, though, when he finds himself assigned to the Benewah; as proud Army man, 
he’s embarrassed to be aboard a Brown Water Navy vessel that patrols the Mekong 
Delta on a Counter Insurgency operation. Ivan’s disappointed with routine patrols 
and a humble M-16 rifle; he lusts after his lieutenant’s sexier weaponry, and after 
convincing his officer of his determination and self-discipline, he’s sent for advanced 
sniper training. Pieces of this story graze briefly against episodes and events from 
Book One. Here readers learn more about why Ivan will not—or cannot—com-
municate with his Boston friends; they also gain oblique insights into how Rudi, 
the slow-witted member of the quartet, is faring with the Marines, as they witness 
how the news of Rudi’s surprising aptitude for killing the enemy is one of the few 
things that breaches Ivan’s emotional reserve. Readers are stranded in the thick of 
the action, and Book Three can’t get here fast enough.  EB
marChetta, melina Froi of the Exiles. Candlewick, 2012 593p (Lumatere 
Chronicles)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-4759-9 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5966-0 $18.99   
R* Gr. 9 up
Since helping the rightful heir to the Lumatere throne reclaim her homeland three 
years ago, former street orphan Froi has transformed into a powerful warrior, fiercely 
devoted to the royal family and sworn to the protection of Lumatere. When he 
is sent into neighboring Charyn to assassinate the king responsible for the curse 
that divided Lumatere for thirteen years, however, his new notions of identity 
are challenged as he uncovers a terrifying political situation that reveals clues to 
his tortured past. Froi’s inexplicable attraction to Quintana, the Charyn princess 
and an abused soul herself, only further complicates matters, and he finds himself 
repeatedly breaking oaths he once held sacred, putting both himself and those he 
loves in danger. In this impressive companion to Finnikin of the Rock (BCCB 5/10), 
the focalization shifts from Finn to Froi (perhaps the most intriguing member of 
the first book’s superb supporting cast), enabling Marchetta to explore the political 
machinations working beyond Lumatere and to examine human interactions at a 
macro level. The relationship between Quintana and Froi gives a face to the sacri-
fices demanded by their states: whored out to the general populace in the hopes of 
breaking Charyn’s curse, Quintana is a broken, resilient girl whose experiences inter-
rogate Froi’s principles, as he uses his physical strength and his aptitude for violence 
supposedly for the good of Lumatere. Where Finnikin was about the reclamation 
of something lost, Froi’s story is about the building of something new in the wake 
of physical and sexual trauma at both an individual and societal level. Fans of the 
first book are no doubt expecting to be challenged by its sequel, and they will not 
be disappointed by this thrilling, romantic, and utterly unforgettable tale.  KQG
May 2012 • 469
mCkinlay, meg No Bears; illus. by Leila Rudge. Candlewick, 2012 26p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5890-8 $15.99   
R 4-6 yrs
 “I’m tired of bears. Every time you read a book, it’s just BEARS BEARS BEARS—
horrible furry bears slurping honey in awful little caves. You don’t need bears for 
a book,” insists young Ella, the narrator (and boss) of this Australian import. To 
prove it, she creates her own book, which the illustrations depict on faux notebook 
pages that grow larger until, at the story’s climax, they fill the actual book’s pages. 
While the tale Ella tells is indeed bear-free, the illustrations that surround the 
edges of her book tell a slightly different story. A modest-looking brown bear in a 
bee-print shirt has overheard her anti-bear diatribe, and it quietly loiters around 
the edges of Ella’s book until the book’s princess (who is depicted as Ella herself) 
is captured by a monster and the book’s fairy godmother, having misplaced her 
wand, stands by helplessly. Luckily, the bear has it, and, while the bear never steps 
entirely into Ella’s book, its arm is shown wielding the wand on the pages and the 
princess is saved. Ella seems none the wiser, however, despite the other characters’ 
attempts to point out the helpful bear, and the book’s final pages show the bear 
apparently describing to these characters its role in the happy ending. While some 
audience members may wish for Ella to realize her error and repent her resistance, 
most will get a giggle out of the irony and the amusing play on some picture-book 
and folktale conventions. Rudge’s digital illustrations offer the soft translucence of 
watercolors, with trim, trickly linework delineating the amusingly skewed yet cozily 
appealing figures. The quiet illustrative details that depict the bear’s role in the story 
need some careful viewing, which makes this better for one-on-one or small group 
sharing. This might be fun to pair with Wiesner’s The Three Pigs (BCCB 5/01) 
for a story session about fairy-tale characters moving beyond a book’s pages.  JH
mCPhail, david The Family Tree; written and illus. by David McPhail. Holt, 
2012 40p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9057-4 $16.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
 “Many years ago, a young man came to the wilderness to start a new life.” When 
clearing forest for his homestead, he opts to leave a single tree standing, and genera-
tion after generation, the tree stands alongside the family’s farmhouse, offering shade, 
protection from the wind, and a place to hang a swing for children, grandchildren, 
and great-grandchildren. The story then jumps to the present, when the great-great-
grandson of that first man confronts the construction crew planning to cut down 
the tree to make space for a new highway. After a swarm of birds and beasts join 
the boy in his standoff, the workers decide to detour the highway so as to save the 
boy’s tree. The tree provides an effective symbol for one family’s extended connec-
tion to the land; there is a solid lesson here on the importance of continuity and 
protecting the things you love, and the boy’s spirit shines through in the text. The 
ending, however, is sentimentally pleasing but completely implausible, a note that 
detracts from the emotional realism of the family story. Browns, blues, and golds 
predominate in the watercolor and ink compositions, lending a sense of warmth to 
the wide-open spaces. Textured hatching on the foreground figures complements 
the more fluid, undetailed backdrops of sky and prairie, and occasional text bubbles 
lighten the tone of the tale. The volume concludes with a series of illustrations, 
sequentially presented in almost comic-panel style, showing a squirrel finding and 
470 • The BulleTin
burying a nut that, over the next few panels, takes root and begins to grow, thus 
reminding viewers of the circular nature of the tree’s tale. Pair this with Zweibel’s 
Our Tree Named Steve (BCCB 5/05) for a storytime that emphasizes the importance 
of a family’s natural surroundings.  HM
medina, meg The Girl Who Could Silence the Wind. Candlewick, 2012 244p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4602-8 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Ever since Sonia Ocampo’s birth, which instantly silenced a raging storm, the 
villagers of her mountain town have believed Sonia holds special powers, and 
they bring her their wishes for granting. When her prayers fail her in the face of 
tragedy, Sonia, now sixteen, begins to question her abilities. To avoid facing the 
townspeople with her doubts, she takes a position as a housemaid for a wealthy 
family in the distant capital city. At same time, her brother, Rafael, disappears; 
through a complex series of events, both literal and mystical, Sonia figures out 
where he is and, with the help of a young man named Pancho, finds him. This 
multilayered debut novel is particularly successful in presenting the complexities of 
Sonia’s thoughts as she tries to understand her identity and her social role. As the 
town mystic, she never allowed herself to consider the possibility of a future of her 
choosing, and her experience in the city finally allows her to dream. The romance 
between Pancho and Sonia is thoughtfully crafted, with each of them considering 
the possibility of love for the first time, and Rafael’s story, which proves to be the 
critical conflict of the novel, is both a devastating experience for the family and 
Sonia’s opportunity to make peace with who she is. Unfortunately, the mystical 
elements don’t always combine smoothly with the realistic events, and the pacing 
is slowed by long stretches of inactivity as Sonia goes through the mundane events 
of her days in the city. Those who stick it out, though, will be readily swept up in 
the exhilarating conclusion to Sonia’s tale.  HM
mihaley, james You Can’t Have My Planet But Take My Brother, Please. Feiwel, 
2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-312-61891-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
During an encounter with an alien realtor and its prospective clients (also aliens), 
thirteen-year-old Giles learns that he and his fellow humans are about to be evicted 
from Earth after failing to live up to the care and maintenance clauses put forth 
in the lease signed by Adam and Eve. As an unwilling representative of his species, 
Giles is charged with the task of cleaning the whole of Manhattan in twenty-four 
hours in a last-ditch effort to prove that humans are worthy custodians of the planet. 
Assisted by a cute blue-skinned lawyer, a blob-like super scientist, and several of his 
human friends, Giles begins his mission with easy success until his insecurities (and 
an extraterrestrial purple princess who knows just how to manipulate them) lead 
him to one bad decision after another, leaving the fate of the human race in limbo. 
The blend of madcap alien-invasion humor and recognizable adolescent struggles 
(sibling rivalry, relationships with the opposite sex, friendship dynamics, etc.) calls 
up Adam Rex’s The True Meaning of Smekday (BCCB 2/08), but the pieces here 
never quite coalesce into a successful story arc. Between the overt environmental 
message and the easy resolutions to Giles’ many problems, the authorial hand is 
too obvious, making each of Giles’ new concerns an opportunity for moralizing as 
May 2012 • 471
opposed to nuance. The wackiness of the various visiting aliens and the super-cool 
sci-fi gadgetry used by Giles and co. to clean up New York (including graffiti-
removing mini-planes and tree-producing androids) may, however, be enough 
to draw in young readers, and most will stay long enough to be satisfied by the 
action-packed, laser-filled ending.  KQG 
moore, bryCe Vodník. Tu/Lee & Low, 2012 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60060-852-0 $18.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60060-881-0 $18.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
After a house fire destroys most of their belongings, Tomas’ parents decide to 
leave the U.S. and return to their home country Slovakia, where they join Tomas’ 
uncle L’uboš and cousin Katka in running a tourist-bait castle in the small town of 
Trencín. Introverted, self-conscious Tomas, who’s visibly scarred from a childhood 
near-drowning that inexplicably left him with severe burn scars, is thrilled to find 
a good friend in Katka. He also discovers that he is one of the rare few who can see 
and communicate with elemental spirits, and the local vodník (a cross between a 
water spirit and a vampire) who attacked him as a child seems determined to finish 
the job. When Tomas learns that Katka will be dead within the year, he makes a 
deal with Morena, a grim reaper, to give her a soul in exchange for Katka’s, pre-
cipitating a race against time to save Katka by releasing one of the souls the vodník 
has trapped in teacups. Snarky excerpts from a handbook for reapers precede every 
chapter, offering useful background information (plus some witty commentary on 
current fantasy trends), and the character of the vodník is a treat, melding child-
ishness, menace, and tricksterdom in ways that recall Stroud’s Bartimaeus (Amulet 
of Samarkand, BCCB 3/04) and the puka in Thompson’s Last of the High Kings 
(BCCB 7/08). The treatment of anti-Roma bigotry (Tomas is part Roma) is a bit 
heavy-handed, but Slovakian culture, landscape, and history are accessibly conveyed 
and they, along with the rich treatment of Slovakian folklore, serve to distinguish 
this debut novel from other tales of supernaturally harangued teens. Recommend 
this equally to those interested in Eastern European culture and those who will 
appreciate a good jab at vampires’ literary ubiquity.  CG
nayeri, daniel Another Jekyll, Another Hyde; written by Daniel and Dina 
Nayeri. Candlewick, 2012 249p (Another Series)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5261-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5623-2 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
In this finale to the Another series (Another Faust, BCCB 10/09, and Another Pan), 
the demonic French governess Nicola Vileroy conspires once again to play on the 
impulsive desires and weaknesses of a teen boy to get what she wants. This time, 
she’s chosen Thomas Goodman-Brown as her victim, and he is easily tricked into 
taking an unknown club drug called W, which produces euphoria and hallucina-
tions followed by lost time. The drug is really a combination of bone dust and 
blood taken from Nicola’s ancestors and her progeny, a son she named Edward 
Hyde. If Thomas takes all of the W, he will eventually become Hyde, and Nicola’s 
immortality will be assured through his line, but if Thomas succeeds in thwarting 
her plan, Nicola will be forever destroyed. This borrowing had the potential to be 
as creepy and dark as the first book in the series, but it fails to live up to its pos-
472 • The BulleTin
sibilities for horror, as Edward’s dark deeds, perpetrated by Thomas while under 
the influence of W, are always committed offstage; it’s also less emotionally and 
linguistically rich than its predecessors. For many readers, though, the anxious and 
violent struggle for control between Thomas and Edward and the hints of Edward’s 
capacity for inflicting torture will be more than enough to satisfy a taste for drama 
and suspense, and the resolution of what happened to the Faust children and their 
governess warrants seeing it through to the end.  KC
nivola, Claire a. Life in the Ocean: The Story of Oceanographer Sylvia Earle; 
written and illus. by Claire A. Nivola. Foster/Farrar, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-374-38066-7 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 3-4
This slim picture-book biography discusses Sylvia Earle’s childhood interest in 
the sea and several highlights of her career as an oceanographer. Readers will be 
particularly engrossed by her close encounters with humpback whales (as curious 
about her as she was about them), her two-week stint in a deep-sea station, her 
underwater hike at 1250 feet in a protective suit named Jim, and her 3000-foot 
dive in a “one-person spherical bubble she had helped to design.” None of these 
adventures is, however, described in much detail, and children who are interested in 
the technologies that enabled her explorations won’t find much in the way of textual 
or visual information. Nivola’s mixed-media paintings are undeniably lovely, with 
myriad shades of blue bathing familiar and mysterious forms of sea life at different 
ocean depths; unfortunately, several entirely omit Earle from the environment she 
is described as exploring, and some of the most fascinating moments aren’t even 
depicted in the illustrations. Readers frustrated by the lack of specific detail of 
Earle’s professional life can turn to Earle’s own Dive!: My Adventures in the Deep 
Frontier (BCCB 6/99).  EB
norriss, andrew I Don’t Believe It, Archie!; illus. by Hannah Shaw. Fickling/
Random House, 2012 124p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75251-0 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75250-3 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98476-1 $9.99   
R Gr. 3-5
This British import describes a typically hectic week in the life of young Archie, 
who constantly happens on the outlandish the way TV sleuths constantly happen 
on the murderous. On Monday, Archie is the sole witness to a series of events in-
volving a runaway piano and a gravel-covered car; thanks to Archie’s grasp of the 
situation, the people trapped in the car are saved, and the girl from the car, Cyd, 
becomes his friend. As the week rolls on, Cyd turns out to be quite useful, as she is 
a sharp-eyed witness able to explain to others the events that inexplicably pile up 
on Archie: “When things go wrong, it really helps to have someone around who 
can go and get the glue solvent, or work out that the dog’s not dead, or produce 
a film of what’s happened.” There’s an almost folkloric structure to Archie’s story, 
with the crazy complications building cumulatively and each day following a pat-
terned open and close with Archie’s mother; a satisfying ending ties the whole week’s 
events together. Archie himself evokes lots of sympathy, and Norriss’ descriptions 
of the various events are pithy and amusing. Shaw’s monochromatic illustrations 
are frequent and friendly, and they help clarify a few of the preposterous incidents. 
May 2012 • 473
Hand this to the kind of kids who are entranced by funny tall tales or by Rube 
Goldberg machines.  JH
oram, hiawyn My Friend Fred; illus. by Rosie Reeve. Tiger Tales, 2012 26p
ISBN 978-1-58925-105-2 $15.95   
R 4-6 yrs
Fred the dog may technically belong to the whole family, but preschool-age Grace 
knows that “Fred is mine. My friend Fred.” And why shouldn’t he be considered 
hers? After all, he does everything with her—he even “checks for monsters under 
my bed. (If there is one thing Fred will not have in our house, it is monsters under 
my bed).” When Grace shuts Fred up in her room with her to avoid letting him 
play with her sister, Fred’s glum reaction finally convinces Grace to share him, even 
though she “knows that ‘ours’ is only a word and whatever anyone says, really that 
dog will always mostly be . . . my friend Fred.” Family members who vie for the 
attentions of their own family pets will easily comprehend the importance of Grace’s 
belief that Fred is “hers,” and most kids (with or without siblings) will relate to 
the difficulty of sharing a beloved item with others. Grace’s narrative voice is fresh, 
individual, and pleasantly conversational as well as credible in its youthful point 
of view. Reeve’s illustrations have the slight smudginess of blended pastels, and her 
vibrant palette imbues the pictures with a sunny cheerfulness, while her dot-eyed 
people and animals call to mind the figures of Brita Granström. Grace is a lively 
heroine, with short dark hair that frequently goes every which way, while Fred is 
an adorable white pup with brown spots whose ear position deftly indicates his 
mood. This would particularly lend itself to storytimes or discussions concerning 
pets or sharing; it might also be an apt and amusing title for an older sibling to 
share with a younger one.  JH
Parker, marjorie blain When Dads Don’t Grow Up; illus. by R.W. Alley. Dial, 
2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3717-4 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
This comedic outing follows four dads who show all the signs of never having grown 
up, from jumping on bubble wrap when a package comes in the mail to diving 
into piles of leaves during an impromptu football game to cozying up to watch 
cartoons with a bowl of cereal. The child speaker (“Don’t be fooled. They may 
look like grown-ups on the outside, but underneath they’re just like us”) is clearly 
in favor of such dads, loading the text with high praise for both their actions and 
their attitude (“Dads who never grew up really remember what it’s like to be little”) 
and emphasizing the positive relationship between kid and dad. The homey, casual 
pictures accent watercolor and colored pencil images with sketchy ink texturings 
in spot-art galleries of young-at-heart dads in action: crawling through tunnels at 
the playground, scooting trains around in the dentist’s lobby, facing off for a game 
of umbrella hockey. While this is more a list than developed plot, there is lots of 
potential here for intimate dad-and-child sharing as well as for family storytimes 
and Father’s Day displays.  HM
474 • The BulleTin
PatriCk, Cat Revived. Little, 2012 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-316-09462-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
At the age of five, Daisy, along with twenty other victims of a school-bus crash, 
became part of a top-secret clinical trial for a drug called Revive that can bring the 
deceased back to life, as long as their bodies are otherwise healthy and the drug is 
administered within a set time frame. Daisy’s also a bit accident-prone, repeatedly 
suffering fatal events; every time she dies, she’s Revived again and she and her han-
dlers/makeshift parents must move and assume new identities. Starting fresh once 
again, this time as a high school sophomore, she’s befriended by kind, vivacious 
Audrey, falls for Audrey’s hot older brother Matt, and, upon discovering that Audrey 
will die from cancer before the year is out, lets the secret of Revive slip to Matt. At 
the same time, Daisy uncovers some secrets within the program: a mysterious extra 
case file, a new test batch of Revive, some unexplained car crashes, and the erratic 
behavior of the mysterious man at the top, nicknamed God. Unfortunately, the 
two plots don’t tie together in any meaningful way. Given that Revive can’t help 
Audrey, it makes little sense that Daisy would reveal a dangerous secret to a boy 
whose main claim to her trust is that he turns SAT vocabulary into sweet talk, and 
the moral issues raised by Daisy’s multiple chances at life compared to Audrey’s 
one are sidestepped by the author’s use of God as a scapegoat for all that goes 
wrong with the program. Speculative-fiction fans interested in probing the ethics 
of death-defying medical advances would be better served by Pearson’s Adoration 
of Jenna Fox (BCCB 4/08), but those interested in the emotional dynamics of a 
life restarted (plus a bit of intrigue and action on the side) will still find this an 
absorbing read.  CG
PearCe, jaCkson Purity. Little, 2012 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-316-18246-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
In the six years since her mother’s death, Shelby has devoted much of her life to 
fulfilling promises she made to her mom right before she passed away. Her promise 
to love and listen to her father sometimes clashes with her promise to live life un-
restrained, but Shelby and her two best friends are practiced in finding loopholes. 
When her father signs them up for the annual Princess Ball, during which the teen 
participants will vow to remain “pure” until marriage, Shelby figures the only way 
around making such a restricting oath is to negate its effect beforehand by having 
sex as soon as possible. Pearce’s portrayal of sex is neither devastatingly serious 
nor exploited for shock value; having stripped away its taboo nature, the author 
affords her characters the opportunity to discuss and experience sex in a frank and 
genuine manner. She subverts a whole host of rom-com tropes, especially when 
Shelby manages to not only have consequence-free sex with a random guy but 
also subsequently begins a relationship with her real love interest. Indeed, Shelby’s 
quest for sex becomes almost secondary as she comes to terms with her grief and 
her estrangement from her father, and her casual but emotive narration offers a 
startlingly authentic picture of a girl in transition on multiple levels. Pearce avoids 
cartoonish representations of the religious motivations behind the purity movement, 
but her feelings on the matter are pretty clear; like-minded teens will appreciate this 
thoughtful look at the implications—or lack thereof—of doing the deed.  KQG
May 2012 • 475
Proimos, james Knuckle & Potty Destroy Happy World; written and illus. by James 
Proimos. Ottaviano/Holt, 2012 [80p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9155-7 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Knuckle Tigerelli the tiger and his book co-star and bud, Potty Polarberg the bear, 
are sick of being depicted as cute and sweet in the book series in which they star. 
Their upcoming book, Tiger and Bear Go to Happy World, is the final straw: “How 
do we get out of this Happy World book? Is it even possible? Are fictional characters 
like us powerless?” Knuckle and Potty embark on a meandering mission (with help 
from Winkie the Pug, the Chicken in a Beret, and pencil erasers) to free themselves 
from the constraints of their author and illustrator and to take down “Happy World” 
(they plan to erase it) in the process. There’s about as much substance here as there 
is in a Hallmark Hoops & YoYo greeting card, but youthful fans of that chortling 
duo will enjoy the similar sort of absolute goofiness served up by Proimos, and the 
humor occasionally comes with a slight edge (the Happy World sun, for example, 
shouts “Welcome to Happy World, LOSERS!”) that middle-graders will appreci-
ate. Those who have moved beyond Dr. Seuss may also be particularly amused by 
the Chicken in the Beret, who spouts bad Seuss-like admonitions: “Do not tell 
him by performing mime. Do not tell him if it’s after bedtime.” Proimos combines 
full-color graphic-novel-like comic panels with more straightforward pages of text 
(printed in a large chunky font) and spot illustrations, and the resulting hybrid 
has great appeal, particularly to readers reluctant to touch anything too long, too 
text-intensive, or too serious. Pastel-pink Knuckles (who looks more like a kitty 
than a tiger) and chartreuse Potty are cute cartoony little guys, despite their wish 
to appear tough, and kids looking for a fast and funny read will find it here.  JH
reagan, jean How to Babysit a Grandpa; illus. by Lee Wildish. Knopf, 
2012 24p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96713-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86713-2 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
This how-to manual, narrated by a knowledgeable and affectionate grandkid, pro-
vides step-by-step directions for other youngsters on babysitting a grandpa. It starts 
with Grandpa’s arrival (apparently grandpas like it if you hide behind a chair and 
then jump out and surprise them), then describes grandparent-friendly activities 
such as noshing on special snacks, taking walks, and playing pirates. Suggestions 
(“What to do on a walk: Step over sidewalk cracks. Look for lizards, cool rocks, 
and dandelion puffs. If there’s a puddle or a sprinkler, show him what to do”) will 
sound pretty appealing for kids, too, and the narrative is particularly effective in 
converting childish concern into caretaker reassurance (“When your mom and dad 
leave, pat your grandpa’s hand and say, ‘Don’t worry. They always come back’”). 
The grandfather/grandchild pairing takes center stage in each humorous spread of 
the line-and-watercolor-style digital art. Grandpa, a rotund fellow on spindly little 
legs who wears rectangular spectacles, looks ready for just about anything, including 
physical comedy (the moment when his grandson dumps a bottle of sunscreen on 
his bald spot is particularly funny). While grandpas will obviously enjoy sharing 
this story with their little ones (and parents will enjoy purchasing it for a Father’s 
Day gift for said grandpa), there is enough playfulness here to broaden the appeal 
to a wider audience.  HM
476 • The BulleTin
reese, james The Strange Case of Doctor Jekyll and Mademoiselle Odile. Roaring 
Brook, 2012 [368p] (Shadow Sisters)
ISBN 978-1-59643-684-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Desperate to find a cure for her brother Grel’s mysterious progressive disease, 
Odile seeks help from the books left her by her late mother, a witch. The city of 
Paris, where they’re now living, suffers problems of its own in 1871: under siege 
by the Prussians, the citizens have been reduced to killing and eating the animals 
in the city zoo, which is where Odile has gone to test some magicked salts on the 
monkeys, with horrific results (the treated monkey turns monstrous and kills one 
of its fellows). She also runs into a young doctor named Jekyll, whose household 
she and Grel eventually join. Little does she know that Jekyll has been spying on 
her, so that when she does heal Grel, and in the process transforms him into a 
powerful, hulking, amoral male, Jekyll is watching. He steals her potions, which 
cause the famous transformation of Jekyll into Hyde, and she is forced to work 
with the doctor to discover the secret of the main ingredient. Setting his story 
against the backdrop of the Commune, a volatile period following France’s loss 
in the Franco-Prussian War, Reese captures the spirit of the period from multiple 
perspectives, including that of the rich foreigners who, though trapped in the city, 
experienced few of the devastating shortages that faced the common folk. Odile’s 
increasing desperation and self-recriminations are in keeping with her character, 
but they become somewhat tedious and overblown, and her excessive pronounce-
ments of despair drag on the pace. Some plot threads are left dangling, but this 
explanation of the mysterious ingredient that animates Jekyll’s transformation is 
well suited to readers who enjoy period drama laced with a bit of tame horror and 
not-so-tame blackmail.  KC
reiChert, amy Take Your Mama to Work Today; illus. by Alexandra Boiger. Ath-
eneum, 2012 30p
ISBN 978-1-4169-7095-8 $16.99   
R 6-8 yrs
Violet has prepared this extended tip sheet to help her peers have a successful day 
when their moms inevitably take them to the workplace. She describes most of the 
expected ways that office equipment and supplies can be turned into playthings, 
such as using the hole punch and the paper shredder to make confetti. As one 
might expect, her advice is a bit, um, misguided, but her mother and her mother’s 
coworkers bear up remarkably well until she tries to give the boss some presentation 
advice, answers the phone and hangs up before pressing hold, and helps out on 
an interview by asking an interviewee how old he is. Boiger’s pencil and black tea 
drawings, punched up with bits of watercolor, effectively display time and move-
ment with just the right amount of chaos as she sets adults off-kilter and places 
Violet everywhere at once. Sly comparisons of coffee breaks to school snack time 
and mid-afternoon slumps to naptime remind adult readers that they probably 
really did learn all they need to know in kindergarten, but what really makes this 
narrative work is the fact that Violet is clearly the heir to Kay Thompson’s Eloise. 
Her obstreperous energy, brazen confidence in the face of adults, and even her body 
type, with its poochy little tummy and continually upturned chin, charm audiences 
for the same reasons that Eloise did, suggesting that every stodgy grownup space 
May 2012 • 477
needs a pixie. Hence this is one of those books clearly aimed at two audiences: 
the children who will delight in reading about a freedom they would never enjoy 
without serious consequences, and the adults who need reminding that yeah, it’s 
tough, but they love their kids anyway.  KC 
riChter, william Dark Eyes. Razorbill, 2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-457-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
A Russian orphan adopted by a wealthy New York City couple, Wally has spent the 
last few years on the street, unable to accept the structure and privilege of her new 
life. When a friend carrying Wally’s ID is murdered, the investigation by both the 
police and Wally herself uncovers a history that links Wally to the Russian mob—and 
a great deal of money coveted by many deadly players. Oh, and her biological mother 
may be alive, too. The setup of an international, transgenerational mob vendetta is 
as much cliché as classic, and the endless twists—including secret identities, layers 
of mafia plots, jewel theft, adoption intrigue, and a whole subplot involved defected 
ATF agents—require too much explanation to feel anything but forced. Wally, as 
the leader of a small crew of runaways, is a strong and capable heroine, although 
she has a tendency to fall back on overly stereotyped girlishness when considering 
her romantic prospects. The author’s screenwriting background is apparent in the 
writing, which offers a mostly sharp ear for dialogue, but the narrative prose is stilted 
and the character psychologies oversimplified. Despite these issues, the grandiose, 
high-adrenaline plotlines and familiar mafia archetypes may hook readers who like 
their villains, heroes, and action sequences bigger than life.  CG
rodriguez, gaby The Pregnancy Project: A Memoir; by Gaby Rodriguez and 
Jenna Glatzer. Simon, 2012 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4622-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4624-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Gaby Rodriguez’s senior project of faking a pregnancy in order to study stereotypes 
and pressures placed on pregnant teens ignited a minor media storm in 2011, fol-
lowed by a Lifetime movie that aired in January 2012. In this memoir, Gaby explains 
in detail the reasons why she embarked on this project. Her background is positively 
full of teen moms, from her own mother who had her first child at fifteen, to the 
majority of her brothers and sisters who became teen parents themselves. A respon-
sible if reluctant babysitter at age nine, Gaby determined she would not embody this 
particular Latina stereotype, but she felt called to do more to raise awareness of the 
social difficulties faced by teen mothers and fathers in her community. Following 
an extended history of her mother’s life, she describes the project and her goals in 
detail without dwelling on her own social life. She notes that while pregnant girls 
get a mix of support and sanction, the boys who stay with their pregnant girlfriends 
(she had a boyfriend throughout the experiment) are given no positive support at 
all and are instead hammered with negative messages of how their lives are over if 
they stand up to their responsibilities. Despite occasional preachiness, Gaby’s voice 
is consistently readable and straightforward, and her motivations and findings are 
utterly accessible for even reluctant teen readers. She makes it clear that the fame 
that followed her project was both a complete surprise and a limited window of 
478 • The BulleTin
opportunity for open discussion about this important topic, and she urges people 
both to think carefully about their choices and to support those who have made 
mistakes. Needless to say, this is perfect for reading groups, especially in communi-
ties where teen pregnancy is prevalent.  KC
sCarrow, simon Fight for Freedom. Disney Hyperion, 2012 [272p] (Gladi-
ator)
ISBN 978-1-4231-5101-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Titus Cornelius Pollenius, a centurion retired from the Roman army after crushing 
the Spartacus slave rebellion, is killed by goons of a moneylender trying to collect 
on the retired soldier’s farm loan. With a personal impetus for revenge, the usurious 
Decimus enslaves Titus’s wife and ten-year-old son, Marcus, and transports them 
to his own remote farm to toil and die. Marcus escapes, only to be captured by the 
owner of a prestigious gladiator school. Once the small but scrappy Marcus realizes 
that a public appearance in the arena might be his one chance to make contact with 
his father’s mentor, General Pompeius, and argue for freedom, he throws himself 
into training, is chosen for a death match with a fellow student, and catches the 
attention of an even more august personage: Gaius Julius Caesar, a rising Roman 
star if ever there was one. This series debut steadily hits all the predictable marks 
for an ensemble drama—the cunning school bully, the strong but silent protector, 
the dastardly villain, a matron and a maiden in distress, and, most importantly, 
a triumph (tempered with an oh-so-ethical refusal to finish off his rival) in the 
arena. Readers won’t find much novelty in this familiar spectacle until the end, 
when the revelation of Marcus’ true identity signals that ensuing series entries will 
most likely steer him onto a more intriguing path. Action fans, though, will find 
enough blood and honor here to award a thumbs up and return to watch Marcus 
take on his next enemy.  EB
sChaefer, lola m. One Special Day; illus. by Jessica Meserve. Disney Hyper-
ion, 2012 26p
ISBN 978-1-4231-3760-3 $16.99   
R 3-6 yrs
Spencer is a spirited and energetic little boy, characteristics that are described in 
rich rebus-style illustrated similes (“He was strong—strong as a [picture of bear],” 
“He was funny—funny as a [picture of a monkey]”). Spencer is about to take on a 
few new characteristics, becoming “quiet” and “gentle” as he watches for and then 
welcomes his parents who return home with a new baby sibling. The final spread 
finds the new family of four lazily spread out on a blanket in the yard while the 
menagerie of animals from the earlier pages looks on. There is no shortage of books 
for soon-to-be older siblings, but what makes this one stand out is the celebration 
of all the great things the older sibling already is followed by the welcome addition 
of a few new roles; the interactive nature of the text begs for child involvement, 
functioning almost as a large-scale rebus tale in picture book format. The digital 
oil pastels feature a country home surrounded by tall grasses and sprinklings of 
wildflowers, and the setting is perfectly suited to the sense of magic in Spencer’s 
animal imaginings. There is a careful delicacy to the compositions, so that single 
buds and blades of grass stand out against the sky and yard; Spencer himself has 
a Sendakian robustness as he bounds about his family’s property. While not all 
older siblings will take to big brotherhood as smoothly as Spencer, his experience 
May 2012 • 479
is shared here with an abundance of love and affection that plenty of soon-to-be 
brothers and sisters will warm to.  HM 
sChraff, anne Don’t Think about Tomorrow. Saddleback, 2012 [198p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-61651-664-2 $8.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61247-358-1 $8.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-12
      Out of Love for You. Saddleback, 2012 [202p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-61651-665-9 $8.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61247-359-8 $8.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-12
      The Rescuers. Saddleback, 2012 [202p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61651-666-6 $8.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61247-360-4 $8.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-12
These three recent additions to the Urban Underground series are representative of 
the series as a whole, a merger of urban fiction and classic teen problem novel with 
substantial hi-lo appeal. Featuring African-American characters in a low-income 
but otherwise nonspecific setting, each book stands alone but is situated in a re-
curring community of teens with complex problems and a complex web of inter-
connections and shared histories. Each installment teases out characters’ ongoing 
issues and explores a few particular problems, balancing three or four thematically 
related plots and introducing new issues while capitalizing on the series appeal of 
a familiar place and community readers can return to many times. In Don’t Think 
about Tomorrow, for instance, Kevin struggles with anger management but makes 
an effort to reach out to loner Lydell; Jaris worries about the slick school principal’s 
intentions toward his mother; and Sereeta prepares for her mother’s return home 
from rehab. There is some unfortunate sexist messaging in depictions of male 
possessive behavior as well as the tendency of the teen girl characters to be either 
sweetly wholesome or greedy temptresses; additionally, the difference between 
flawed-but-good protagonists and flawed-and-irredeemable antagonists seems a bit 
arbitrary, though it does give readers some definitive villains. The books, written in 
a simplistic and sometimes choppy style, are clearly purposive and even prescriptive. 
This approach may be ultimately be grounding, though, suggesting ways forward 
out of various predicaments while still offering empathetic, mostly nonjudgmental 
representations of difficult experiences such as class conflict, veterans’ experiences, 
and teens’ interpersonal relationships. Given the dearth of such representations, 
these are a solid addition to the field and a good link to more complex works by 
Walter Dean Myers and Sharon Flake.  CG
sChumaCher, julie The Unbearable Book Club for Unsinkable Girls. Delacorte, 
2012 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90685-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73773-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98571-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
A knee injury blows Adrienne’s plan of a canoe trip with her friend the summer be-
fore her junior year, so instead she’s stuck in town with nothing to do but participate 
480 • The BulleTin
in a newly created mother-daughter book club. As a result, she’s drawn into unac-
customed closeness with glamorous CeeCee the queen bee, Jill the overachiever, and 
quiet Wallis the enigma, whose mother never attends. CeeCee in particular becomes 
guide, goad, and odd pal to Adrienne, dragging her out in the middle of the night 
for adventures and pushing her out of her complacent acceptance of her mother’s 
authoritative silence on the identity of Adrienne’s father. Adrienne, a bookworm 
who sees herself as “average, shapeless,” has the musing voice of a young woman 
who hasn’t really fully emerged from her chrysalis, a rueful awakening perceptivity 
that’s laced by flashes of wit but unseasoned by precocious sophistication; it’s all 
conveyed through compact dialogue and sharply observed social event, though, so 
proceedings move along smartly. The book is presented as Adrienne’s own report 
for school, with sections headed by the titles of the relevant books and each chapter 
introduced with a literary term explained by Adrienne. Schumacher, author of the 
compelling Black Box (BCCB 9/08), deftly allows elements of The Yellow Wallpaper, 
Frankenstein, The House on Mango Street, and The Awakening to infuse Adrienne’s 
thinking as she immerses herself in them and as her own story unfurls alongside 
them. The result is a story that explores the way books can and can’t inform lives, 
as Adrienne’s summer leads to some surprising, even tragic events; that makes this 
a natural for book-club discussion by reluctant and eager attendants alike.  DS
silvey, anita The Plant Hunters: True Stories of Their Daring Adventures to the Far 
Corners of the Earth. Farrar, 2012 [96p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-374-30908-4 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Forget your tree-hugging vegans, gardening grannies, and bespectacled botanists. 
Silvey’s plant enthusiasts, featured herein, are more likely to be restless adventurers, 
savvy investors, or even wily scoundrels. The focus is on Western naturalists who 
scoured remote regions for plants yet unknown to mainstream collectors in what 
they regarded as the “civilized” world. With botanical garden and private collec-
tors clamoring—and paying—for floral novelties, the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries were prime time for men (and a few women) curious and brave enough 
to risk their lives in pursuit of an uncatalogued plant. The perspective tends to be 
that of the adventurers themselves, and the tales of facing wild elements, punish-
ing terrain, and life-threatening insects and beasts carry the clubby scent of leather 
chairs, cigars, and a good coal fire. Although Silvey describes the illegal British 
acquisition of tea and cinchona plants and seeds from China and South America, 
there is little actual discussion of colonialism; nor does she address any unintended 
consequences of transplanting biota into non-native regions. While the limited 
scope of this title is better designed to whet than satisfy the appetite of a budding 
botanist, it does successfully infuse the image of plant collection with a measure of 
excitement many readers will not expect. Black and white photographs, a timeline, 
chapter notes, a bibliography, and an index are included.  EB
singer, marilyn The Boy Who Cried Alien; illus. by Brian Biggs. Disney Hy-
perion, 2012 40p
ISBN 978-0-7868-3825-7 $17.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs 
You know the drill: a boy known for telling lies gets into a bit of a bind with some 
predators, but when he calls for help, no one responds to what they assume to be 
May 2012 • 481
another whopper. In Singer and Biggs’ comics-style adaption, however, the “wolves” 
are green-speckled, tentacled aliens while the titular boy is the bespectacled Larry 
the Liar who, besides being an expert fibber, also has a penchant for poetry—as do 
his fellow townspeople. The resulting mashup of classic tale, clever wordplay, and 
mixed-media art overstays its welcome a little but still holds considerable appeal for 
young readers. Singer’s verse is somewhat variable, with some constructions awk-
wardly stumbling over meter but others evincing musical clarity. The intermingling 
comic-book-like panels and double-page spreads feature thickly outlined figures, 
often with wide eyes and open mouths, the palette alternating between muted 
greens and apricots and vibrant purples. Once kids realize that the alien language 
(also in rhyme) is actually anagrammed English, there’ll be no stopping them from 
puzzling it all out; an author’s note explaining the translations will more than likely 
inspire a new version of Pig Latin at the playground.  KQG
sPringman, i. C. More; illus. by Brian Lies. Houghton, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-0-547-61083-2 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
It all starts innocently enough: a mouse gives a shiny green marble to a magpie, 
who tucks it away in his nest. Soon the magpie is collecting other found objects—
a Lego, some coins, a chess piece, a toothbrush—until he has become a full-scale 
hoarder with multiple nests stuffed full of his findings in the branches of his tree. 
Magpie’s obsession literally reaches a breaking point when the weight of the collec-
tions breaks a branch off the tree and sends Magpie in a downward spiral of stuff. A 
group of mice helps Magpie climb out of the rubble and select a few favorite pieces; 
the magpie then flies off with his few treasures, free from the piles of belongings. 
While the grander social commentary about overconsumption may be somewhat 
lost on the intended audience, the lesson about living simply carries here, gracefully 
communicated both in the illustrations and the spare text. Only a word or two is 
included on each spread (“A few, // several, // more // and more // and more. // 
Lots. // Plenty”), allowing the viewer ample opportunity to focus on the acrylic 
and colored pencil compositions, which boast definite “I Spy” appeal. The animals 
are depicted with vivid photorealism, careful attention given to the detail of each 
individual tuft of feather and fur; the backgrounds, cream-dominant handmade 
papers rich with earthtoned texture, lend an element of calm to potentially chaotic 
compositions. While this particular magpie may have learned his lesson, you still 
might want to look upwards the next time you lose your sunglasses.  HM
stamPler, ann redisCh, ad.  The Wooden Sword: A Jewish Folktale from Afghani-
stan; illus. by Carol Liddiment. Whitman, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-8075-9201-4 $16.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs
In this adaptation of a folktale set in Afghanistan, a shah, plagued by insomnia, 
decides to dress as a commoner and wander the streets of his town. When he reaches 
“the poorest section of the poorest street” he witnesses a young Jewish couple cozily 
smiling despite the meagerness of their Sabbath meal; when asked how he is so 
happy despite his poverty, the young man replies, “If one path is bocked God leads 
me to another, and everything turns out just as it should.” The shah decides to test 
the poor man’s faith repeatedly: when he forbids the man’s profession of shoemak-
ing, the man takes up water-gathering; when the shah forbids water-gathering, he 
takes up wood-cutting, then forbidden in turn. The former shoemaker then ends 
482 • The BulleTin
up in the royal guard, where his quick wit saves both him and a man doomed to 
execution, whereupon the shah appoints him as an advisor. At its heart, this is a 
tale about maintaining a positive attitude and making the most of bad situations, 
and children will, with a little explaining, recognize these important themes; while 
it’s pretty chirpily told for such harrowing events, those familiar with the biblical 
Job tale, which this resembles, may feel the shoemaker could have had it worse. 
There is a lot of plot in this retelling, and subsequently many points of discussion 
for young listeners. The acrylic illustrations are bold and bright, with deeply hued 
clothing and environmental details set against sandy, neutral backgrounds and 
abundant cultural details worked into every spread. The characters themselves are 
stiffly drawn, and though, their cartoonish faces are so similar that it becomes dif-
ficult to distinguish one from another. An author’s note provides source information 
as well as background on the research that went into the retelling of this tale.  HM
thomas, lex Quaranteen: The Loners. Egmont, 2012 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-329-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-330-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 10-12
When a virus breaks out that is deadly to all post-pubescent humans, McKinley 
High School is abruptly transformed into a hellish prison with no guards and no 
adults, from which students can escape only in the brief interlude before they 
complete adolescence and die from the virus. Sealed off from the outside world 
for a year now, the school is divided among deadly gangs who were once just your 
normal teen cliques. David should have been part of the ruling-class Varsity, but a 
pre-disaster falling-out with his old team means that he’s a Scrap, on his own—until 
he challenges Varsity, unites the Scraps, and becomes a target for the sociopathic 
quarterback. There’s a certain dark humor in the school’s transformation as Nerds 
weaponize dictionaries, Pretty Ones transform grooming tools into implements of 
torture, and a black market emerges for prostitution and personal hygiene products 
alike. Thomas pulls no punches in regards to the lengths characters go to not just 
for survival but for power, and the novel makes The Hunger Games look positively 
optimistic on the subject of human nature, a stance illustrated by the deteriorating 
relationship between David and younger brother Will, who both needs and resents 
his protection. The book is more interested in psychology than science, so it’s unfor-
tunate that characters tend to be shallow and not wholly logical, with relationship 
drama coming across as trivial and the villain’s descent offering no insight into the 
interplay of circumstance and pathology that is central to the book’s theme. What 
the book lacks in nuance and depth, however, it makes up for in sheer energy, and 
the gritty, no-holds-barred, Lord-of-the-Flies-meets-Heathers plot will likely hook 
readers with a taste for bleak, action-packed survival stories.  CG
thomPson, mary g. Wuftoom. Clarion, 2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-547-63724-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
For the past two years, Evan has been slowly turning into a Wuftoom, a worm-
like creature with nubs for arms and legs and a thick membrane coating his skin. 
Once his transformation is complete, he’ll join the rest of the Wuftooms in an 
underground world filled with species of sentient dark creatures, who must eat 
May 2012 • 483
each other to survive. Members of one of those species, the Vitflies, bribe and 
threaten Evan into working against the Wuftooms as the two species prepare for a 
showdown. Meanwhile, Evan spirals further and further away from humanity and 
conscience, torn between a human allegiance to his mother and a growing affinity 
to the hive mind of his Wuftoom peers, many of whom have similarly human ori-
gins. Thompson plays with themes of belonging, acceptance, and loyalty that may 
resonate with readers, but overall the plotting is muddled, more like the transcript 
of a nightmare than a coherent underworld fantasy. The nightmarescape, however, 
is incredibly vivid, tapping into primal, creepy imagery as Thompson describes in 
shudder-eliciting detail everything from the Wuftooms’ subterranean eating and 
transportation habits to Evan’s gooey transformation and psychic luring of another 
teen to become a Wuftoom. With a writing style and eye for disturbing detail that 
manages to fuse elements of Sonya Hartnett and Darren Shan, this eerie novel may 
therefore still satisfy readers in search of chills.  CG
traCy, kristen Bessica Lefter Bites Back. Delacorte, 2012 263p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98961-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74069-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89983-6 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-7
In The Reinvention of Bessica Lefter (BCCB 2/11), Bessica survived starting middle 
school without her best friend, Sylvie, who’s at a different school. Sixth grade is still 
tough, though: she and Sylvie, who’s faring much better in middle school than Bes-
sica, are having friendship issues that lead to bickering and text warring. She’s also 
struggling in her new role as the school mascot (a bear), and getting increasingly 
uneasy about her debut performance, especially after she finds out that the infamous 
mascot of the opposing team has evil plans for her. Bessica’s pell-mell, self-focused, 
yet funny narration still rings true as the voice of a kid whose anxieties have outpaced 
the rest of her development; while she can be somewhat wearing literary company 
at times, it’s an effective portrayal of the place preteens sometimes bog down in, 
and it’s realistic that she doesn’t so much grow as a result of adversity but scramble 
her way through to the next obstacle as best as she can. There’s additional humor 
and authenticity in both her panic at the rumored upcoming “facebombing” by the 
opposing mascot and the fact that nobody knows exactly what facebombing is but 
dreads it nonetheless. Bessica is sometimes the girl kids hope not to be, but that’s 
something most kids take a turn at anyway, and her successful and funny survival 
of a very trying period indeed will elicit sympathy and relief from readers.  DS
van leeuwen, joke Eep!; tr. from the Dutch by Bill Nagelkerke; written and illus. 
by Joke van Leeuwen. Gecko, 2012 150p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-877579-07-3 $7.95   
Ad Gr. 4-6
During one of his daily bird-watching walks, Warren finds “a bird in the shape of 
a little girl. Or a little girl in the shape of a bird. Or something in between.” He 
takes the bird-girl home to his wife, and the childless couple decides to look after 
the creature. Despite their instructions on table manners and proper footwear, 
Beedy turns out to be more bird than child, and she eventually flies away, meeting 
another human caretaker, this time a little girl; Beedy similarly frees herself from 
this home and continues to fly south a little at a time, leaving more lonely people 
in her wake at each stop. Meanwhile, Warren and Tina set out to find their Beedy, 
484 • The BulleTin
if only to wish her a proper farewell, and along the way are joined by the various 
people Beedy has affected. An award-winning book originally published in the 
Netherlands, this is an odd little tale that has more potential to appeal to adults 
than youngsters, particularly as the language becomes increasingly metaphorical in 
its imagery and allusions. Fortunately, the whimsy of the book’s premise will most 
likely be enough to get young readers’ attentions, and, like Michelle Cuevas’s recent 
The Masterwork of a Painting Elephant (BCCB 12/11), the book might provide 
a pleasing read-together possibility, prompting discussion about the differences 
between love and possession, imagination and reality. The translated prose is a bit 
stilted at times, but van Leeuwen’s line drawings, reminiscent of Shel Silverstein 
and Quentin Blake in their frenetic, dashed energy, bring a bit of levity to what is 
otherwise a quiet, contemplative tale.  KQG
vega, denise Rock On: A Story of Guitars, Gigs, Girls, and a Brother (Not Neces-
sarily in That Order). Little, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-316-13310-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
With a Battle of the Bands fast approaching, high school sophomore and band 
front-man Ori finds his dream of rock-stardom (or some modest indie version of 
it) suddenly within reach. Unfortunately, his older brother Del, newly dropped out 
of college, seems determined to undermine him, levying subtle put-downs, hitting 
on the girl he’s almost-sort-of-dating, and just plain disengaging. As the Battle 
draws closer, the group emerges as a serious contender for first place (partly due to 
finding an awesome female bassist who, in a matter-of-fact twist, is also partially 
deaf), leading to some nasty competition just as familial and romantic tensions 
mount. The groupie drama that unfolds via posts on the band’s social media page is 
largely superfluous, but the other three pillars of the plot are engaging and smartly 
paced, with the brotherly relationship—with all its baggage, love, disappointment, 
and oddly expressed support—particularly well drawn. Vega has a way with details, 
creating a pattern of incidents and emotional beats that builds assuredly to the 
final face-offs between bands and brothers. Likable three-dimensional characters 
and rock-solid friendships add considerable appeal to this feel-good tale for the 
younger YA set.  CG 
vivian, siobhan The List. Push/Scholastic, 2012 332p
ISBN 978-0-545-16917-2 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Every year at the start of homecoming week at Mount Washington High, a list 
appears with the names of the prettiest and ugliest girl in each class. The list is 
embossed with a seal long ago stolen from the principal’s office to certify that it’s 
official, but no one knows who makes each year’s list. This year, the list is anno-
tated, and it contains some noteworthy choices: the first four-time winner in the 
ugliest category, and a girl whose ugliness is only on the inside. The book alternates 
chapters between the eight girls chosen, revealing how each deals with her sudden 
notoriety and how it affects her siblings and her friends. The freshman ugliest, for 
instance, isn’t so much ugly as muscular and athletic, so she is able to brush off the 
label, but her boyfriend has a hard time standing up for her among his obnoxious 
friends. The prettiest junior feels that her status came about because of her recent 
weight loss, so she figures she just has to keep starving and purging a little more. 
May 2012 • 485
Meanwhile, the girl who has been named ugliest every year has become a minor 
celebrity, and she is trying to milk her misfortune for enough pity votes to win 
homecoming queen. The girls’ reactions, which range from rage to wonder, have 
a ring of authenticity, and it’s plausible that their relationships shift as a result of 
their being publicly noted and singled out for their appearance. The identity of 
the listmaker comes as a genuine surprise, but her motivations are surprising yet 
understandable, even if her plan fails to disrupt the status quo. Ultimately, that’s 
one of the takeaways here; high school hierarchies may be as tough for those at 
the top as they are for those at the bottom, but that doesn’t mean there’s enough 
energy for any real change.  KC
voorhoeve, anne C. My Family for the War; tr. from the German by Tammi 
Reichel. Dial, 2012 400p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3360-2 $17.99   
R Gr. 6-10
Franziska Mangold’s family may have been Protestant for the past two generations, 
but their Jewish heritage has made them targets for rising Nazi persecution. They 
use their savings to secure permits and passage to Singapore, but before they can 
depart, Mr. Mangold is arrested and his wife, reluctant to leave her husband, loses 
their one best chance to emigrate. The best she can do is apply for Ziska to leave 
on a kindertransport and hope that once her daughter is settled in England she will 
be in a position to help her parents secure work visas and join her. Ziska’s English 
family, the Shepards, are orthodox Jews who are surprised to learn that the child 
they’ve taken into their home knows nothing of her religious roots. Ridden with 
guilt over her own good luck in leaving Berlin (her best friend Bekka misses the 
last transport out) and anxiety for her parents, Ziska—now named Frances by her 
new “brother” Gary—isn’t the easiest little ten-year-old to warm up to. Just as the 
Shepards’ kindness and the comforting cycle of schooling and Jewish ritual begin 
to soothe her, Frances is wrenched anew by forced evacuation to the countryside 
during the Blitz. Mrs. Shepard obtains permission from Mrs. Mangold to bring 
Frances back to London, where she remains throughout the war and becomes as 
beloved to her temporary family as she is to biological parents. By war’s end, the 
possible joy of reunion is dampened by the many tragedies that have beset the 
Mangold family and their friends, and Frances must decide whether she will make 
a permanent home in England or on the continent. Voorhoeve masterfully captures 
the careful planning, split-second decisions, and pure dumb luck that spell the dif-
ference between life and death for those in Hitler’s crosshairs, and the intertwined 
stories of the Shepards and Franziska’s friends displaced by the war convey the fact 
that nobody survives such international cataclysm completely unscathed. A brief 
historical note is appended.  EB
wallner, alexandra Susan B. Anthony; written and illus. by Alexandra Wall-
ner. Holiday House, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-8234-1953-1 $16.95   
Ad 7-9 yrs
Children who approach biographies expecting subjects who perform heroic deeds 
or triumph over adversity will find the story of nineteenth-century lecturer, writer, 
activist, and suffragist Susan B. Anthony to be quite a sea change. Wallner offers 
a cogent, if barebones, portrayal of a woman, educated well beyond the standards 
of her time, gender, and station, who made a career of running into the brick wall 
486 • The BulleTin
of opposition to the myriad of issues she held dear, from abolition to women’s 
rights, only to die before her cause célèbre, women’s suffrage, was vindicated in 
the Nineteenth Amendment. This is largely an intellectual history, and although 
Wallner does her best to spice it up with bloomers and rotten eggs, the preponder-
ance of ideas and issues may make this a hard sell for the picture-book set. Line 
and gouache pictures in muted and muddied tones are a bit too tepid to capture 
the spirit of the obstreperous Ms. Anthony, but they do provide some concrete 
images to help with some of the text’s abstractions. This isn’t likely to win readers 
as a pleasure outing, but the appended timeline and source notes suggest this could 
be a good choice for beginning report writers.  EB 
wells, dan Partials. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2012 470p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-207104-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-207106-4 $9.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Eleven years after a virus released by the Partials (genetically engineered super-
soldiers the U.S. created to fight a war against China) topples human civilization, 
the 40,000 or so humans with immunity live in isolation on a well-fortified Long 
Island. With the plague continuing to kill every newborn child, most humans exist 
in the day to day, accepting that extinction is probably inevitable while at the same 
time clinging to the fragile hope offered by a government that mandates pregnancy 
for every woman older than eighteen. Kira Walker, a sixteen-year-old medic with 
an interest in research, has an alternative plan: since the Partials were immune to 
the virus, why not leave the safety of the island, capture a Partial, and bring it back 
to be studied? Wells creates a compelling, fantastically complex post-apocalyptic 
landscape, adding thought-provoking twists to a classic story of humanity creating 
its own doom. At the same time, the plot never gets mired in philosophizing; moral 
ambiguities are necessarily faced on the fly, and the pace rarely falters as the narrative 
gallops through edge-of-your-seat shoot-outs, stealth missions, mind games, political 
conspiracies, nonstop twists, and ever-rising stakes. Kira is a strong, sympathetic 
heroine driven by smarts and bolstered by guts, and she’s single-minded in her de-
termination to save her species; no matter what interpersonal drama is playing out 
around her, she Gets Things Done. Complementing this rock-steady protagonist 
are a large cast of distinctive, believable, and well-developed characters (including 
a couple potential love interests who mostly take a back seat in this volume) who 
are swept along on Kira’s quest and whose loyalty and perseverance give the book, 
in spite of its dark themes, an undercurrent of optimism. With broad cross-genre 
appeal and an engaging balance of thematic depth and rip-roaring action, this 
winner will leave readers clamoring for sequels.  CG
winter, jonah Just Behave, Pablo Picasso!; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. Levine/
Scholastic, 2012 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-545-13291-6 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Arguably the most towering figure of twentieth-century art, Pablo Picasso started 
out as a prodigious young painter in love with change and novelty, and Winter’s 
picture book chronicles the way the artist’s fearless originality shocked the art 
world. As the text explains, “In the time it takes other people to admire the exqui-
site beauty of his art, young Pablo has moved on to some other style,” leaving in 
May 2012 • 487
his wake frustrated buyers, agents, and critics who just want him to make more 
of the same successful paintings rather than developing new style after new style. 
This isn’t so much a biography of Picasso as a look at an iconoclast at work, and 
a spirited one at that; Winter’s present-tense prose, emphasizing quick, heartfelt 
dialogue, has an urgency that conveys the intensity of the young and artistic, and 
the portrait of the artist as a young rule-breaker will immediately put audiences on 
his side. Appropriately enough, the art packs the main punch here: Hawkes’ usual 
heartiness becomes deliberate audacity (especially on the title page, where young 
Picasso’s face fills the spread, staring out intently at the viewer), counterbalanced 
with some more painterly styles in the sweeping acrylic brushstrokes. Illustrations 
respond smartly to the text’s imagery, providing visual metaphors for the drama of 
Picasso’s life and celebrating artistic freedom with the soaring shifts in perspective. 
Yet the art leaves the abstraction to Picasso himself, tracing his creativity accessibly 
and including takes on specific, identifiable Picasso paintings (their titles and loca-
tions are noted on the book’s last page). Kids—and adults—who ask “What’s the 
big deal about Picasso?” will find the answer here in a nutshell, and this would make 
a terrific partner to other modernist art picture books such as Winter’s Gertrude 
Is Gertrude Is Gertrude Is Gertrude (BCCB 1/09). A final note gives a little more 
detail on Picasso’s life.  DS
yee, Paul The Secret Keepers. Tradewind, 2012 133p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-896580-96-8 $12.95   
Ad Gr. 5-8
The 1906 San Francisco earthquake claimed the life of Jackson Leong’s older 
brother, Lincoln, and Jack witnessed his spirit’s departure from this life with his 
“yin-yang eyes,” his ability to see ghosts. Now another spirit is causing the Leongs 
trouble: as they try to get their nickelodeon back in business, the ghost of a young 
woman appears in the theater and frightens away the customers. Exorcism by the 
Temple Keeper simply chases her to a new location where her presence, although 
not directly threatening, nonetheless upsets the Leongs and their relatives. Lincoln 
can’t leave well enough alone, either, and a servant girl fears that he’s trying to lure 
her to death to become his ghost bride. Jack figures out the identity of the female 
ghost and finally pins her connection to his aunt and uncle, exposing a deeply 
buried family secret; and Lincoln, happily, finds in the now peaceful spirit a more 
appropriate mate for the afterlife. With a pair of persistent revenants on the loose 
and some pretty engrossing folkloric elements and superstitions at play, one would 
expect far more creepiness than Yee delivers, but the Leong family story unfolds 
more as an outline than a fully realized novel. This title won’t reach the bar for 
most ghost-tale enthusiasts, but historical fiction readers open to a supernatural 
twist may enjoy the quirky mystery.  EB
488 • The BulleTin
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
marCus, leonard s.  Show Me a Story! Why Picture Books Matter: Conversations 
with 21 of the World’s Most Celebrated Illustrators. Candlewick, 2012 [307p] il-
lus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-7636-3506-0 $22.99
In his 2002 book Ways of Telling, children’s literature scholar and sometime GSLIS 
adjunct Marcus presented a series of entertaining and provocative interviews with 
noted children’s book illustrators, including Jerry Pinkney, Rosemary Wells, and 
Maurice Sendak. Here he expands upon ten of those interviews with postscripts 
and offers up entirely new accounts of his discussions with eleven more illustra-
tors, including Mo Willems, Peter Sís, and Chris Raschka. After a giving a brief 
introductory overview of the rise of the picture book in popular culture, Marcus 
primarily lets his interviewees speak for themselves, transcribing his discussions 
with them about the artistic process, the impact of their personal lives on their 
professional work, and their various paths into the world of children’s literature. 
Marcus’ skills as both a historian and interviewer are on full display here, as his 
questions reflect a broad knowledge of the publishing industry and children’s books 
while allowing his subjects enough room to meander through their responses, often 
arriving at some surprising and intriguing conclusions. The inclusion of the older 
interviews alongside the more recent ones makes for some noteworthy thematic 
threads, particularly when several of the more contemporary artists cite the former 
interviewees as inspiration. Each interview is prefaced by a short introduction, 
often setting the stage for both the themes and the settings of the interviews. 
The accompanying color art gives a visual representation of the artistic process 
and includes initial sketches, final products, and much in between. An index and 
bibliography are included.  KQG 
May 2012 • 489
Adventure: Barnes; Burt; 
Grant; Mihaley; richter; Scarrow; 
Silvey; Wells
African Americans–fiction: davis, t.; 
Schraff
Aliens–fiction: Mihaley
Aliens–stories: Singer
Animals–fiction: Hiaasen
Animals–stories: Hillenbrand; Hob-
bie
Animals–stories: Kasza
Appearance–fiction: vivian
Archeology: Bunting
Art: Winter
Art and artists: Winter
Asian Americans–fiction: LeBox; Yee
Babies–stories: Schaefer
Babysitting–stories: reagan
Bands–fiction: vega
Baseball–poetry: Florian
Bears–stories: McKinlay
BiLinGuAL BooKS: Hayes
BioGrApHieS: Lambert; nivola; 
Wallner; Winter
Bioterrorism–fiction: Lorentz
Birds: Lewin
Birds–fiction: van Leeuwen
Birds–stories: Springman
Books and reading–fiction: Burt; 
proimos; Schumacher
Books and reading–stories: McKin-
lay
Botany: Silvey
Brothers–fiction: vega
Brothers and sisters–stories: Schaefer
Careers–fiction: Babbitt
Chickens–stories: davis, A.
ConCept BooKS: Leedy
Contests–fiction: Gephart; Graff
Cowboys–poetry: Harrison
Crime and criminals–fiction: Barnes; 
Corriveau; Fredericks; Grant; Ha-
thaway; Hiaasen; Lyga; richter
Cuba–fiction: engle
death–fiction: Andrews; Green; 
patrick
disabilities: Lambert
disasters—fiction; Lawson
dogs–fiction: Caletti
dogs–stories: oram
dyslexia–fiction: engle
dystopias–fiction: Wells
Ecology: Lewin
elections–fiction: Angleberger
Ethics and values: Babbitt; Bobet; 
davis, A.; Marchetta; patrick; 
pearce; rodriguez; Schraff; 
thompson; Wallner
explorers and exploring: Silvey
Families–fiction: Bick; Caletti; da-
vis, t.; Frederick; Graff; Hatha-
way; Medina
Families–stories: Schaefer
FAntASY: Bobet; Burt; Cashore; 
Corriveau; Frederick; Hatha-
way; inzana; LeBox; Marchetta; 
Moore; nayeri; reese; thomp-
son; van Leeuwen
Fathers–fiction: Gephart; Lyga; 
pearce
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CApS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
490 • The BulleTin
Fathers–stories: Lindaman; parker
Fears–stories: Cannon
Films–fiction: Andrews
Fish–stories: Cannon
FoLKtALeS And FAirY tALeS: 
davis, A.; Hayes; Stampler
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: 
Frederick
France–fiction: reese
Friends–fiction: Andrews; Fredericks; 
George; Karo; Lynch; proimos; 
Schumacher; tracy
Friends–stories: Hillenbrand; Kasza
Future–fiction: Barnes
Games: KaBoom!
Gays and lesbians–fiction: George
Ghosts–fiction: Jaffe; Lawson; Yee
Gifts–fiction: Feder
Gladiators–fiction: Scarrow
Grandparents–stories: reagan
GrApHiC noveLS: inzana; 
Lambert
Grief–fiction: pearce
Gypsies–fiction: Moore
HiStoriCAL FiCtion: engle; 
Lynch; voorhoeve; Yee
History, classical: Scarrow
History, U.S.: Harrison; Wallner
History, world: Bunting
Horror: nayeri; thompson
Houses–fiction: Kooser
HuMor: Angleberger; Bently; 
Cannon; Hiaasen; Lindaman; 
McKinlay; Mihaley; nor-
riss; parker; proimos; reagan; 
reichert; tracy
identity–fiction: inzana; Jaffe; 
Medina
illness–fiction: Green; thomas; 
Wells
immigrants–fiction: LeBox
Japan–fiction: inzana
Jews–fiction: voorhoeve
Jews–stories: Stampler
Kites–stories: Hillenbrand
Labor–fiction: LeBox
Language arts: Feder
Latinos: rodriguez
Latinos–fiction: Medina
Latinos–folklore: Hayes
Literature, English: nayeri; reese
MAGiCAL reALiSM: Medina
Marine biology: nivola
Mathematics: Leedy
Mothers–fiction: Schumacher
Mothers–stories: reichert
Mummies–stories: Bunting
Music and musicians–fiction: vega
MYSterieS: Corriveau; Fredericks; 
Jaffe; Lyga
Nature study: Hobbie; Lewin; 
Mcphail; nivola; Silvey
obsessive-compulsive disorder– 
fiction: Karo
optimism–stories: Stampler
orphans–fiction: richter
pets–stories: Cannon; oram
Physical education: KaBoom!
poetrY: Florian; Harrison
politics–fiction: Angleberger; 
Cashore; Marchetta
pregnancy: rodriguez
Reading aloud: Florian; norriss
Reading, easy: Feder; Kasza; nor-
riss; proimos
Reading, reluctant: rodriguez; 
Schraff
relationships–fiction: Bick; Caletti; 
George; Hathaway; Hubbard; 
pearce
reputation–fiction: Fredericks; 
vivian
rHYMinG StorieS: Bently; 
Singer
romance–fiction: Green; Hubbard; 
Karo; Medina
runaways–fiction: Jaffe
School–fiction: Feder; Fredericks; 
George; Graff; thomas; tracy; 
vivian
Science and scientists: nivola
SCienCe FiCtion: Barnes; 
Grant; Mihaley; patrick; thomas; 
Wells
Secrets–fiction: Bick; Cashore
Sex–fiction: pearce
May 2012 • 491
Sharing–stories: oram
Sheep–stories: Bently
Slovakia–fiction: Moore
Sports–poetry: Florian
Stepfamilies–fiction: Frederick
Storytelling: Hayes
Storytelling–fiction: Bobet
Storytelling–stories: Kasza
Storytime: oram; parker
SupernAturAL StorieS: Moore
SurvivAL StorieS: thomas
SuSpenSe: Lorentz
teachers: Lambert
teachers–fiction: Bick; Feder
television–fiction: Gephart; Hiaasen
terrorism–fiction: Lorentz
time travel–fiction: Lawson
toads–stories: Hobbie
transgender people–fiction: davis, t.
trees–stories: Mcphail
verSe noveLS: engle
vietnam War–fiction: Lynch
voyages and travel–fiction: Green; 
Hubbard
War–fiction: Lynch; voorhoeve
West, the–poetry: Harrison
Witches–fiction: reese
Wolves–stories: Bentlys
Women’s studies: rodriguez; Wallner
WordLeSS BooKS: Hobbie
Work–stories: reichert
World War ii–fiction: voorhoeve
Writers and writing: Lambert
The Johns hopkins University press
1-800-537-5487 • press.jhu.edu
Precocious Children 
and Childish Adults
Age Inversion in Victorian Literature
Claudia NelsoN
Especially evident in Victorian-era writings is a 
rhetorical tendency to liken adults to children and 
children to adults. Claudia Nelson examines this 
literary phenomenon and explores the ways in which 
writers discussed the child-adult relationship during 
this period.
Though far from ubiquitous, the terms “child-wom-
an,” “child-man,” and “old-fashioned child” appear 
often enough in Victorian writings to prompt criti-
cal questions about the motivations and meanings of 
such generational border-crossings. Nelson care-
fully considers the use of these terms and connects 
invocations of age inversion to developments in 
post-Darwinian scientific thinking and attitudes 
about gender roles, social class, sexuality, power, and 
economic mobility. 
She brilliantly analyzes canonical works of Charles 
Dickens, Charlotte Brontë, William Makepeace 
Thackeray, Bram Stoker, and Robert Louis 
Stevenson alongside lesser known writings to dem-
onstrate the diversity of literary age inversion and its 
profound influence on Victorian culture.
By considering the full context of Victorian age 
inversion, Precocious Children and Childish Adults 
illuminates the complicated pattern of anxiety and 
desire that creates such ambiguity in the writings of 
the time. 
$50.00 hardcover
“A fascinating, capacious, 
and transformative study. 
Occasionally, I read a 
book that I know will 
change what I see in the 
world and in literature. 
This is one of those 
books.”
—Theresa MaNguM, 
University of Iowa
