ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
~ ·~11~ ~P
.~t
~_
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
June 2003
Vol. 56 No. 10
A LOOK INSIDE
387 THE BIG PICTURE
The Cat Who Liked Potato Soup by Terry Farish; illus. by Barry Root
388 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
389 * The Cat Who Got CarriedAway by Allan Ahlberg; illus. by Katherine
McEwen
412 * Harry on the Rocks written and illus. by Susan Meddaugh
413 * An American Plague: The True and Terrifying Story of the Yellow Fever
Epidemic of 1793 by Jim Murphy
415 * Blues Journey by Walter Dean Myers; illus. by Christopher Myers
419 * A Day in the Life ofMurphy written and illus. by Alice Provensen
429 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
430 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $70.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus
Reprint Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300
North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2003 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Barry Root from The Cat Who Liked Potato Soup ©2003. Used by permission
of Candlewick Press.
JUNE 2003 
* 387
THE BIG PICTURE
The Cat Who Liked Potato Soup
by Terry Farish; illus. by Barry Root
Picture-book artists tend to get most of the glory in the picture-book partnership,
but a truly fine picture-book text is a thing of beauty in its own right, achieving
things that pictures can't (even as the art achieves things that the text can't) rather
than functioning merely as punctuation or captioning. Though it's a demanding
format, with its need for compactness and for partnership, there are those that
excel at it: Margaret Wise Brown, Arthur Yorinks, Jacqueline Briggs Martin, to
name a few. Now Terry Farish demonstrates herself an exciting new talent in the
genre with this casually told yet tender tale about the prickly friendship between
an old man and his cat.
The old man used to have lots of cats, leaving him largely indifferent to
any particular individual, but now he lives with just the one, "who he liked, but
not so's you'd notice." She's no hunter, instead warmly appreciating the old man's
potato soup and enjoying riding along in the boat on his fishing trips ("The cat sat
on the bow of the boat, her face into the wind, like she was a hood ornament").
One day, the two squabble: when the cat refuses to desert the warm bed in the
morning (the old man had finally installed an electric blanket), the sulking codger
goes fishing without her; when he returns home, he finds a catless house. Eventu-
ally, though, the insulted kitty returns, bearing a considerably larger fish than the
old man's usual catches, and the properly humbled old man treats her with the
appreciation he'd hitherto hidden: "And he loved the sight of her, oh, and this
time you'd notice."
Farish's deliberately easygoing text takes an engaging story and turns it
into a finely fashioned saga of wry humor and delicate emotion. Her understated
colloquialisms allow the story to shine through the rustic flavor (seeking the errant
cat, the old man "looked in all his rooms. He had three"), and her carefully crafted
structure strengthens the impact ("She did not come home for lunch. She did not
come home for supper"). These days picture-book prose finds it difficult to resist
artistically ragged right margins (perhaps hoping that it will lighten some leaden
prose), but here that arrangement packs a subtle but effective punch, the deliberate
placement giving the succinct phraseology a silent shaping rhythm that will add
atmosphere to readalouds as well. At the center of all this is the relationship of the
undemonstrative old man and his longtime pet. Their regular conversations have
an air of homely bickering about them, and since the cat's portion of these ex-
changes depends strongly on the old man's interpretation and understanding (the
returned cat "opened her mouth and howled for a long time. The old man had
trouble making out the details of her story"), the narrative dexterously dabbles its
toes in the water of fantasy while never quite leaving reality's shores; most pet
owners will relate to the notion of extensive communication that may not quite
388 
* THE BULETIN
translate to outsiders. Underneath all this squabbling is the sense of a domestic
partnership ("He drove up his and the cat's dirt driveway") that's long privately
understood, even if public acknowledgment was awhile in coming.
Fortunately, the visuals are well worthy of the text, with Root's water-
color and gouache pictures evincing the same effective naturalness as the prose.
The cat is wisely underplayed (making the sudden opening of her eyes after the old
man's solitary departure a noticeable response), so she doesn't overbalance the
bewhiskered old man. The setting is far from elegant but it's full of unforced and
restrained character, from the recycled bathroom appliances (an old bathtub next
to the porch houses a few struggling plants, and a toilet inviting "junk mail" crouches
next to the mailbox) to the water boom in the field behind the house to the single
pinwheel that stands bravely in the front yard. The palette leans on warm ochres
(nicely setting off the orange cat) until the cat's departure, whereupon blues shadow
the landscape and grays thin it, but the soft moonlight shines through the bedroom's
tidy yellow curtains and warms up the little house's interior upon her return. The
quietly artistic layout (brown rather than black print boxed in restrained sage, full-
page illustrations balanced with spot art and text on the facing page) adds a nicely
rubbed glow that makes this a comfortably attractive book indeed.
There are certainly plenty of youngsters who will be drawn to the notion
of living with just a beloved pet for company. There are also likely quite a few kids
in similar human relationships, where they're grumped at by somebody undemon-
strative who's genuinely fond of them nonetheless, and this story may help explain
that cranky commentary can hide unspoken affection. Even kids who don't fall
into those categories will appreciate the rhythmic storytelling, the lively individu-
ality, and the irascible yet endearing relationship between these memorable char-
acters. (Imprint information appears on p. 399.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADA, ALMA FLOR, comp. 
iPfo Peep!: Traditional Spanish Nursery Rhymes; comp.
by Alma Flor Ada and F. Isabel Campoy; ad. by Alice Schertle; illus. by Vivf
Escrivi. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
[64p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16020-4 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16019-0 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-5 yrs
Co-editors Ada (author of Where the Flame Trees Bloom, BCCB 2/95, and My
Name Is Maria Isabel 6/93, etc.) and Campoy present twenty-nine traditional
nursery rhymes from Spain and Latin America in Spanish and English. A note
explains that the rhymes were selected from numerous Latino anthologies: "Fi-
nally, faced with the decision to select among hundreds, we chose those nursery
rhymes and songs that we cherished in our own childhoods, and those the numer-
ous children-Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Dominican, and Central Ameri-
can--with whom we have worked love the most." Each page or spread offers one
rhyme, Spanish-language version first. The verses are unforced and bouncy, with
JUNE 2003 
* 389
lilting rhythms that make them easy, pleasurable readalouds in both languages.
Schertle's English adaptations (based on translations by Ada) of the Spanish rhymes,
while not always literal, capture the buoyancy and playfulness of the originals.
The art is sometimes a bit bland, but the cozy illustrations have a comforting
familiarity. The organic palette uses varying tones of green and blue, yellow and
red to differentiate between interior and exterior, daytime and nighttime; some
pages have simple textile-like borders in carnival colors that enclose the action.
Images are sunny pastorals or domestic scenes featuring happy children, pleasant
adults, and winning fauna-even the sun and the moon, peeking over the horizon
in different spreads, smile indulgently. This is a substantive, useful collection that
will enrich nursery rhyme, readaloud, and bilingual shelves. JMD
AHLBERG, ALLAN 
The Cat Who Got Carried Away; illus. by Katherine
McEwen. 
Candlewick, 2003 
80p
ISBN 0-7636-2073-4 
$15.99 
R* 
Gr. 2-4
The third adventure of the Gaskitt family is a marvelous montage of all things
comic-mysteries small and large, slapstick, parody, sports, unusual food cravings,
pets with delusions of grandeur, an exciting chase scene, "honest" villains, police
dogs, a new baby, a very clever rat, penguins, and even some very useful maps. It
all starts out innocently enough, with the Gaskitts relaxing and looking at family
photos, but immediately things get interesting when Horace, the family cat, no-
tices a man pushing a barking baby carriage. When pets all over town begin disap-
pearing (including Horace), it's clear that something is amiss, but the children are
too busy running, running, and running some more at the behest of their P.E.-
inclined substitute teacher (their real teacher, Mrs. Fritter, has fallen out of a win-
dow trying to find the class pet. "'Poor Randolph!' [the children] cried. 'Poor
Randolph!' 'Poor Randolph!' Oh, yes, and poor Mrs. Fritter") to be able to do any
sleuthing. Ahlberg's characteristically droll narration provides for many laugh-
out-loud moments as the mystery unfolds. McEwen's watercolor and crayon illus-
trations are themselves witty compositions that help the reader visualize the crimes
and the clues. Written as an early chapter book, this breathless romp is impossible
to put down until the mysteries are solved and all five Gaskitts (make that six-
Horace is a Gaskitt, too) are safely at home waiting, with the rest of us, for their
next adventure. KC
ALLEN, WILL 
Swords for Hire: Two of the Most Unlikely Heroes You'll Ever Meet;
illus. by David Michael Beck. 
CenterPunch, 2003 
[168p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-9724882-0-0 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Sixteen-year-old Sam Hatcher is sent off to join the King's Royal Guard, which
has fallen on hard times since the (presumed) death of King Olive and the ascen-
sion to the throne of Olive's smarmy brother, Boonder; the captain of the Royal
Guard then sends Sam to Rigby Skeet, "Sword For Hire," for a little seasoning.
The seasoning begins almost at once when a man stumbles into Skeet's ramshackle
shack with three arrows in his back and a message: King Olive is still alive, impris-
oned in the evil Boneman's palace. Set up by the King's Elite, the false King
Boonder's new goon patrol, Skeet and Hatcher barely escape with their lives; un-
deterred, they set out to rescue the true king. Allen's tale is eminently predictable,
the tone is a bit sophomoric, and the plotting is, occasionally, sloppy. This novel
390 
* THE BULLETIN
is also, however, a breezy, lighthearted spoof of adventure fantasy plots, with a silly
sense of humor ("Later, they had to cross the River of Blood, slosh through the
Swamp of Anguish, and walk through the Pasture of Randolph. 'Pasture of
Randolph?' Sam had asked. 'I guess Randolph owns it,' Rigby replied") and a
quirky sense of order ("The fist, that's what's real! The right to the jaw, the sword
to the gut! Not that magical junk!"). The attention-grabbing opening (the impris-
oned King Olive's story thus far) launches readers into a swift-moving plot parade
that doesn't let up until the foregone but still funny conclusion. Readers seeking
the painless guffaw, or even the almost-silent-snort, will find it here. JMD
ARRINGTON, AILEEN 
Camp ofthe Angel. Philomel, 2003 
[160p]
ISBN 0-399-23882-4 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
After the departure of their mother four years ago, Jordan and her little brother
(Carson, known as Brother) were left on their own with their shiftless and abusive
father. Now eleven, Jordan misses her mother (whose departure she attributes to
"nerves," though it's clear serious mental problems were the cause) but rarely ques-
tions her strictured island existence and joyless home. Things begin to change,
however, with the children's discovery of a stray white cat, whom they begin to
feed and cherish; when her father's behavior becomes increasingly dangerous (and
illegal), it's his mistreatment of her beloved cat that finally motivates Jordan to
take the necessary steps to stop him. The prose moves somewhat slowly, the de-
scriptive turns sometimes offering more artistic than emotional rewards, but
Arrington's understated style assures that the story doesn't bog down in atmo-
sphere. The plainspoken text straightforwardly and effectively depicts Jordan's
relationship with her stormy father ("It was the wrong tone. It was important not
to use the wrong tone with Papa") and the sad realities of assistance ("Jordan re-
membered that they said it was the law about reporting it. And it was the law
about visiting within twenty-four hours and then they went away andyou stayed"),
and the cat makes an effective device both for the plot and for Jordan's protective
projection. Though somewhat rawer, this will likely please those who enjoyed
Giffs Pictures ofHollis Woods (BCCB 12/02) and who'd like to see another hard-
luck child find the place she deserves. DS
ASHMAN, LINDA 
Babies on the Go; illus. by Jane Dyer. 
Harcourt, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201894-8 
$16.00 
R 2-4 yrs
Ashman, author of Castles, Caves, and Honeycombs (BCCB 5/01) looks here to
animal motion, specifically animal babies in motion. The book begins at the be-
ginning: "Some babies stand up right away.// They take a step, then run and
play.// But many need more time to grow,// so they have other ways to go." This
brief introduction is followed by a rhyming list of ways various babies travel: hu-
man babies "rolling by in baby strollers," koala babies "holding tight to Mother's
shoulders"; sloth babies "swinging in a belly sling," swan babies "sailing snug be-
neath a wing," etc. While Ashman's rhyme is rather singsong and occasionally
technically stretched, toddlers will appreciate the gentle rhythm and quiet tender-
ness. Dyer's meticulously realistic yet fluid watercolors of these parent-child pairs
have a likable gentleness. A final page features thumbnails of the larger illustra-
tions with captions identifying the animals. The text's involving momentum makes
this title an effective readaloud choice, especially if the storytime theme (or class-
JUNE 2003 
* 391
room unit) revolves around non-domestic animals; preschoolers investigating their
own means of motion will be intrigued by the animal world's possibilities. JMD
AUCH, MARY JANE 
Souperchicken; written and illus. by Mary Jane Auch and Herm
Auch. 
Holiday House, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1704-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Henrietta is a discriminating chicken who loves to read, so much so that she neglects
her egg-laying duties on the farm, to the dismay of her aunts Golda and Zoe.
Since "Henrietta wasn't the only hen not laying well," the farmer responds to the
drop in egg production by sending the older hens "on vacation" while keeping the
young Henrietta, who owes him more eggs. The excluded Henrietta is crestfallen
until she reads the writing on the side of the truck taking the old hens on vacation-
"Souper Soup Co."-and realizes the aunts are headed for a soupy doom. On the
way to rescue her aunts, Henrietta saves a truck full of pigs headed to the Saucy
Sausage Company and a truck full of cows bound for the Happy Hamburger
Company, reiterating as she does so, "Please learn to read! Reading can save your
lives!" Eventually (very eventually) Henrietta rescues the aunts, after which she
finds them all (chickens, pigs, cows) a home with a vegetarian farmer who keeps
cows for milk, pigs for digging truffles, and hens for eggs. "And Henrietta took on
an important new career. She became a reading teacher." The joke here is a good
one, but the text is overly long, and the constant reiteration of the reading-is-good-
for-you theme eventually becomes tiresome. The illustrations help lift the title out
of its text-intensive mire, however, since Auch and Auch's computer-enhanced,
animatronic art (according to Mary Jane Auch's website, the medium is oil paint
and digital technology) is slick and shiny, adding a manic energy to events. Despite
the dogmatic message, the clever wordplay (the book Henrietta is reading when
the story opens is Could the Sky Fall? by Chick N. Little) and lively action will
entertain informed listeners as well as newly independent readers. JMD
BATES, KATHARINE LEE America the Beautiful; illus. by Wendell Minor. 
Putnam,
2003 
4 8p
ISBN 0-399-23885-9 
$16.99 
M 
6-10 yrs
Minor supplies watercolor and gouache scenes to accompany all four verses of the
Bates poem that has become, since its 1895 publication, an unofficial national
anthem. Minor's vision tends toward pastoral and wilderness landscape, with the
inclusion of an industrious farmer harvesting his Iowa grain, and canoers paddling
their way through the Florida Everglades. His literal interpretations are generally
predictable, if apt: there's plenty of purple in those mountains towering "above
the fruited plain," and a weathervane angel blasts its trumpet to herald the grace
"God shed" over an autumnal Vermont town. Several pictures, though, are sim-
ply pretty scenes that bear no specific relation to an excerpt or seem to miss the
point entirely. Those beautiful pilgrim feet, of "stern, impassioned stress" fame,
stand stock still, while on the next spread a covered wagon beats their "thorough-
fare for freedom" across Nebraska. A farmer tucking sheaves of wheat beneath his
arm in rolling fields of nonstop gold seems an improbable symbol of any national
flaw in need of mending, or any soul to be confirmed "in self-control." Addenda
include useful information about Bates and her original poem, information about
Samuel Ward (who crafted the melody to which it would eventually be sung), a
reproduction of the song scored as a hymn, annotated thumbnail sketches of all
illustrations, and a numbered U.S. map that displays sites stretching from sea to
392 
* THE BULLETIN
white-space sea. Flip through the pictures, and then encourage kids to discuss
where they believe America's beauty lies. EB
BEL, HILARI 
The Goblin Wood. EOS/HarperCollins, 2003 
294p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-051372-1 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-051371-3 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Makenna is eleven years old when her mother, a hedgewitch, is drowned in the
village pond as a result of the Decree of Bright Magic passed by the religious (and
sorcerous) Hierarch. In revenge for her mother's death, the girl floods the fields
and houses of her former neighbors, after which she flees deep into the woods;
there she encounters the goblins who are being driven from their homes by the
decree. Five years later, Makenna is the general of an army of goblins that besieges
settlers from the Hierarch, driving them from the wood. Concurrently, in the
City of Steps, a mistakenly dishonored knight named Tobin is determined to clear
himself. To that end he undertakes a task for Master Lazur, a leading Hierarch
priest, intending to seek out and destroy the sorceress who bespells and enslaves
the goblins harassing the settlers. Hedgewitch and knight race toward collision in
Bell's intricate fantasy. The goblins capture Tobin, and his imprisonment causes
him to rethink all he has taken as truth. His prejudices against both girl and
goblins fade when he is the recipient of their gruff kindness and witness to their
loyalty and camaraderie. The roaring action here is supported by strong character-
izations grounded in understandable (if not always laudable) motivations. Well-
rounded main characters fight a morally complex villain over ethical issues of unusual
nuance for this type of fast-paced adventure fantasy. The goblin characters are
neatly rendered, and the contrast between their size and their heroism makes them
truly memorable. The low-key potential romance between Tobin and Makenna
in no way undercuts the tension or pace, and the final outcome is in question until
the bittersweet conclusion. Readers who enjoy being swept up in intelligent ac-
tion will leap right in. JMD
BELTON, SANDRA 
PicturesforMissJosie; illus. by Benny Andrews. 
Greenwillow,
2003 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17481-7 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17480-9 
$16.99 
R 
6-9 yrs
A young African-American boy traveling with his father meets Miss Josie, the woman
who supported the father's education and shaped his future. The boy is intimi-
dated by the forceful woman ("She was like a giant, standing there in front of the
sun. Against the row of houses without yards in between. He wondered if she was
the one who had pushed all the houses together"), but she puts him at ease with an
appreciation of his desire to "make pictures." Years later, the boy attends college
in Miss Josie's city; when he goes to see her ("To get the visit over with. And make
his father happy"), he finds that her house is "a home away from home. Just the
way his dad had said." Miss Josie encourages the young man in his passion to
make art, celebrates his graduation, rejoices in his marriage, and lives to meet his
own young son. The poetic language is rich and thoughtful, and the stately pace
offers homage to an African-American woman of singular character. Andrews'
(illustrator of Fraustino's The Hickory Chair, BCCB 3/01) collage and oil paint
pictures are an arresting combination of realistic and interpreted images that re-
flect and expand upon the story. Contrasting dimensions rule in alternately spare
JUNE 2003 
* 393
and complex compositions: the elongated Miss Josie is the dominant figure in the
early pages, the boy tiny in comparison; in later pages Miss Josie is the smaller
figure, and the boy, now grown to a young man, towers over the elderly woman.
Flowers, featured in many of the spreads, are riotous bursts of color and form that
refuse to be repressed despite containment in clay jars or on manicured lawns. A
concluding note explains that the story was "written to honor the memory of
Josephine Carroll Smith," an educator in Washington, D.C., who "opened her
home, her heart, and her purse to numerous young black men who were struggling
to educate themselves. They became her sons." JMD
BOTTNER, BARBARA 
The Scaredy Cats; illus. by Victoria Chess. 
Simon,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83786-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The Scaredy Cats are well named: they're afraid to close the window (it might fall
on Mrs. S. C.'s fingers), so they shiver instead; they're afraid to cook breakfast (the
pan might burn somebody) so they go hungry; they're afraid to bounce Baby Scaredy
Cat in the air (she might go up and never come down), so they're bored, and so on.
At the end of the day, Baby Scaredy Cat points out that avoiding things out of fear
made their lives nearly unbearable, so that it might be equally wise to expect good
things to happen. This is basically a twist on noodlehead tales such as The Stupids
Step Out, and there's some of the same appeal in the silly behavior, in the refrain
("All kinds of things can happen"), and in the cumulative list of the discomforts
their fear makes them endure. This doesn't have the same nonsensical logic, though,
since the fears are somewhat random, and audiences will be quick to ask why Baby
Scaredy Cat waited until today to question what's clearly a long-standing policy;
nor are the fearful ideas expressed with enough humor to make them funny in
their own right. Chess is an interesting illustrator for this project, since her worlds
often suggest a good reason for considerable fear, but there's a squat and solid
domesticity to her furry protagonists that comically underscores their limitations.
Their homey tackiness suits the densely crowded patterns and overstuffed decor of
their feline residence, wherein claustrophobia would be the most logical worry of
all. This is still an amusing sequence, and kids will particularly enjoy the parental
foolishness tempered by the wisdom of the youngster. DS
BROOKS, KEVIN 
Lucas: A Story ofLove and Hate. Chicken House/Scholastic,
2003 
423p
ISBN 0-439-45698-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
In this British import, fifteen-year-old Cait finds her peaceful life with her father
disrupted when her restless older brother, Dominic, comes back from university
for the summer. Dominic is drawn to the troublemaking element in their small
island community, rich Jamie Tait and his hangers-on, not knowing that Jamie
has made it clear he has designs on Cait despite her obvious rejection of him. Into
this tense situation comes Lucas, a boy unlike anyone Cait's ever known; living
rough on the coast, he's despised as a gypsy by the bigoted locals, but Cait is drawn
to his unusual serenity and his perceptiveness. His strangeness makes him an easy
target, however, for Jamie Tait's cunning hate campaign that threatens Lucas' free-
dom and, when mob frenzy has been incited, his life. There are some appealing
elements here-the magnetic, possibly supernatural outsider, the changes in Cait's
relationship with her naive older brother, the shady power structures of the insular
394 
* THE BULLETIN
community-and Brooks is particularly good at using the physical reality of the
semi-isolated island and its natural features to enhance the mood of his story.
Unfortunately, this lacks the tautness that marked his previous book, Martyn Pig
(BCCB 9/02), with Cait's lengthy self-examinations and explanations diffusing
the tension rather than enhancing it. The heavy hand of contrivance is too evident
in the events and in the characters, both the good guys (Lucas seems born for
martyrdom) and the antagonists (their villainy is too pat to be interesting). The
mixture of mob sway and supernatural elements is employed more effectively in
Westall's Yaxley's Cat (BCCB 3/92), but this will definitely have allure for readers
partial to tales of romantic and misunderstood strangers. DS
CAPUZZO, MICHAEL 
Close to Shore: The Terrifing Shark Attacks of1916 
Crown,
2003 
[144p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92231-8 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82231-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 6-10
Why should adults have all the fun? Capuzzo pares down his adult study of the
early twentieth century New Jersey shark attacks for what is certain to be an appre-
ciative middle-school audience. While trimming chapters on biographical back-
ground of the victims and much of the discussion about the shark's menace to the
hotel trade, he retains his edge-of-the-seat narrative style, in which chapters con-
cerning attacks on and response from the human community alternate with recon-
struction (empathetic, but short of anthropomorphized) of the fish's probable
motivation and predatory path. Capuzzo delivers all the terror promised in his
subtitle, but he also explores seriously the social mores and scientific misunder-
standing that heightened both the likelihood of attacks and delay in evacuation.
This account is based on a popular theory that the 1916 attacks were committed
by a single predator, but Capuzzo also acknowledges the controversy surrounding
this view and admits our current grasp of shark behavior cannot settle the ques-
tion. A list of sources is included, as are period photographs and generous excerpts
from contemporary newspapers. Readers can expect to spend the summer bolted
to their beach blankets or watching Jaws reruns from the safety of an armchair.
EB
COLLINS, MARY 
Airborne: A Photobiography of Wilbur and Orville
Wright. National Geographic, 2003 
64p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-6957-8 $18.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Collins ably condenses the Wright Brothers' aeronautical accomplishments into a
picture-packed title that should pump attentive middle-schoolers up to speed on
the technical challenges overcome and the unique fraternal relationship that poised
Orville and Wilbur for success. While biography readers soak up the details of the
brothers' work strategies ("Orville ... loved to bang away on his latest idea ...
Wilbur loved to mull over big ideas"), history buffs can savor period flavor (female
passengers tied down their skirts to protect against "moral hazards") and technophiles
revel in photographs of wind tunnels, engines, and catapults. The requisite phys-
ics of pitch, roll, yaw, and lift are cearly explained in text and accompanying
diagrams, and even readers with limited scientific interest should readily grasp
their importance in early aeronautic design. At a brief but thorough sixty pages,
this title should fill the bill for most report writers, but enthusiasts in search of
JUNE 2003 
* 395
more depth (or, perhaps, altitude?) should taxi on over to Russell Freedman's ac-
claimed The Wright Brothers: How They Invented the Airplane (BCCB 6/91). In-
dex, chronology, and list of resources are appended. EB
CROWE, CHRIS 
Getting Away with Murder: The True Story of the Emmett Till
Case. 
Fogelman, 2003 
128p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8037-2804-2 
$18.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-12
Having dealt with the Emmett Till trial in fictional form (Mississippi Trial 1955,
BCCB 4/02), Crowe now provides a nonfiction exploration of the infamous 1955
case, wherein a fourteen-year-old African-American boy was murdered in Mississippi
for the attention he paid to a white woman. As well as covering the main aspects
of the high-profile trial that controversially exonerated the defendants, the author
provides additional information and insights that help flesh out the picture. The
brief biography of Emmett himself, for instance, brings him into personal focus
and helps put his peer-encouraged daring into context, and the book makes clear
that Emmett Till's mother, with her insistence on bringing her son's body home
to Chicago and making the crime public, played a large role in the events. There's
also some quiet acknowledgment of the striations in white Mississippi society and
the possibility that outside scrutiny, intended to make acquittal difficult, actually
increased its likelihood. The exploration is marred by heavy-handed and dogmatic
tendencies in the prose and the scattered organization, not to mention the absence
of notes in the otherwise generous end matter. Nonetheless, this is a thoughtful
exploration of an incident that many young people will know only as a footnote, if
they know it at all, despite its importance in galvanizing the civil rights movement.
Black-and-white photographs (including the famous Jet magazine image of
Emmett's battered body) appear throughout; a timeline, bibliography, and list of
further resources (but no index or notes) are appended. DS
DERBY, SALLY 
Two Fools and a Horse: An Original Tale; illus. by Robert
Rayevsky. 
Cavendish, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5119-6 $16.95 
R 6-9 yrs
When a sinister-looking peddler appears on the streets of their tiny village, Janski
and Wilhelm, two lazy fellows, decide to follow the peddler, convinced he has
stolen goods in his big blue pack. They puzzle over what the peddler could have
stolen, until Wilhelm has a brain wave: "Farmer Kohl has been missing a horse for
three days now." Undeterred by the fact that the peddler's sack is far too small to
hold a horse, the two simpletons take action: while Janski keeps an eye on the
peddler, Wilhelm fetches Farmer Kohl, the magistrate, and "a dozen or so farmers,
armed with hoes and pitchforks." The men react to Janski and Wilhelm's story
with hoots of derision ("You couldn't get a horse in a bundle that size"), while the
peddler helpfully opens his pack and begins to sort through his wares, showing
pots and pans, a silver-plated accordion, a cuckoo clock, etc. After the farmers
have all bought something and left, "the peddler pulled wide the neck of his bundle.
'Ho! Come, my beauty,' he called with a whistle. There was a rustle and a stir, and
out of the bundle clambered a large brown horse, tossing its mane and stamping
the ground." The sly, ironic text of this combination fool and trickster tale has
both pace and humor, and the style echoes the best of traditional folktales.
Rayevsky's mixed-media illustrations are as clever as the text, and his controlled,
sophisticated technique adds a subtle depth to the visuals; his masterful drafting
396 
* THE BULLETIN
makes the deceptively simple compositions emphatic and strong. Young audi-
ences will appreciate the trickery and ponder the mystery behind it. JMD
DEUKER, CARL 
High Heat. Houghton, 2003 
277p
ISBN 0-618-31117-3 
$16.00 
R Gr. 7-10
Shane Hunter's on a fast track downward after his father, accused of money laun-
dering, succumbs to despair during the investigation and takes his own life. With
their assets seized, the family is forced from their elegant home into public hous-
ing, and Shane slides from the posh Shorelake Academy into public school. Most
devastating is his loss of interest in baseball, but after a brush with the law, the
talented pitcher is required by his probation officer to sign up for the school team.
Shane's talent as a "closer" propels his team to success and the rest should be a
baseball fairy tale, except for the fact that Shane's still got of load of anger to
confront, and he takes his hostility out on Shorelake's best hitter, Reese Robertson,
seriously injuring him with a fastball to the head. Following the "accident," Shane
hits a slump and, after obsessing over Reese's recovery, he determines to help the
hitter regain his confidence. Reese, however, is now permanently reduced to a
"charity case; the scrub who tries so hard everybody roots for him." Their practice
sessions get Shane back to the top of his game, but Reese's career is gone for good.
High Heat joins the Deuker canon (Painting the Black, BCCB 6/97, etc.) with yet
another fine study of a conflicted soul whose ethical salvation is determined in a
sporting arena, and once more readers are left to ponder whether a tainted success
loses its sweet savor. EB
DOWELL, FRANCES O'ROARK 
Where I'dLike to Be. 
Atheneum, 2003 
[240p]
ISBN 0-689-84420-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
After a life staying with various caretakers of various levels of competence, eleven-
year-old Maddie has been at the East Tennessee Children's Home for five months
when her life is changed by the arrival of a new girl. Murphy has glamour and
charisma, much of it due to her exotic life with her parents before they died, and
she's fascinated with Maddie's scrapbooks, especially her scrapbook of houses. It's
Murphy's idea to build a fort, and she involves not only Maddie but also Donita
and Ricky Ray, two other Home residents, and Logan, a geeky classmate, in its
creation. The fort then becomes the center of their lives, a place where they find
comradeship and where they add to the scrapbooks that have become reflections
of all their dreams-until Murphy tries to curry favor with a popular girl by show-
ing her a scrapbook, which then gets ridiculed and destroyed. Dowell gives Maddie's
narration a forthright matter-of-factness that keeps the story from tipping into the
sentimental despite the emotional subject matter (seeing Donita with the adult
mentor Maddie lacks, Maddie says, "A feeling came over me that was both sad and
pretty. I couldn't exactly name what it was") and that makes the book accessible to
advanced younger readers as well. Some readers will realize well before Maddie
does that Murphy's autobiography is pure fiction, but they'll also see, as Maddie
and her friends do, what that fiction means and how important it is. The inclu-
sion of Logan, who has his own family issues despite having two whole parents,
ensures that this resonates as more than just a drama of legally abandoned kids; it's
a story that understands that many young people have to define their own worth
without the help of a family. DS
JUNE 2003 
* 
397
DYSON, MARIANNE J. 
Home on the Moon: Living on a Space Frontier. National
Geographic, 2003 
64p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-7193-9 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Former NASA Mission Control staffer Dyson considers the history and morphol-
ogy of the moon and speculates on its possible commercial development, resource
exploitation, and chances for settlement. The delicate relationships between the
moon's geologic composition, its balance of day- and nightspan, its gravitational
field, and the extant technologies available for lunar development are ably intro-
duced, and cost effectiveness for various undertakings are examined; ample photo-
graphs, imaginative paintings, and supportive diagrams enhance textual discussion.
The recent space-shuttle crash, which seems to have put even relatively modest
extraterrestrial pursuits on hold, undermines the claim "Space exploration is not as
dangerous as it used to be" and unintentionally reminds readers that making the
moon into an economic satellite is now further in the future that it was when this
title went to print. Moreover, Dyson posits her predictions while cavalierly dis-
missing political considerations: "Current international law forbids governments
from owning and selling lunar land. But that could change. One traditional way
to own land is to be the first to live on it.... Owners then may resell the property
for a profit like they do on Earth." While this title probably will not fire up wildly
glamorous imaginings, it should provide an informed reality check for budding
capitalists and empire builders with their eyes on fresh frontiers. A glossary, bibli-
ographies, and an index are included. EB
EASTON, PATRICIA HARRISON 
Davey's Blue-Eyed Frog; illus. by Mike
Wohnoutka. 
Clarion, 2003 
92p
ISBN 0-618-18185-7 
$14.00 
M 
Gr. 3-5
Third-grader Davey is tadpole hunting at a local pond with his friend Becky when
he runs across a talking frog. The frog is an enchanted princess, no less, who
demands, "Stop staring and give me a kiss." Davey is more interested in showing
off a talking frog to his classmates than he is in restoring Princess Amelia to her
human form, so rather than kiss her he drops her into his tackle box and takes her
home. Amelia isn't shy about her demands: she wants food and a comfy place to
sit, and she wants to be kissed so the spell (cast by a wizard in the pay of her
wicked, throne-stealing uncle) will be broken and she can go home. Davey must
weigh his burning desire to show off against his distaste for kissing a frog, but he
ultimately does the right thing. The book unfortunately largely squanders the
humorous premise: the dialogue is stilted, characterizations are minimal, and the
contrived plot has a clumsy denouement. Davey discovers that he should take
better care of his pets (he releases some sadly neglected salamanders and a turtle)
and Amelia gets to go home, but how she got to the pond in the first place, how
she gets back, and where she goes back to are never satisfactorily explained. Black-
and-white drawings make the characters look more adult than juvenile, and the
frog is just too comically cartoony to elicit much sympathy. The slightly oversized
trim size, large font, and wide-leaded text blocks may attract reluctant readers to
this easy chapter book, but fans of fractured fairy tales will be better off with
Scieszka's The Stinky Cheese Man and Other Fairly Stupid Tales (BCCB 10/92) or
Napoli's The Prince of the Pond (12/92). JMD
398 
* THE BULLETIN
EMBERLEY, ED 
Thanks, Mom; written and illus. by Ed Emberley. 
Little,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-316-24022-2 
$15.95 
R 2-4 yrs
Kiko, the circus mouse, ought to know better than to make off with a piece of
cheese (sitting minding its own business on a plate that says "The Delicious Cheese
Company"), but does he? No, indeedy. Kiko snatches up that cheese and hightails
it for home, but he runs into Gato (the cat), who gives chase. It's looking bleak for
Kiko, but then Fido (the dog) starts chasing Gato, and then Otto (the tiger) chases
Fido, and then Mumbo (the elephant) chases Otto, and it looks like there is no
escape for Kiko-until his mother, Koko, gets into Mumbo's face and has a few
words with her. Elephant, tiger, dog, and cat flee the wrath of the protective mama
mouse, and Koko and Kiko go home with the cheese. With its repeated phrases
(which consist essentially of variants on the early lines, "Oh, Kiko, see Gato? Uh-
oh! See Gato run? Run, Kiko, run! Butdon'tdrop thatdelicious cheese! "), Emberley's
text is a masterful piece of narrative engineering; the flashy graphics combine with
the speedy text in a chase-and-escape sequence that will warm the heart of any
toddler thrill-seeker. Ringmaster Emberley visually introduces his cast at the be-
ginning, employing a double-page spread to reveal their talents: Otto the Outra-
geous gets shot out of cannons; Koko plays the saxophone while Kiko the
Courageous rides the high wire; Mumbo the Marvelous balances peanuts on her
nose; Fido the Fabulous is a trapeze artist; and Gato the Glorious is a juggler. With
that introduction for context, listeners will appreciate the clown-like aspects of the
chase that follows, especially the concluding spread on which Kiko thanks his
mother, who replies (in a way that only indulgent mamas can), "You are very
welcome, my little sweetheart darling." Use this in a circus storytime, and get
ready for a three-ring reaction. JMD
ESCKILSEN, ERIK E. 
The Last Mall Rat. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2003 
182p
ISBN 0-618-23417-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Short on cash but long on creativity, fifteen-year-old Mitch Grant markets himself
to beleaguered mall salespersons as a unique "customer service" specialist, a hound
of vengeance who tails troublesome customers out to their cars and terrifies them
by shouting "Caveat emptor!" until they flee. Business is so brisk that Mitch en-
lists the aid of several friends, who all don Hello Kitty masks when they launch
their raids. Jimmy Biggins, however, is the loose cannon in Mitch's set, and when
he physically attacks a customer in the parking lot, it's clear the game has spun out
of control; Mitch must then decide whether he'll blow the whistle on Jimmy and,
necessarily, implicate himself and other friends in the process. Readers will recog-
nize more than a grain of truth in Esckilsen's depiction of mall culture, from the
security guards who profile teens to shoppers who demand clerks' undivided atten-
tion but have no real intention of buying. Where readers are likely to balk, though,
is at Mitch's (and, for that matter Esckilsen's) laundry list of implausible excuses
for his misbegotten project, which includes everything from the downfall of the
central business district to child-labor laws to Jimmy's dismal home life-every-
thing except the kids' own responsibility for an obviously terrible idea. Moreover,
it's pretty obvious that even the Keystone Kops should have rounded up this little
gang long before there was any call for confession. Still, there's an alluring urban-
legend quality to the theme, and kids can add this to their own stock of local mall
lore. EB
JUNE 2003 
* 
399
FARISH, TERRY 
The Cat Who LikedPotato Soup; illus. by Barry Root. 
Candlewick,
2003 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-7636-0834-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 387, for review.
FLEISCHMAN, SID 
Disappearing Act. 
Greenwillow, 2003 
133p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-051963-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-051962-2 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Veteran writer Sid Fleischman himself puts a finger on the strongest and weakest
elements of this comedic adventure: the strongest, in having a character describe
the twelve-year-old narrator as endowed with a "bouncy gift with words"; and the
weakest, in admitting in an author's note to being unable to "figure out a dramatic
scene to wrap things up-until the very last instant. Suddenly there it was. Like a
jack-in-the-box." Yes, and yes again. The voice of narrator Kevin is fresh and full
of surprises as he and his twenty-one-year-old opera-singing sister, Holly, flee from
New Mexico to California to dodge a stalker (whom they nickname "The Toad")
after discovering that their mother has disappeared on an archeological dig in
Mexico. Apt and funny observations abound: Holly's voice coach looks "like a
sumo wrestler in a feathered hat" and wears "earrings that swung around like wreck-
ing balls when she turned her head"; as the pace hurtles toward climax, Kevin
discovers that "the string section had two dentists and a psychiatrist in it. I was
glad to know that if Holly got a toothache or went crazy on stage, help was right
there in the orchestra pit." Also enjoyable are the references to children's books
about other scary journeys, such as The Wolves of Willoughby Chase, Smith, The
Lord of the Rings, and, most strategic to the plot, Where the Wild Things Are (R. L.
Stine gets thrown in as a side joke). Less satisfying is the coincidence of Holly's
discovering a significant plot point from an out-of-town newspaper she just hap-
pens to pick up ("and wouldn't you know it"). The wrap-up too seems contrived
and abrupt, as a cast who has engaged us suddenly disbands-or maybe the child-
hood book that Kevin never finds, the one with the secret map their mother left
them, presages a sequel? BH
FOREMAN, 
MICHAEL 
Wonder Goal!; written and illus. by Michael
Foreman. 
Farrar, 2003 
26p
ISBN 0-374-38500-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
It's the new kid's first soccer match and he's out to prove himself to his teammates,
guys who share the "same impossible dream of one day becoming world class soc-
cer stars." And he does it-kicks a "screamer" right beyond the outstretched fin-
gers of the goalie. Now freeze that frame. Segue from brilliant green field to
restful blue bedroom where the boy sleeps surrounded by posters of his soccer
heroes; then flash to the slightly duller bedroom where his dad used to sleep, sur-
rounded by posters of his soccer heroes ("His dad was not going to see the wonder
goal. It wouldn't be in the papers and it wouldn't be on the telly. His dad was
going to miss it"). Fast forward to a different goalie, an adult who misses the ball
driven just beyond the goalie's outstretched fingers. It's the World Cup, and the
boy is now a pro who's kicked another bomb, "Just like the goal he had scored all
those years before on that freezing boyhood Sunday." Still with us? It's question-
able whether young viewers are, as Foreman toggles between fields and bedrooms,
400 
* THE BULLETIN
past and present, wish and memory, all shadowed by a cloud of mild anxiety about
whether the player's father is among the spectators. The timelessness of soccer
mania is undoubtedly the focus here, but the jumbled images and underdeveloped
themes of rookie player and inspirational parent will leave many listeners scratch-
ing their heads. Still, kids who can brush aside the plot for the uncomplicated
pleasures of fast moves, rough tumbles, and thunderous applause should be well
satisfied with Foreman's vivid watercolor portrayal and dream themselves onto the
team. EB
FRANCO, BETSY 
Mathematickles!; illus. by Steven Salerno. 
McElderry,
2003 
34p
ISBN 0-689-84357-7 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
"Mathematickles" are poems using mathematical formats and symbols as integral
aspects of their verse, here arrayed seasonally starting with autumn ("holes + nuts -
nuts = squirrel hide & seek") and going through the year to summer ("lightningbugs
x jar = summer lantern"). Multiplication, division, fractions, even graphs get in on
the act, with up to five verse "problems" per spread. Some of the math is fairly
arbitrarily applied (there's little conceptual difference between some of the multi-
plication problems and the addition sums), and there's a fair bit of cheating here
and there (what looks like math is sometimes just concrete poetry); not all of the
aggregations are clever beyond the mathematical component. It's quite an inge-
nious idea, however, and there are several cunning entries that will capture youth-
ful attention; Franco also has a good sense of season-evoking detail, so the entries
genuinely reflect the cyclic changes of the year in a way that young readers will
recognize. There's definite flair to the kitschy retro art, which relies on the squiggles,
streamlined abstracted figures, and vibrant party colors of 1960s advertising; un-
fortunately, the art overpowers rather than enhances the quiet atmospherics of the
verse and visually buries the brief lines in the energetic, high-impact compositions.
Drawbacks notwithstanding, this begs to be used as the center of a classroom as-
signment, either for straight poetry or for an inspired math crossover. DS
FRANK, E. R. 
Friction. Jackson/Atheneum, 2003 
197p
ISBN 0-689-85384-X 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Twelve-year-old Alex loves her alternative school, her longtime classmates, and
especiallyher devoted teacher, Simon, and she's looking forward to the class camping
trip. New girl Stacy seems at first to be an enhancement, sharing family secrets
with Alex and bringing a rakish worldliness to the ensemble, but then she begins to
undermine the group's cohesion by suggesting that Simon's interest in Alex goes
well beyond the teacherly. Stacy's insinuations are so effective that the class-and
even Alex-begins to question and reexamine Simon's behavior, and when Stacy
accuses Simon of molesting her, Alex is unable to muster a convincing denial. The
book concludes by treating its heroine somewhat unfairly, giving Alex a rather
unrealistic amount of power and, therefore, blame; up until then, however, it's an
intriguingly nuanced account of a young girl's struggle to understand a compli-
cated situation. Alex's self-examination is both realistic and realistically limited-
she's honest enough to be aware that she finds Simon's affectionate touches
pleasurable and that her body is beginning to be capable of different kinds of
pleasure, but it's still hard for her to assess the meaning of all this physicality.
Frank interestingly complicates the question with some innocent but seriously
JUNE 2003 
* 401
naive lapses of judgment on Simon's part, with good-hearted adult orthodoxy that
leaves Alex on her own in the face of Stacy's increasingly dangerous insinuations,
and with classmates whose own adolescence leaves them piqued by the gossip as
well as confused by the situation. Aside from being a thoughtful and compelling
read, this would be a terrific book for opening up a provocative discussion about
the ethics of teacher-student relations as well as the actions of Alex, Stacy, and
Simon. DS
FRAZEE, MARIA 
Roller Coaster; written and illus. by Marla Frazee. 
Harcourt,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-15-204554-6 
$16.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
Within the line snaking its way toward the Rocket there stands a skeptical but
game little gal who "has never ridden on a roller coaster before, ever." The size and
noise is intimidating, but she allows her father to guide her into the front car.
Then "WHOOSH! Most people scream. Some people can't make a sound. And
one person [guess who?] can't even open her eyes." When the thrill's over, though,
and the riders variously sprint and wobble their way down the ramp, she's a full-
fledged convert, ready to go again. Of course the little girl is too immersed in her
own experience to note the people around her, but nothing escapes Frazee, who
pictorially documents the reaction of the other ten riders, from the senior citizens
who clearly embrace coasters as a lifelong passion, to the teenagers clutching and
smooching in the last seat, to the burly, bulging-muscled twentysomethings who
exit scrunching their eyes and grabbing their guts. Yellow cars on red track zoom
gracefully across airy white space, and bright red text follows the course of twists
and loops and turns until the ride slows to a stop and the font returns to sober
black. Here's an enticement to reluctant first timers and a promise of great things
to come for kids still too young to pull down the lap bar. EB
GERSTEIN, MORDICAI 
Sparrow Jack; written and illus. by Mordicai
Gerstein. 
Foster/Farrar, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-374-37139-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
In this fact-based picture book, Gerstein tells the story of nineteenth-century En-
glishman John Bardsley, who grows up a lover of birds, especially the English
sparrow. He misses the sparrows when he emigrates to Philadelphia, and when an
inchworm infestation devastates the city, he has an idea: bring over 1,000 om-
nivorous English sparrows to chow down on the pests. The idea is a startling one,
but the sparrows settle happily into their new home, curb the inchworm popula-
tion, and expand their numbers, making Bardsley a happy man. This is a deftly
turned story about an interesting historical tidbit, but it's rather alarmingly blinkered
about an important fact: Bardsley's action (and a similar importation before his,
which the book never mentions) was actually very ecologically destructive, result-
ing in the spread of an invader species that's displaced and harmed native bird
populations; no matter how well-meaning Bardsley may have been and how much
short-term use there was in limiting the annoying insects, his bird importation was
itselfa damaging act. The illustrations are nonetheless zestful and effective: Gerstein
gives his compositions a sparrowlike busyness that makes their period scenes lively
and entertaining. His scrawling line adds both comedy and atmosphere, while the
changing layouts help visually pace the story; both pertly perching birds and squirmy
inchworms have an energetic and, appropriately, nearly overwhelming presence,
402 
* THE BULLETIN
decorating and breaking the framed borders as well as infiltrating the scenes them-
selves. Overall, this is an amiable title despite its rather significant flaw; interesting
assignments might come of using it in conjunction with material that gives a dif-
ferent view of the sparrows' presence in the U.S. DS
GLICK, SUSAN 
One Shot. Holt, 2003 
218p
ISBN 0-8050-6844-9 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Lorrie's expectation of spending her summer lounging by her father's pool before
she starts her senior year is set aside when she gets the opportunity to work with
the world-famous photographer Molly Price. Her stepmother is helping the aging
Molly put her affairs in order, and she asks Lorrie to help sort and catalog a life-
time of papers, photographs, and memories so that they can be archived and made
available to future generations. At first intimidated by this gruff and difficult old
woman, Lorrie soon begins to cherish their time together, and she gathers her
courage to ask Molly to help her with her own photographic aspirations. Lorrie
has some talent, but she finds through her disappointingly conventional photo-
graphs that she is just as buttoned down as her straitlaced father, preventing failure
by managing risk and backing off from emotionally charged or intellectually chal-
lenging situations. As her relationship with Molly deepens and she spends more
time looking at life through the lens of her camera, Lorrie learns a new economy of
academic and affective success, one that measures the worth of an outcome by the
amount of difficulty and risk involved. Glick manages the unfolding of Lorrie's
emotional and intellectual capabilities without condescension; her transition from
conservative introvert to someone who is willing to play just slightly out of her
league is believable and engaging, and the ups and downs of Molly's endgame are
poignantly real. Readers who aspire to artistic achievement, as well as those deal-
ing with their own aging loved ones, will relate to Lorrie's challenges. KC
GOING, K.L. Fat Kid Rules the World. Putnam, 2003 
[192p]
ISBN 0-399-23990-1 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 9-12
At six foot one and nearly three hundred pounds, Troy Billings has but one dream-
to make an inconspicuous exit from the world. Filthy, emaciated, usually home-
less Curt MacCrea finds him contemplating the subway tracks, claims to have
saved his life, and demands a free meal. Curt has something to offer, too: a new
dream for Troy, in which he's the drummer in Curt's proposed punk band, Rage/
Tectonic. Troy knows he's being cajoled, wheedled, and manipulated by Curt at
every turn, but an immediate rise in his social status convinces him to stay aboard
this train; Curt is indeed a gifted guitarist and a school legend, and any friend of
Curt is a force to be reckoned with. Troy has no drumming experience, but he's
swept into the current of Curt's determination, and by gad, he actually learns to
drum, or at least to provide the powerhouse banging that can drive the real star's
screaming riffs and raging lyricism. Troy's contemptuous younger brother begins
to offer some respect, and Mr. Billings, an ex-Marine who believes anything can be
achieved through will and discipline, surprises Troy by encouraging his efforts and
treating Curt with unexpected kindness. Going draws her characters with com-
passionate acuity; Troy's bumbling advance toward drumming competence and
self-respect is funny and heart-wrenching, while Curt's semi-stoned rush at star-
dom exposes both his brokenness and his promise. Likewise, Going cuts through
JUNE 2003 
* 403
the theatrical pretenses of punk rock to capture the angst and artistry. The lan-
guage is raw, but the relationships are tender, and readers who followed the sadder
fortunes of Koertge's Stoner and Spaz (BCCB 3/02) will grasp thankfully at the
possibility of double salvation. EB
GREENBERG, JAN 
Runaway Girl: The Artist Louise Bourgeois; by Jan Greenberg
and Sandra Jordan. 
Abrams, 2003 
80p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8109-4237-2 
$19.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Greenberg and Jordan, premier art writers for young people (Vincent Van Gogh,
BCCB 6/01, etc.), turn to the life and work of contemporary sculptor Louise Bour-
geois, describing her childhood in France during and after World War I, her move
to New York, where she raised a family and continued her sculptural exploration,
and her leap into artistic prominence in the 1960s. As usual with living artists, the
authors draw not only on published material but also on direct interviews, in this
case with the subject and with her longtime assistant, so that Bourgeois' own voice
dominates the narrative, enhanced by the additional information and contextual
insight provided by the authors. Lavish use of photography, much of it color,
helps remind readers of the visual importance of the subject's work, and the juxta-
position of family photographs and biographical discussion with relevant sculp-
tures is particularly rewarding, rather like a thoughtfully produced exhibition.
Budding artists will find both the history and the explication of process stimulat-
ing, and prospective museum visitors will find the background information en-
hances their viewing considerably. Meticulous and helpful end matter includes a
timeline of important dates, a handy short example of "How to Look at a Sculp-
ture," a list of museums containing Bourgeois' work, a glossary, a bibliography and
endnotes, lists of Bourgeois' artwork chronologically and by chapter, and an in-
dex. DS
HARRAR, GEORGE Not as Crazy as I Seem. 
Houghton, 2003 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-618-26365-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Devon is obsessed with counting to the number four, avoiding
germs, buttoning all the buttons on his shirts (which are arranged in his closet
according to color), and engaging in other forms of ritualistic, compulsive behav-
ior that essentially control his life. Devon doesn't see it that way, though; he sees
his behavioral eccentricities as the way to keep bad things, uncontrollable things,
from happening. His parents are hoping the move to a new town, new school, and
new therapist will help Devon get over his problem, but it isn't until his behaviors
get him into deep trouble that Devon is motivated to make a serious effort. A
strong plot peopled by believable characters makes what could have been another
programmatic novel about obsessive-compulsive disorder in teenagers (see Hesser's
Kissing Doorknobs, BCCB, 9/98) an intriguing character study instead. Minor
players are also well developed: Devon's parents are not only complex individuals
but a complex couple, with dynamics that would tickle any psychotherapist; Devon's
new friend, Tanya, is a quirky, brave young woman who is willing to believe that
Devon is more than his behavioral tics; even Ben, the catalyst for Devon's trouble
in school, has a backstory that hints at a darker life. (The weakest character is
Devon's therapist, Dr. Wasserman, but that may be because, like many effective
therapists, he makes Devon do all the work.) The conclusion seems to wrap up
404 
* THE BULLETIN
both Devon's school trouble and his OCD with a very neat bow, but the closing
line indicates that only extensive efforts will keep Devon from replacing one com-
pulsion with another. It is a tribute to Harrar's strong characterizations that read-
ers will not only believe Devon can do it, they'll be rooting for him. JMD
HARRISON, METTE IVIE 
The Monster in Me. 
Holiday House, 2003 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-8234-1713-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Thirteen-year-old Natalie is grimly resigned to her foster-care placement with the
Parkers, but she'd be far happier back in the group home, where expectations were
lower and she was able to slide through life unobserved. She slowly begins to
adjust to the Parkers, realizing that they're not the perfect family she had envi-
sioned but instead a family succeeding in the face of their own strains and ob-
stacles, and she slowly dares to connect with the people around her, especially
through her love of running, which nets her a place on the cross-country team.
The hardest thing of all, though, will be forgiving and starting again with her
recovering-addict mother, and Natalie's not sure that she'll be able to-or even
wants to-do it. This is fairly programmatic, from Natalie's periodically interpo-
lated monster dreams of convenient symbolism to the nice girl at school with her
own dark past to the occasional tendency towards sentimentality ("I really won.
And it feels like it was more than just a race"). Underneath the predictability,
however, is some solid storytelling about a girl who hasn't had much help finding
her place in the world and who therefore isn't entirely sure of what to do when she
has a chance at one. The story is, like Natalie's running, well paced, and her joy in
her athletic prowess is effectively conveyed; the open-ended conclusion has an
honesty missing from some foster-child sagas. This doesn't have the polish of
Paterson's classic The Great Gilly Hopkins, but it's still an accessible tale of a girl's
tentative but crucial growth. DS
HICKS, BETTY Animal House and Iz. 
Roaring Brook, 2003 
172p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2746-0 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1891-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Elizabeth (Iz) has settled in well with her three stepbrothers; so well, in fact, that
she's ready to collude in their Get-a-Dog plan, a covert operation in which the
siblings will bring home a string of approved pets (animals that can be left alone
for three days) that are so obnoxious the parents will be fairly begging to acquire a
nice, normal pooch. Releasing the cricket into the parents' bedroom gains the kids
nothing but two overtired, unapproachable adults; feeding the menagerie rich food
does produce a desired bout of diarrhea, but it costs the beloved hedgehog its life.
Worst of all, the contentious parrot infects brother Jack with psittacosis and lands
him in the hospital. Ultimately, though, confessions are made, all is forgiven, and
there will be a new addition to the household-a baby. As the predictable dog plot
proceeds apace, another storyline follows Iz's mother's efforts to take Iz back into
her own custody. Iz's guilt over preferring her stepmother's casual housekeeping
and boisterous clan over her own mother's polished formality is certainly credible,
but the problem's resolution (Iz's mother consoles herself by getting a dog of her
own and offers to dog-sit any pup the new wife's clan may adopt) both diminishes
her mother's claims to maternal devotion and stretches the limits of amicable di-
vorce. This isn't as sharp a portrayal of blended family antics as Hicks' ISmellLike
JUNE 2003 
* 405
Ham (BCCB 10/02), but readers who've crusaded unsuccessfully for pets will be
sympathetic. EB
HOLT, KIMBERLY WILLIS 
Keeper of the Night. Holt, 2003 
308p
ISBN 0-8050-6361-7 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-12
"My mother died praying on her knees. Her rosary beads were still in her hands
when we found her. She left no note, said no good-byes, gave no last hugs or
kisses. Only the empty bottle of sleeping pills that had rolled under her bed proved
that she'd meant to leave." This bereavement leaves thirteen-year-old Isabel to
take care of her increasingly disturbed little brother and sister as her father retreats
to his fishing boat. Though it is clear from their memories that Isabel's beautiful
mother had been declining in a long depression, none of the members of the ex-
tended Chamorro family can deal with the loss; friendships consequently change
and Isabel's brother, too, eventually tries to commit suicide. The author of My
Louisiana Sky (BCCB 6/98) and When Zachary Beaver Came To Town (12/99) has
moved away from her southern settings to a village on the island of Guam, and
from her more traditional narratives to one- or two-page chapters that form a
kaleidoscopic impression of Isabel's journey through tumultuous feelings and epi-
sodes. This storytelling technique, which draws on observations, poems, lists, and
even recipes, results in a sense of fragmentation for the reader; but perhaps that is
the point, since Isabel's life has itself been fragmented. As primary characters
deepen, secondary characters become familiar, and as the book nears its climax
and conclusion, the shifting pieces stabilize into a collage. Isabel's family finally
undergoes confrontation and counseling, with hope of healing. The first half of
the novel may require patience from young adult readers, but the brevity and
rhythm of the segments should carry them toward the dramatic action. An intro-
ductory author's note cites Holt's childhood experiences in Guam during her father's
military service. BH
HORNIMAN, JOANNE 
Mahalia. Knopf, 2003 
184 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92325-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82325-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Life as a new mother proves too much for Emmy, and when she leaves, Matt finds
himself a single teen father, looking for a place to live and raise their baby, Mahalia.
His mother offers to let them live with her, but Matt wants to prove that he can
care for his daughter on his own. He and Mahalia find a house on a street "inhab-
ited almost entirely by people like themselves . . . where untidy lives were lived
temporarily and happily." Here Matt grieves the loss of Emmy and tries to decide
what he wants to do with his life, but most of his time, his mental energy, and, as
a result, the plot of the book, are consumed with the day-to-day trials of having
complete care of an infant. Before Mahalia, Matt had no real plans for his future,
and her birth does not really energize him in that direction; his only real passion is
to be Mahalia's father, and for the time being, caring for her seems to be all he can
manage. Horniman provides scant context for the non-Australian to situate the
characters, their lifestyles, their homes, or even the social services that constrain
and/or enable their choices, but the ethos resonates nonetheless; Matt's longing
for Emmy, his conflicted feelings about his dad, and his budding affection for his
roommate, Eliza, seep into the reader slowly, rendering him as a character both
real and close. Most affecting is his relationship with Mahalia: his senses ofwon-
406 
* THE BULLETIN
der and responsibility are tangible, and though he often experiences her presence
as a burden, he feels her absence as a physical pain. The pace is the main problem
here; the book moves awfully slowly, but the patient and sensitive reader will find
a realistic picture of life with baby and will come away affirmed in the fact that a
life connected to such love, difficult though it may be, is ultimately worth the
trouble. KC
INGMAN, BRUCE 
Bad News! I'm in Charge!; written and illus. by Bruce
Ingman. 
Candlewick, 2003 
[26p]
ISBN 0-7636-2072-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Responding to that perennial child fantasy of world domination, this book plays
out the predictable scenario of a boy who turns adult rules on their head and lives
to regret it. Banished yet again by a mother wielding an enormous index finger
("OUTSIDE NOW! And take that THING with you"), a young boy and his
metal detector (the "thing" to which his mother refers) discover a charter that
allows him to rule the world. At first the new kid-friendly rules are fun, if banal
and cliched ("Stay up late... snacks all the time... wild parties every week"), but
soon the responsibilities of leadership (again predictable and cliched--"Kiss ba-
bies ... Launch ship ... Judge beauty contest") prove too heavy a mantle to bear.
The boy delegates his more onerous responsibilities to square-headed men in gray
suits so that he can retain the more desirable role of his fantasy as "president of
fun." The acrylic illustrations have plenty of energy, especially in their vibrant
hues and naively drafted figures; squiggly black lines and bits of interpolated col-
lage add to the carnivalesque flavor. The approach becomes forced, however, in
the playfully intrusive narration; there are even "terms and conditions for reading"
that include "when you get to the end, say, 'Again, please!'" and "no sticky fingers
or ripping pages." Rather than capturing a child's perspective, this is clearly an
adult playing at a child's perspective, rendering attempts to be cute and conspira-
torial more pushy and patronizing. Still, the fantasy is compelling, and it will no
doubt spark imaginative adaptations for youthful despotic wannabes. KC
JONES, MELANIE DAVIS 
Pigs Rock!; illus. by Bob Staake. 
Viking, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-670-03581-5 $15.99 
R 
3-5 yrs
The title makes the premise of this musical picture book perfectly clear: the mem-
bers of a porcine rock-and-roll band get raves from fans ("Fans clap. Fans cheer.//
It's the pig rock band they love to hear"). The activities of the piggy band include
playing concerts, sleeping late, and hitching a ride on an ice-cream truck after their
bus breaks down. The rhyming text, which limns the success of the porcine musi-
cians, has a syncopated rhythm, and the art is slickly digital. Staake's geometric
compu-cubism relies on a palette of eggplant, aqua, and other decorator tones.
The roly-poly pigs' clothing reflects the breadth of their musical repertoire: the
bass player dresses in countrified jeans and a checked shirt, the pianist wears a
black suit and sunglasses, the drummer favors beach shorts and flowered shirt, and
the lead guitar sports jailhouse stripes (perhaps echoing Elvis in order to "rock
with 'Blue Suede Shoes'"). Kids who know enough about rock bands to appreci-
ate the references may find the format somewhat youthful, but listeners who ap-
preciate the backbeat will be ready to do the storytime rock and roll. JMD
JUNE 2003 
* 407
KAY, VERLA Homespun Sarah; illus. by Ted Rand. 
Putnam, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23417-9 
$15.99 
R 4-6 yrs
Here's a picture-book preparation-or substitute-for those family trips to his-
torical enactments where everybody walks around in costumes and demonstrates
how things were done in the old days. The opening double-page spread sets the
pace, which is brisk both in its trochaic dimeter verse ("Homespun Sarah,/Braided
head./ Warm quilt, snuggle,/ Feather bed") and in Rand's dynamic watercolors.
Quickening a young viewer's attention is a bright white cutout with a rooster
facing an image of the same size on the recto: Sarah's pillowed head, her eyes
startled awake by the crowing cock. Subsequent pages are varied in composition
and design, with effective use of deep washes and open contrasts in both outdoor
and indoor scenes. The process of making a new dress for Sarah, from washing
and drying flax through spinning, dyeing, weaving, and sewing, ends the book in
a whirl of excitement matched only by the appearance of a big black bear during an
earlier berry-picking scene. Despite the enthusiastic presentation, this is not a
totally idyllic scenario: the outhouse is smelly, and Mother's skirt burns from the
cooking fire; in addition, the author's note tells us-among other things-that
children were not allowed to sit or speak during meals and that "a girl would wear
her only dress every day for as long as it fit, even ifit was a year or more." Pictures
of a clean and happy crew belie such hardships, but preschoolers needn't have their
introduction to Colonial Pennsylvania be dreary, and surely life in the 1700s fea-
tured children as irrepressible as many are today. BH
KOJA, KATHE 
Buddha Boy. 
Foster/Farrar, 2003 
[128p]
ISBN 0-374-30998-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
The weird, dumpy kid with the dragon t-shirts and perpetual grin is the last person
on earth Justin wants to work with on an economics assignment. He soon finds it
difficult, though, to ignore Jinsen's awesome artistic ability or to criticize the un-
flappable calm with which his sophomore classmate accepts ridicule and abuse at
school. As their mutual interest in art draws them toward friendship, Justin learns
about the tragedies in the boy's life that turned Michael Martin into "Jinsen,"
whose adherence to Buddhism began as a way to manage a violent temper and
became a fulfilling way of life. Understanding and sympathy aren't enough, how-
ever, and Justin is forced to take a public stand against bullies out to destroy Jinsen's
chances for a prestigious art academy scholarship. Koja enriches a standard do-
the-right-thing storyline by exploring, through Justin's perspective, the tension
between Jinsen's noble ideals and his unrelenting patience that could itself test the
patience of any average teen. Details of a school culture that benignly ignores
rampant bullying will, unfortunately, ring true for many readers, but a hope-filled
ending for Jinsen will leave spirits at peace. EB
KORNBLATT, MARC 
Izzy's Place. McElderry, 2003 
118p
ISBN 0-689-84639-8 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Ten-year-old Henry is angry: his parents are constantly fighting, and he feels out
of control and alone. Since his rage over their fights leads to fits of uncontrollable
screaming, his doctor and his parents feel it is best for him to spend the summer
with his grandmother. Here, his resentment continues unabated, but it is the
408 
* 
THE BULLETIN
anger of grieving; his beloved grandfather has died, depriving Henry of his favorite
companion and most trusted confidant. His expressions of temper are appropri-
ately little-boyish-he is snappish with his grandmother and the neighbor who
tries to befriend him, and he gets into a fistfight with a boy his own age with whom
his grandmother arranges a play date. When he is injured during a vandal attack
on his neighbor's property, he begins to come to terms with his situation, realizing
that while his anger can't change anything, it can hurt the people who care about
him. Kornblatt passes no overt judgments on Henry's insensitive parents, but it's
painfully clear that they are too self-involved to help Henry. However, his neigh-
bor, who is himself grieving the loss of his son Izzy and the impending death of his
wife, gently ushers Henry into his more mature understanding of sorrow and wel-
comes him as a partner in a pain that will never entirely disappear but that may
diminish with sharing. While the emotional resolution comes quickly and the gap
Izzy has left in his father's life provides a rather convenient space for Henry to fill,
the author avoids rosy platitudes and unambiguously happy endings in favor of a
satisfyingly plausible experience of intergenerational male bonding. Young read-
ers coping with difficult situations will readily relate to both the grieving and the
recovering Henry. KC
KRAFT, ERIK P. 
Lenny andMel's Summer Vacation; written and illus. by Erik P.
Kraft. 
Simon, 2003 
58p
ISBN 0-689-85108-1 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-5
Twin brothers Lenny and Mel are planning an uneventful summer spent lying
down-no camp and lots of rest-even though their parents have other ideas.
Embracing inertia with a passion usually reserved for sports and/or food, the twins
remain as inactive as possible despite their parents' best efforts (a visit to Animal
Town, a trip to the library, a vacation in a remote cabin with some very strange-
smelling couches, etc.) to engage them in anything other than lolling about. De-
spite the brothers' insistence on doing as little as possible, the chapters are packed
with incident: the boys manage to create inedible lunches out of bologna and old
turkey stuffing, individual swimming pools out of garbage bags, and summer-
reading book reports out of advertising pamphlets from the drugstore ("The Many
Faces of Pimples") and the hardware store ("How to Tell If You Have Termites").
There may not be much narrative depth here, and the characterizations are not
exactly complex, but there are some gleeful moments, both between the boys them-
selves and the boys and their grownups (including a very funny car game of "Do-
nut Pass," inspired by the road sign, "Do Not Pass"). The episodic chapters are
given thematic continuity by the organization of the book into the three summer
months (June, July, and August) and by the consistently jokey banter between the
brothers. Goofy pen-and-ink cartoons add to the slapstick feel of the boys' efforts
to do as little as possible. High art this isn't, but hey, it's summer vacation. JMD
KRISHNASWAMI, UMA 
Chachaji's Cup; illus. by Soumya Sitaraman. 
Children's
Book Press, 2003 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-89239-178-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
When he was younger, Neel was very close to Chachaji, his father's uncle; he and
his friend Daniel spent hours in his company, playing in the backyard, watching
Hindi movies, or hearing stories of Indian history. One of these stories features
JUNE 2003 
* 
409
Chachaji's mother, who at the partition of India and Pakistan traveled to India
carrying a delicate china teacup ("She knew-if this teacup got to India without
breaking, she would get to India without breaking"), from which Chachaji now
insists on drinking his tea. As Neel grows older, he starts to grow away from the
old man, who's showing signs of increasing age; when an inattentive Neel acciden-
tally breaks Chachaji's teacup, that seems to be the harbinger of Chachaji's own
downturn. Neel's solution (he glues the cup together, and a restored Chachaji
returns home) is somewhat pat, but Krishnaswami unfolds her story gently and
unforcedly, and both Chachaji's playful companionability and Neel's drifting away
are quietly credible. The included details of Indian history (still largely absent
from U.S. literature for young people) are dramatic, and they're carefully chosen
for audience accessibility. Sitaraman's draftsmanship sometimes tips from the naive
into the ungainly and awkward on the figures, but the strong, often spicy colors
emphasize the warmth of the story, and the solid brushstrokes keep the scenes in
memory and description from being too fancifully wispy. There are dramatic
stories in many families, and many young people will relate to Chachaji's even as
they clamor to tell their own. DS
LEVIN, BETTY 
Shoddy Cove. 
Greenwillow, 2003 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-052272-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-052271-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
The fog that rolls in on Cossit Island combines with Clare's work in the nineteenth-
century living museum and the mysterious presence of the two apparently homeless
children to ignite her imaginative fantasies: are these children really travelers from
the past, looking to escape an evil songmaster who sought out runaway slaves on
this very island? Reality turns out be far more prosaic, in the present at least.
Adam and his half-sister are in fact runaways, and they enlist Clare's reluctant help
in getting word to their relatives so that they won't have to enter foster care. Clare
finds herself unable to resist helping Adam and May make contact with his father's
family, even though it means lying to her mother and stealing food. Her small
moral dilemma mirrors a larger one that the children discover. While hiding out
in a secret room (probably a stop on the Underground Railroad), they unearth the
story of a murder that took place on the island in 1836, involving a man trying to
capture some runaway slaves that the village is hiding from authorities. At issue in
both narratives is the commitment to help those who need it, even when such help
puts one at moral or physical risk. Both the present dilemma of the children and
the historical tale of the escaped slaves are doled out in suspenseful interplay, keeping
readers involved until the end. Certain loose ends are left dangling, and readers are
left wondering over the success of Adam's and May's integration into their new
family, but the treatment of history and its relation to the present are subtly effective
and openly engaging. KC
LUBAR, DAVID 
Wizards ofthe Game. 
Philomel, 2003 
166p
ISBN 0-399-23706-2 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Mercer is a passionate fantasy gamer, and his idea to turn the annual eighth-grade
charity fundraiser into a gamers' convention should make his Social Studies teacher
very happy, bring him closer to luscious but unattainable committee member
Michelle, and make him a hero among gamers throughout the region. The third
410 
* THE BULLETIN
committee member, Ed, vehemently objects to gaming and launches a newspaper
campaign to rally protests against Mercer's project. Here, on an authorial roll of
the dice, the plot takes an abrupt twist as four residents of the homeless shelter that
will benefit from the fundraiser turn out to be displaced wizards, and Mercer and
his gaming buddies try to reopen a portal to return them to their home world.
Having unleashed this plot monster, Lubar is hard pressed to tame it. 
What
begins as a lively tale of level-headed kids standing up for their recreational rights
spins into a health-class-styled admonition for safe sorcery, as the kids' advertising
statues take on evil lives, a monster emerges from the art-room kiln, Donny the
janitor (also a wizard, and a heckuva nice guy, too) saves the day, and everyone
learns a lesson: "I followed his gaze to the scattered statues, lying like broken
corpses on a battlefield. In my mind, I saw what it would be like if they were flesh
and blood rather than paper and paste." In the end Lubar's point may be ambigu-
ous, but the battle scene pitting junior high against fantasy forces of darkness will
probably make the game worth the candle. EB
LUM, KATE 
Princesses Are Not Quitters!; illus. by Sue Hellard. 
Bloomsbury,
2003 
[32p]
ISBN 1-58234-762-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Three sisters (Allie, Mellie, and Libby), princesses all, "lived in a huge silver palace
by the sea with roses all around." Not satisfied with opulence and wealth, they
decide to alleviate their boredom by trading places with three servant girls, be-
cause, as Princess Libby says, "Servants have all the fun!" The princesses-cum-
servant girls descend upon the housekeeper, Mrs. Blue, who, at their demand, puts
them to work. After doing morning chores, the royals are tired, but they continue
unflaggingly with their afternoon chores and their evening chores because "they
didn't want anyone to say that princesses are quitters." By the end of the night
(and after missing all their meals), the three pooped princesses fall into an ex-
hausted sleep. The next day, having washed a laundry load in their maids' aprons,
the princesses have an epiphany. Together they make a proclamation establishing
servant benefits that would make any union proud: "YOU HAVE TO ... SLEEP
IN every day until nine and WORK no more than you can do and REST when-
ever you are tired and EAT when you are hungry too and SPEND an hour every
day just SITTING in the gardens and HAVE holidays every year and let's have
FUN!" The text here is wordy and repetitive, but that won't stop the princess-
lovers in the patron pool. The frothy illustrations offset the purposive point of the
story with beaucoup de bouffant hairdos, poodle crowns, and lots of pink and purple
(hair, dresses, wallpaper, furniture, etc.). Touches of visual cleverness (the final
page features a copy-worthy coat of arms with domestic tools rampant) add pi-
quancy to the sometimes swirly mlange of lines and shapes. This is overlong for
a single readaloud, but group adaptation for a classroom play or into a script for
readers' theater would be surely result in a royally funny ruckus. JMD
MALONEY, PETER 
Bronto Eats Meat; written and illus. by Peter Maloney and Felicia
Zekauskas. 
Dial, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2791-7 
$16.99 
R 4-6 yrs
Bronto is a chipper young brontosaurus snacking happily on the tops of trees and
other appropriate brontosaurus foods, until one day he comes home "with a terrrible
JUNE 2003 
* 411
stomachache." When it gets worse, his parents rush him off to the doctor, whose
x-ray reveals that Bronto has inadvertently consumed a wayward young boy named
Billy (who had mistakenly thought a treetop was a safe place to hide from his pesky
sister). Since there's apparently no surgery in dino-world, there are only three
ways to get Billy out, all of them delightfully taboo-breaking: the first way is
vomiting, number two-"well, we all know what number two is," and the third is
burping. Fortunately for all, number three works quite well, landing Billy back in
the bosom of his disbelieving family and relieving Bronto's digestive problems.
This isn't the most streamlined story in the world, but it's casually gifted in its
ability to bring together an array of irresistible subjects--dinosaurs, eating, bodily
functions-and turn them into a jovial and enjoyable plot. The mixed-media
illustrations feature popsicle-colored brontosauri with the faces of playground ani-
mals; while the hues are somewhat pale and the figures flat, entertaining use is
made of compositions (the cutaway of Bronto's swallowing of young Billy uses the
full spread vertically) and details (the illustrations of the three possibilities for Billy
removal are not in the most scrupulous taste, but they are indeed funny). Not
only does this have strong possibilities for traditional venues such as storytime, this
is exactly the kind of picture book that older brothers might well enjoy reading to
younger siblings. DS
MANNIS, CELESTE DAVIDSON 
The Queen's Progress: An Elizabethan Alphabet; il-
lus. by Bagram Ibatoulline. 
Viking, 2003 
42p
ISBN 0-670-03612-9 
$16.99 
R 
6-9 yrs
The alphabet is used as an organizing principle in this surprisingly complex and
informative book about Queen Elizabeth the First's annual tour through her be-
loved English countryside. Dominating each spread is an oversized letter in a gold
and red brocaded Anglo-Saxon font, around and through which the Queen's cara-
van makes its slow progress amidst jesters, dancing bears, traveling performers,
dancing courtiers, treacherous rogues, and hunting parties. The book tells its story
on three levels: a simple quatrain that is keyed to the letter of the alphabet, a
textual note that explains the context of the rhymed text, and illustrations that are
buzzing with the activities, intrigues, and landscapes of the Queen's tour. Eliza-
beth is presented as a strong-minded, intelligent, joyous ruler with a deep love for
her people and a strong desire to be among them, even though that often entailed
personal danger. Both courtiers and peasants are depicted with facial expressions
that reflect their stations as well as their responses to the Queen's activities.
Ibatoulline's background in textile design shines in the extravagantly ornate fabrics
worn by the nobles; the intricate details of the costuming, the frenetic activities of
the courtiers, and the playful antics of a frisky little spaniel invite young viewers to
linger over the pages. The book appeals on many levels-it is visually arresting,
aurally pleasing, and cognitively satisfying. The text and illustrations provide in-
sights into the texture of Elizabethan life that are sure to evoke avid interest; be
prepared to answer lots of questions and to direct budding historians to further
reading on the subject. KC
MASS, WENDY 
A Mango-Shaped Space. 
Little, 2003 
220p
ISBN 0-316-52388-7 
$16.95 
Ad Gr. 5-7
At thirteen, Mia's accustomed to her synesthesia, experiencing sounds and words
as visual effects ("The color of the leaf is exactly the same color as Jenna's name-
412 
* THE BULLETIN
a bright, shimmering shade of green with some yellow highlights"), and she's also
practiced in keeping it a secret in order to avoid the ridicule she once encountered
after sharing the truth about herself with classmates. Increasing trouble with math
class leads her finally to confess the truth to her family, however, and to her best
friend; as her worried family searches for an explanation, Mia begins to connect
with other synesthetes and to find out more about herself. Mia's narration con-
vincingly and engagingly describes her experience of the world, using such detail
that some young readers may wish they too converted their sensory input into
visual images, and her relief at finding understanding sharers of that experience is
credibly portrayed. Overall, however, the novel never makes a credible case for
this experience as a problem, and since that's where the narrative draws its tension
(in addition to a unremarkable side plot about the death of Mia's cat, Mango), the
result is an interesting depiction that never evolves into a compelling story in its
own right. Alternative ways of experiencing the world are sufficiently absorbing,
though, that young readers may wish to enter Mia's world just to share her view-
point. DS
MEDDAUGH, 
SUSAN 
Harry on the Rocks; written and illus. by Susan
Meddaugh. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-27603-3 
$15.00 
R 5-8 yrs
Boatman Harry (a plucky personified Labrador) gets bopped by a seagull who
mistakes his head for a rock (upon which to break open a clam), and in the ensuing
confusion Harry drops his oars and he and his boat (the Labradory 1) are swept
out to sea. The unlucky sailor is shipwrecked on a lonely and isolated island where
he finds nothing but sand, rocks, "one windblown tree," and an egg, which he
places in the sun to cook. Instead, the egg hatches, and out tumbles a lizard ... or
so Harry thinks. The days pass, the lizard grows wings, and Harry calls him a
bizzard (a combination bird and lizard); eventually the bizzard can fly and catch
fish-and cook them with his fiery breath. "'You are not a bizzard,' said Harry,
and suddenly he was very frightened. 'You are a DRAGON!"' Harry hides from
the creature, who finally flies off, only to reappear when Harry is endangered by a
storm. The dragon takes Harry home: "'You saved my life,' said Harry. He
couldn't help wondering why the dragon had come back. The dragon smiled.
'Mmmm,' he said. 'Mmmmm... Mmmmmm... MOM!'" Meddaugh (author/
illustrator of Martha Speaks, BCCB 11/92) spins a simple but droll story sure to
capture the imaginations of young listeners. The attention-getting opening is just
the beginning of a well-paced, cleanly wrought piece of storytelling. The cheerful
watercolor and colored-pencil art has a sturdy matter-of-factness that makes the
fantasy endearingly domestic, with the sunny orange bizzard an eager and irresist-
ible companion. This will work well as a readaloud for a wide range of ages, since
there's no age cutoff for the desire to have an adoring pet dragon. JMD
MILORD, 
SUSAN 
Willa the Wonderful; written and illus. by Susan
Milord. 
Houghton, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-27522-3 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Young piglet Willa knows exactly what she wants to be when she grows up, so
when her teacher (big pig Mr. Lane) assigns the class a project on favorite careers,
she does not hesitate for a moment: "Willa wanted to be a fairy princess." Finding
the right (frilly) clothes in her Dress-Up box, she snaps off a handy wand (a branch
JUNE 2003 
* 413
from a tree), fills a sack with fairy dust (dirt), and heads off to school. Things don't
go quite as planned, however, and by the end of the day a downcast Willa is just
about to give up on her chosen career. Fate fortunately steps in, and Willa, magi-
cally in the right place at the right time, saves the day and has her faith restored in
her future as a fairy princess. Milord's well-paced, good-humored text will scoop
up even the most skeptical listener. The connection between fairy-princessing and
Willa's climactic rescue may be a bit tenuous, but fantasy is entitled to some lee-
way with the rules of logic. The acrylic ink, watercolor, and colored pencil illustra-
tions have a cartoony charm, and the close juxtaposition of piglet and princess has
an inherent humor bound to elicit giggles from the readaloud crowd. Those con-
cerned with perpetuating passivity can take heart from the fact that Willa's convic-
tion of her fairy princess calling doesn't mean she sits around waiting for magic to
make it happen; in a pinch, she waves that wand and takes decisive action. JMD
MONTES, MARISA 
Get Ready for GabL!: A Crazy Mixed-Up Spanglish Day; illus.
by Joe Cepeda. 
Scholastic, 2003 
120p
Library ISBN 0-439-51710-9 
$12.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-439-47519-8 
$3.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Third-grader Maritza Gabriela Morales Mercado (Gabf at home) has a problem-
Johnny and Sissy, two of her least favorite people in her class, are her partners for
a science report about strange and unusual animals. Johnny is a bully who teases
Gabf about her name, Sissy is a snob, and they can't agree on what animal to
study. A surprise visit from her grandmother helps Gabf solve the problem: her
grandmother gives her a tape of the sounds of coqul, tiny Puerto Rican tree frogs.
When Gabf plays it in class, even Johnny and Sissy agree they want to learn more
about the strange and beautiful frogs. Since part of the resolution involves the
importance of the accent over the i in "Gabf," it's confusing that her name initially
appears without it even in Gabf's own first-person narration, and some of the
secondary characters are a bit flatly drawn. Gabf and her family are sketched with
affectionate detail that makes them particularly attractive, however, and the text is
energetic and bouncy, just like the amiable main character; the dialogue is an easy
mix of English, Spanish, and Spanglish (a Spanish/English glossary is appended).
The cast of characters is decidedly multicultural and the classroom dynamics are,
while neat, believable. Short chapters, large typeface, and angular yet jolly line
drawings by Cepeda add to the book's accessibility. This is a solid early chapter
book (the first in a new series) that knows the audience it wants and reaches it with
humor and flair. JMD
MURPHY, JIM 
An American Plague: The True and Terrifying Story of the Yellow
Fever Epidemic of 1793. Clarion, 2003 
[176p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-77608-2 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-10
The young United States scarcely had time to draw a collective breath after the
Revolutionary War when disaster struck the capital city of Philadelphia in the
form of mortal epidemic. Murphy, who has covered other historic disasters with
laudable insight (The Great Fire, BCCB 5/95; Blizzard, BCCB 1/01), follows the
progress of the disease from its quiet toehold among the hoi polloi near the docks,
to its spread throughout the city, illuminating the social and political vulnerabili-
ties of the new nation as sickness took its toll. Readers view the panic from several
414 
* 
THE BULLETIN
vantage points: the mayor, who overreaches his elective mandate to impose order
on his city; Dr. Benjamin Rush and his medical colleagues, who squabble over
cause and cure; the Free African Society, whose brave members nurse in stricken
households, only to be accused ofprofiteering; and the doctor-merchant-barrelmaker
team that runs the Bush Hill hospital with compassion and common sense, achieving
impressive results. Murphy allows his audience to share the contemporary per-
plexity by deferring explanations of the nature of yellow fever until the last chapter
and by offering scant comfort regarding current measures for mosquito control
and the emergence of drug-resistant forms of mosquito-borne diseases. Period
illustrations punctuate the text; reproductions of eighteenth-century newspaper
articles and documents (particularly death-list excerpts) are truly absorbing. An
index is forthcoming, and the list of sources with lively annotation should not be
overlooked. EB
MURPHY, 
MARY 
I Kissed the Baby!; written and illus. by Mary
Murphy. 
Candlewick, 2003 
18p
ISBN 0-7636-2122-6 
$12.99 
R 
1-3yrs
In a series of positive and negative silhouettes, various animals question ("I saw the
baby! Did you see the baby?") and answer ("Yes! I saw the baby, the teeny weeny
thing") one another about a new baby. The energetic story is told almost entirely
in dialogue, the conversations among the various animals replete with question
marks and exclamation points. Splashy, high-contrast graphics feature ink-and-
wash animals reminiscent of shadow puppets, all outline and eye with smiling,
open crescent-shaped mouths. The occasional touch of neon color along the edge
of the pages makes the black-and-white shapes (and typeface) pop. The enthusias-
tic call-and-response conversations end with a little mouse telling a big duck, "I
kissed the baby! Did you kiss the baby?" To which the duck replies, "Of course I
kissed the baby, my own amazing baby. And I'm going to do it again! Ppfffwah!"
The lemon-yellow duckling (and the page's hot pink text) is a satisfying, surprising
shock of color, reinforced on the next page by the sunny duckling's rose-colored
"Quack! Quack! Quack!!" This is an enthusiastically bouncy book that will
delight younglings just figuring out that questions have answers (and accomplish-
ments have exclamation points), as well as families with new babies in the house.
JMD
MURPHY, PATTI BELING 
Elinor and Violet: Two Naughty Chickens at the Beach;
written and illus. by Patti Beling Murphy. 
Little, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-316-91034-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
To Elinor's mother's dismay, Violet has come to stay with her grandmother again
for the summer ("I don't think Violet is a good influence on you," Elinor's mother
clucks). Elinor protests that Violet "has many good ideas," and sure enough, Vio-
let leads Elinor on a merry path of mischief long before they take their clandestine
trip to the beach. The friends set Elinor's sisters' alarm clock to go off at 3 A.M.,
decorate their clothes with permanent marker, steal flowers from a neighbor's gar-
den, and frost cupcakes with shaving cream. Elinor's stints in the time-out chair
are presumably what leads her to resist Violet's only really dangerous "good idea";
though she does take the bus to the beach without telling anyone, Elinor won't go
into the water without a grownup. The bright gouache illustrations complement
the text by showing how the girls' shenanigans are perceived by others, but aside
JUNE 2003 
* 415
from the opening scene where Violet appears wearing a "Chicks Rule" T-shirt,
Murphy doesn't even flirt with the comic possibilities made available by the fact
that these girls are in fact chickens. Instead, this is a clearly didactic tale about peer
pressure, and one can't help feel that the energetic and mischievous Violet, carted
off to grandma's house for the summer, is being unfairly set up as the foil for well-
behaved, well-mothered Elinor. KC
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Blues Journey; illus. by Christopher Myers. 
Holiday
House, 2003 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-8234-1613-5 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-7
Myers' blues rhapsody is a meandering riff on the heartbreak and joys of life, using
traditional blues forms (the call and response pattern) and classic images ("Strange
fruit hanging, high in a big oak tree"). Christopher Myers' use of blue ink, brown
paper bags, and white paint as the medium for his blue and brown illustrations is
a subtle yet thematically effective choice, emphasizing the connections between
the blues tradition and the African-American experience. The texture provided by
the paper-bag canvas infuses the illustrations with an intense dimensionality rein-
forced by the broodingly blue figures and the highlights of white that enhance
eyes, skies, and other elements. Despite the occasional lack of narrative continu-
ity, the text and the images are a powerful and resonant pair; while the connections
between the two are not always immediately apparent, that subtlety provides the
necessary pause for reflection demanded by this challenging work. An introduc-
tion explains the history and technical components of blues music, including a
clear, accessible description of the scale usually used in blues melodies and of the
call and response form of the lyrics. A timeline at the conclusion chronicles the
development of the blues in the United States; a glossary explains some of the dual
meanings of phrases in the text. JMD
O'HAIR, MARGARET 
Twin to Twin; illus. by Thierry Courtin. 
McElderry,
2003 
34p
ISBN 0-689-84494-8 
$15.95 
R 2-4 yrs
This airy verse celebrates the everyday joys-and a few of the trials--of life with
twins ("Double born, twice the blessing./ Double kids. Twice the messing"). The
text is written in (what else?) couplets that cover the range of baby to toddler
experience ("Double crawl, then double walk/. Conversation, double talk!// Double
giggles when they're glad./ Double tantrums when they're mad"). Although the
grammar and subject matter occasionally seem oddly juxtaposed and a tad forced,
the scansion never misses, and Courtin's illustrations featuring roly-poly baby bodies
and pin-dot eyes pull it all together. The uncluttered composition, large subjects,
and bouncy rhymes will carry across a room for a readaloud, but this book seems
more suited to the intimacy of a double-cuddle, double-snuggle session. KC
PATTISON, DARCY 
The Journey of Oliver K. Woodman; illus. by Joe
Cepeda. 
Harcourt, 2003 
48p
ISBN 0-15-202329-1 
$16.00 
R* 5-9 yrs
Tameka really wants her Uncle Ray (who lives in Rock Hill, South Carolina) to
come visit her (in Redcrest, California), but he just can't get away. In his place he
sends Oliver K. Woodman, a jointed wooden man he himself has crafted. Uncle
416 
* THE BULLETIN
Ray leaves Oliver by the side of the highway with a hat, a backpack, a note explain-
ing his ultimate destination, a request that Oliver's benefactors keep Ray apprised
of his progress, and a sign that says "California or Bust." As a postcard tells Ray,
the first person to pick him up is Jackson McTavish, who takes Oliver as far as
Memphis in his truck. The second card comes from Sherry, whose friends bring
Oliver to Forest City, Arkansas, and then put him in an aunt's station wagon for a
ride to Fort Smith. After trucker Bobbi Jo drives him to New Mexico, he's passed,
via her grandfather, to Miss Utah, who hands him over to the wild Claremont
sisters (three gray-haired old ladies on a gambling spree); they get him as far as
California, where Bernard Grape, attorney at law, delivers him to Tameka's door-
step. Everyone who picks up Oliver sends a note back to Uncle Ray about their
adventures until, finally, Tameka herself takes Oliver on the final leg of his jour-
ney, from Redcrest back to Rock Hill via airplane. The notes tell the story with a
jaunty succinctness, and there's plenty of humor in their varying styles and their
tongue-in-cheek but sincere enjoyment of their wooden companion. Cepeda's
illustrations (oil over acrylic) have a textured depth that adds complexity while
keeping the tone light. Oliver himself gains more and more personality as his
journey goes on, achieving a Tin-Mannish reality that makes him more than just a
wooden mannikin. Sweeping, changing vistas give a sense of Oliver's passage from
East to West, and the notes to Uncle Ray provide a comforting sense of continuity.
Pattison delivers a mini-quest complete with adventure, danger, and suspense.
Youngsters will delight in the whimsy, while the neighborhood may need to keep
a close eye on its garden gnomes lest they start taking similar trips. JMD
PAUL, ANN WHITFORD 
Little Monkey Says Good Night; illus. by David
Walker. 
Kroupa/Farrar, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-374-34609-7 
$16.00 
R 2-5 yrs
In a bedtime-delaying maneuver that will be familiar to many parents, Little Mon-
key wants to say goodnight to the entire circus. As Papa Monkey chases Little
Monkey through the Big Top tent, Little Monkey says goodnight to Ringmaster,
performing Poodle, the clowns, the elephants-you get the picture. Walker's jelly-
bean palette with cotton-candy textures is just right for this circus romp; art, mon-
key, and text swoosh in graceful acrobatic arcs from page to page, swinging little
listeners toward their own bedtimes. What really makes this traditional sleep-
bargaining narrative stand out is the prize at the end-being able to say goodnight
to a mom on the job. Mother Monkey catches her daring darling right in the
middle of her trapeze act and flips him artfully down to Papa, to the delight of the
crowd. This book is sure to send little ones rocking off to bed with sweet circus
dreams of their own. KC
PETERS, JULIE ANNE 
Keeping You a Secret. Tingley/Little, 2003 
250p
ISBN 0-316-70275-7 
$16.95 
R Gr. 9-12
The result of a teen pregnancy, Holland feels obliged to live the life her mother
wasn't able to enjoy by earning good grades, being a school leader, and getting into
a good college. Even having a nice boyfriend with whom she practices responsible,
boring sex is part of the plan. Enter Cece, a proud, sexy lesbian. Holland's desire
for her takes her breath away, and one by one, Holland's mother's expectations
dissolve in the wake of Holland's overwhelming love for Cece. Their relationship
is flirtatious and delicately embodied in its incipient stages as Holland awakens to
JUNE 2003 
* 417
the knowledge that she wants this girl, and Cece waits patiently for Holland to
figure that out. When Holland kisses Cece for the first time, she wants to be out
to the world, but Cece cautions against it, ostensibly because she wants to save
Holland from enduring the hateful reactions of others. As it turns out, Cece has
more selfish reasons for wanting to keep their love a secret; having "found" Hol-
land, a beautiful, smart, popular girl, she doesn't want to risk losing her to the rush
of lesbian attention that she would assuredly get. As a result, Holland handles her
coming out badly; her family and friends feel betrayed and alienated as they learn
of her lesbianism through innuendo and rumor. While there is some information
about resources available for gay teens embedded in the narrative, there is no heavy-
handed agenda here; everyday reality for Holland and Cece has as much joy as
difficulty, and they are far too practical to succumb to angst and melodrama over
their perfectly ordinary, perfectly wonderful, desire for each other. These are strong,
likable young women; readers will warm to their situation and cheer Holland's
breaking free from her mother's narrow vision of happiness. KC
POSNER, PAT, ad. 
Fantastic Creatures from Greek Myths; illus. by Olwyn
Whelan. 
Bedrick/McGraw-Hill, 2003 
[4 5p]
ISBN 1-57768-507-5 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Gods and Goddessesfrom Greek Myths; illus. by Olwyn Whelan. 
Bedrick/
McGraw-Hill, 2003 
[45p]
ISBN 1-57768-508-3 $18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In two bright compilations Posner offers simplified versions of well-known classi-
cal Greek myths. Fantastic Creatures from Greek Myths contains six tales about
heroes and their encounters with mythical monsters, including "Perseus and the
Gorgon," "Odysseus and the Cyclopes," and "Theseus and the Minotaur." Gods
and Goddesses from Greek Myths offers half a dozen stories about the origins and
habits of the Greek gods and goddesses, such as "Zeus and the Olympians," "Artemis
and Orion," and "Persephone and Hades." Each heavily illustrated volume opens
with a brief introduction to classical Greek mythology and concludes with a two-
page glossary. The illustrations resemble fancy wrapping paper, rendered in a
candy-colored pastel palette and with a naive simplicity that effectively demystifies
characters and events. While the writing is overly casual it is also supremely acces-
sible, making these two titles useful volumes that will reach the intended audience
right where it lives--or writes school reports. JMD
POTTER, ELLEN 
Olivia Kidney; illus. by Peter Reynolds. 
Philomel, 2003 
155p
ISBN 0-399-23850-6 
$15.99 
R Gr. 5-7
When Olivia Kidney finds herself locked out of her new apartment one day, she
discovers a Carrollian cast of characters living in her building--a haughty, de-
posed princess inhabiting an apartment made entirely of glass, an extremely untal-
ented psychic who takes the tappings of the spying princess for messages from the
spirit world, a gaggle of raucous children whose mother keeps goats and chickens
in her bedroom, and a strange seductress with a diminished, but still dangerous,
pirate for a butler. After saving the life of the psychic's son, nearly losing herself to
the siren song of the seductress, escaping the murderous designs of the pirate, and
helping a young ghost realize that he is in fact dead, Olivia is finally able to achieve
418 
* THE BULLETIN
her heart's desire-a renewed relationship with her estranged father and a psychic
connection with her dearly departed brother. Because of the pervasive presence of
death and loss in the book, all of the rather zany comedic action is edged with
melancholy, giving the fantasy a grounded feel and keeping the whole from de-
grading into a meaningless delirium. Though fearless and feisty, Olivia is also a
very sad and lonely little girl, seeking connections with both the humans and the
ghosts that people her world. Her own sense of loss leads her to be wary of danger,
yet also lends her a remarkable ability to render the compassionate service of friend-
ship to the eccentric people she meets. Readers will agree with the ghosts in the
book: Olivia Kidney is a "first-rate kid." KC
PRESSLER, MIRJAM 
Malka; tr. from the German by Brian Murdoch. 
Philomel,
2003 
[2 8 8p]
ISBN 0-399-23984-7 
$18.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
Malka is a seven-year-old Polish Jew who, with her mother, Hannah, and her
sixteen-year-old sister, Minna, escapes a Nazi round-up only because Hannah is a
doctor on call at a nearby farm. From there the three of them begin an arduous
walk over mountainous terrain to cross the Hungarian border. Malka becomes ill,
and Hannah makes a decision to leave her in hiding with a family who subse-
quently turns her out to fend for herself. At this point the action splits between
Hannah's and Malka's excruciating experiences, and their separation intensifies
the split viewpoint used throughout the novel. When the narrative focuses on
abandoned Malka, readers become so deeply involved that middle-aged Hannah's
physical and emotional developments seem distracting; sometimes the transitions
between the two characters are confusing as well. This problem, together with an
abrupt ending that leaves readers dangling mid-scene when Malka refuses to re-
unite with her mother, mars the impact of a powerful plot based on historical fact.
An author's note cites interviews with the real Malka, who escaped to Israel and
who recollected the events on which this novel is based. While many young people
will fall by the wayside of the long dual journey, a patient reader will feel the effects
of Pressler's acute descriptions and perceptions in a book worth adding to collec-
tions of heavily used Holocaust fiction. By the author of Anne Frank: A Hidden
Life (BCCB 4/00), the text has been unobtrusively translated from German. BH
PRESTON, DIANA 
Remember the Lusitania! 
Walker, 2003 
[112p] 
illus. with
photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8847-5 
$23.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8846-7 
$22.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The 1915 sinking of the Lusitania was, of course, both a civilian maritime tragedy
and an act of war. In this distillation of her adult title Lusitania. An Epic Tragedy,
Preston's focus lists toward the former, as she notes but does not deeply plumb
such issues as the German Embassy's published warnings that British ships were
subject to attack and the possibility that U-boat commander Walther Schweiger
overstepped his orders in launching the torpedo. Her description of shipboard life
(which follows families in three classes of Lusitania accommodations and the crew
of the U-20), the opulence and austerity of the two vessels, and reaction to the
sinking among both ill-fated passengers and German crew are delivered in a blaze
JUNE 2003 
* 419
of first-rate storytelling. Most material is derived from a broad spectrum of pri-
mary sources, from government documents to contemporary journalism to survi-
vor interviews, and this adherence to firsthand accounts pays off in the riveting
immediacy of Preston's prose. Plentiful illustrations (including historical photo-
graphs, documents, and maps) help bring the presentation well within the grasp of
able younger readers, and a selection of further readings, as well as a bibliographic
essay, will direct researchers to works on the ship's sinking and exploration of the
wreckage. EB
PROVENSEN, ALICE 
A Day in the Life of Murphy; written and illus. by Alice
Provensen. 
Simon, 2003 
34p
ISBN 0-689-84884-6 
$16.95 
R 
4-6 yrs
"Murphy-stop-that is my name. I am a terrier. I bark. I bark at anything and
everything and all the time." Murphy's other chief preoccupation is food, natu-
rally enough, and he focuses on it with single-minded intensity. The contrast
between this bristly little gray terrier and his barnyardmate, the laid-back, leggy
brown hound that trails after him, adds considerable humor to the day, which
starts with a competitive dawn dash to scour the kitchen floor for snacks and pro-
ceeds through a chaotic schedule of cat-chasing, mouse alerts, and a visit to the vet
("I think I may have to throw up"). The dinner table features crumbs and hand-
outs. Nighttime affords a wild flurry of barking that translates into Murphy's
storytelling to all the animals in the barn: "Was it a rat? A fox? A skunk? A wolf?
A bear? A thief? The moon! The moon! I heard the moon move!" Finally, the
hay makes a comfy bed, with sock, bone, and stick nearby. Provensen's figures are
clear and stable. Her flat perspective and childlike drafting characterize landscapes
and domestic scenes with clean lines and handsomely modulated colors. Murphy's
frequent and expressive head-on stares are visually engaging, while his monologue
is tonally authentic and impudently anthropomorphic. Preschoolers may recog-
nize in Murphy's behavior the shades of toddler siblings or, in hyper moments,
themselves. BH
RIPSLINGER, JON 
How I Fell in Love &d Learned to Shoot Free Throws. 
Roaring
Brook, 2003 
[17 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2747-9 $22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1892-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Seventeen-year-old Danny Henderson has a reasonably cunning plan: he's going
to get close to the girl of his dreams, ace basketball player Angel McPherson, by
asking her to coach him on his free throws (and since they really do need improve-
ment, her basketball skills are a considerable plus). Though his overtures are ini-
tially stymied by the fiercely private Angel, Danny persists; as the two become
closer, he discovers what she's hiding-she's the daughter, by artificial insemina-
tion, of a lesbian mother-but he remains afraid to share his own secret. The
teens' revelations function more like soap opera than genuine emotional drama in
the context of the book (Angel histrionically refers to herself as a "test-tube baby"),
but the romance is definitely an appealing one. Capable Angel isn't your usual
heroine, so there's an extra spice to the traditional (and enjoyable) story of win-
ning over the girl who's afraid of getting what she wants. More interesting than
Danny's family secret (his mother, who ostensibly died of cancer, actually was
420 
* THE BULLETIN
killed in an accident along with her lover) is Danny's relationship with his father,
who's the athletic director at Danny's school and who's more complicated than
the misogynistic jock he initially appears to be. Though particularly gratifying to
girls worried they'll have to choose between romance and athletics, this has enough
solid plot and relationship exploration to draw to a broad range of readers. DS
RODARI, GIANNI 
One and Seven; tr. from the Italian by David Anglin; illus. by
Beatrice Alemagna. 
Mariuccia laconi, 2003 
[24p]
ISBN 0-9628720-6-7 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
"I knew one child," says the narrator of this humanistic fable, "who was 7 chil-
dren": he's Paolo in Rome, Jean in Paris, Kurt in Berlin, Yuri in Moscow, Jimmy
in New York, Chu in Shanghai, and Pablo in Buenos Aires, but everywhere he
"was eight years old and already knew how to read and write and rode his bicycle
without holding onto the handlebars." That commonality is why, once they're
grown up, they "will no longer be able to make war against one another." Andersen
medal-winner Rodari is one of Europe's most significant writers for children, but
this tale, which originally appeared in a collection, fares poorly as a standalone
picture-book text: though the softly turned phrases keep the text from becoming
heavy-handed, it's evanescent instead, lacking any plot, and the epluribus unum
theme isn't hugely original. Alemagna's artwork turns the oversized pages into
dramatic, childlike portraiture. The scribbly textures and sharp, doodly features
recall the work of Brian Karas, but the intense closeups and elaborate cityscapes
have an artistic spirit all their own. This will ultimately appeal more to adults than
to children, but the attractive art will make it more palatable if it's used for Sunday
school lessons or other ethical discussions. DS
RUBEL, NICOLE 
Grody's Not So Golden Rules; written and illus. by Nicole
Rubel. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-15-216241-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Once again, an assault is launched at the oppressive rules imposed on kids by well-
meaning adults (see Ingman, above) as Grody, a very stylish young dog with star-
tlingly round eyes, rewrites rules of health, hygiene, and civility according to kid
logic. Why get up in the morning when "you're just going to have to go to bed
again at night"? And if you do get up, why brush teeth that will just get dirty at
breakfast? Grody challenges rules at school as well as at home: "Always talk when
the teacher is talking. That way you get to leave the classroom. You can always
start again next year." Each of Grody's rules is founded on inarguably sound
reasons that are belied by the illustrations, which show the inevitable consequences
of the new maxim. Indeed, the collage art of the text is as chaotic as the world
Grody's rules would inaugurate. For the most part, the illustrations are crowded
cartoons, but mixed in with the cartoon images are overlays of photographed fab-
rics and textures, digitally manipulated photographs of food, lamps, vases, flowers,
pets, etc. and patterned optical illusions that make the eyes swim. The inspired
anarchy of the ensemble comes to a crashingly disappointing end with rule 14:
"Don't follow my rules or you will look just like me-eeeeeeeeee!" Grody appears
here labeled with the exaggerated consequences of following his rules, including
"very dirty ears," "countless cavities," "powerfully bad breath," "failing grades,"
etc. It's a bit of pointless overkill rather than a satisfying conclusion, and it ends
up scoring one more point for the grownups. KC
JUNE 2003 
* 421
RUMFORD, JAMES 
Nine Animals and the Well; written and illus. by James
Rumford. 
Houghton, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-30915-2 
$16.00 
R 6-10 yrs
Nine animal friends on the way to a birthday celebration for the raja-king de-
bate-and doubt-the merits of their gifts. Each animal-Monkey, Rhino, Camel,
Rabbit, Cow, Cobra, Elephant, Tiger, Peacock-is convinced he has the best gift,
until he sees the gift another carries. Comparing, tossing, and sharing gifts results
in the ultimate loss of all (the final gift of nine golden coins rolls into a well), and
the animals are left without a present but with a great story. Rumford (author of
Traveling Man, BCCB 12/01, and Seeker ofKnowledge, 4/00) effectively crafts this
original, fable-like tale around a surprising underlying element: the historical trav-
els of what we call Arabic numerals. A brief introduction neatly displays number
signs from various stops along the way, explaining, "We got our nine number signs
and the zero from the Europeans, who got them from the North Africans, who got
them from the Arabs, who got them from the Indians of India." The animals carry
numerically cumulative presents (one loaf of bread, two mangoes, three cakes, four
cones of sugar, etc.), and even the shapes of the animals themselves are inspired by
the Indian numerals. The stylized art (paper collage decorated with brush, pen,
and pencil) is lightened by the animals' expressions of joy and dismay and the vivid
palette, which leans toward shades of red, gold, and green, with background colors
and borders in intense hues. This is a rich picture book that can be used on many
levels, whether telling stories, teaching math, or discussing history. A concluding
note gives a bit more information about the numerals' travels. JMD
SCHERTLE, 
ALICE 
Teddy Bear, Teddy Bear; illus. by Linda Hill
Griffith. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16871-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16870-1 
$15.99 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Fourteen poems feature those cuddly bruins indispensable to youthful emotional
lives, discussing bears in various locations ("Teddy Bear Store"), bears enjoying-
or suffering-various activities ("Scrub-a-Dub"), and aspects of bear existence
("Teddy Bear Wear"). The talented Schertle (author of How Now, Brown Cow,
BCCB 12/94) doesn't quite hit her usual mark here, with some poems lacking her
familiar inventiveness or suffering from a wavering rhythm. There are plenty of
enticing bearish details, however, and when the verses succeed (as in "Barely Bear"),
there's an A. A. Milneish cuddliness to the result. Griffith's teddy portraiture is
unfortunately a far cry from Ernest Shepard's understated coziness, though: slick
and overcrowded full-page images jar with Schertle's tone and sometimes miss
opportunities offered by the verse; the bears are, however, marketably appealing, if
a bit samey from picture to picture. The listener's own teddy is probably the best
visual for this poetry anyway, and youngsters may well find some of these entries
just the thing to serenade bear and owner at bedtime. DS
SEDGWICK, MARCUS 
The Dark Horse; written and illus. by Marcus
Sedgwick. 
Lamb/Random House, 2003 
217p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90091-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73054-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Sigurd (usually called Sig) and his young foster sister, Mouse, find a strange wooden
box on the beach while searching for food. The box belongs to a shipwrecked
422 
* THE BULLETIN
stranger, Ragnald, who ingratiates himself with the community Lawspeaker, Horn,
in order to get it back. After the village leaders are killed in a brutal fight over the
box, sixteen-year-old Sig defeats a challenge by Sif, Horn's daughter, and becomes
Lawspeaker. He has little time for learning about his new influence however;
shortly after he takes his position as leader of Storn, the village is attacked by the
Dark Horse, a horse-riding clan that loots and destroys villages, killing the inhab-
itants. A small group of Storn escape, Sig and Mouse among them, but Mouse
betrays them to the Dark Horse, and they are captured. Offered the option of life
and slavery or death, Sigurd and the remaining Storn choose death, only to be
rescued by Sif, who returns in time to save them. The format of the novel-
Sigurd's first-person account alternates with a third-person narration-effectively
draws in the reader while providing enough detail to make the intricate story un-
derstandable. Mouse, the strange child who was raised by wolves and who can
communicate with animals, is capably developed, and Sigurd, too, is believable as
an intelligent young man not so bound to tradition that it blinds him to circum-
stance. Unfortunately, the relationship between Sigurd and Mouse is just too
close to make her concluding betrayal (despite the revelation about her origins)
credible; in addition, the consequences of her betrayal are so great that Sigurd's
allowing her to escape isn't convincing, either. Nevertheless, the pace is steady if
not swift, the suspense is palpable, and the relationship between Mouse and Sig, at
least until the end, is grounded in emotional reality. Those readers who tingle at
the notion of ancient tribes engaged in ritual and warfare will find enough here to
keep the pages turning. JMD
SIMMONS, MICHAEL 
Pool Boy. 
Porter/Roaring Brook, 2003 
164p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2924-2 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1885-2 
$15.95 
R* Gr. 7-12
Brett's cushy life in his well-off family came to a screeching halt when his stock-
broker father was sent to prison for insider trading. Now he, his mother, and his
younger sister are living with his aunt, on the wrong side of the tracks, where he's
bitter through and through about the changes in his existence; on family visits to
his father, he takes great pleasure in dishing out denigration ("I could say things
like, 'Hey Dad, you're a loser and an idiot,' and he'd be sitting behind a big Plexiglass
window and couldn't do anything"). After failing at his hated fast-food job (a
failure, Brett is sure, that is everybody's fault but his), he falls into a job cleaning
pools with seventy-year-old Alfie, a local character who used to drive Brett's school
bus years ago and who soon becomes a valuable friend and advisor for the unhappy
teen. Simmons is absolutely superb in his creation of Brett's narrative voice: the
teen is completely credible in his self-centered and materialistic bitterness, while
managing to stay sympathetic to readers because of his understandable anger and
his genuine, if awkwardly expressed, love for the rest of his family. The book is
perceptive about the pleasures of punishing those who have hurt us and the di-
lemma of finding ways to do it without hurting others, and it never strays from the
authentic even when depicting Brett's growth and forgiveness ("I still hate Dad for
blowing everything and losing the house and the pool.... But maybe I hate him
in a different way than I thought"). His relationship with Alfie isn't unusual in
literature for young people, but it's depicted with an understated subtlety that
nonetheless makes their connection clear and renders Brett's grief at Alfie's death
credible and touching. Even readers who initially find it hard to forgive Brett's
JUNE 2003 
* 
423
arrogance will understand the pain of losing cool stuff, and Simmons' stellar narra-
tive will elicit compassion from any teen who's had reason to be angry with a
parent. DS
SPINELLI, EILEEN 
Moe McTooth: An Alley Cat's Tale; illus. by Linda
Bronson. 
Clarion, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-11760-1 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Moe McTooth is a contented alley cat, relishing his roaming adventures ("And life
was good") until winter comes, and cold, wet, and hunger eradicate the pleasures
of his existence. Fortunately, he's taken in and cherished by a young woman;
come spring, however, an open window calls him back to his old life, and he's
outta there. Eventually, Moe sensibly misses the charms of the cozy indoors, re-
turning to his delighted not-quite-owner for comfy domestic days and wandering
through the alluring streets at night in a fine and satisfying compromise (and one
the young woman herself embraces, following Moe out into the night). In-and-
out cat stories aren't exactly rare, but Spinelli gives this one an understated grace.
Her poetic specifics provide apt imagery ("By day he chased after dockside trucks
for sardines that spilled like silver into his mouth") that heighten the storytelling
without turning it frothy or whimsical, and her careful use of repetition, especially
dramatic employment of anaphora, give the story a clear rhythm and shape.
Bronson's art isn't the match for the text that one might hope, since it's more
stylized than compelling, lacking Spinelli's delicacy. There's an pleasing rhythm,
however, to the cubist-infused draftsmanship, with fisheye-lens curves of the land-
scape and interior scenes rhyming with the sinuous curves of the cat. The oils
make the blue-purple nocturnal scenes into luminous fantasias while ensuring that
the rich orange Moe is always the focus. Cats and adventures are a perennially
winning combination, and listening youngsters will immediately want to hunt for
their own alley cat or follow their own feline ramblers out into the night. DS
SPINELLI, JERRY 
My Daddy and Me; illus. by Seymour Chwast. 
Knopf,
2003 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-90606-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-80606-7 $15.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
Though the illustrations feature a puppy and grown dog, the story here is pure
human daddy and child: a young boy gleefully greets his returning father, they
enjoy various playful family rituals, they work around the house and yard, they
regale the neighbor with musical and dance performances, and, most importantly,
Daddy provides the lullaby when it's bedtime for the young narrator. While many
real dads will envy the seemingly inexhaustible patience, repertoire, and energy of
the featured father, the individual components of the father-child relationship are
exuberantly realistic, from piggyback rides ("Hey," says Daddy, "who's this cow-
poke riding me?") to home maintenance ("When the house breaks, we have to fix
it. My job is the carry the toolbox and hand Daddy the hammer"); cumulatively,
they're a delicious fantasy of an evening with Dad all to yourself and doing all your
favorite things. While it's a little strange that the very human parent-child pair are
pictured as canine, there's one distinct advantage-aside from one easily alterable
textual mention of the "Boy of the Day," there are no gender commitments, so
this could be a nice father-centered treat for girls as well. Chwast's thickly daubed
brushstrokes lend the figures and scenery a papier-mlchi feel; while the figures are
424 
* THE BULLETIN
therefore sometimes rather stiff, the toylike simplicity of the rounded, canine-
inhabited world enhances its appeal to the young audiences, who will enjoy the
paternal adventures all the more for their sprightly decoration. This is a natural
for a father-centered storytime; be prepared for a lot of stories, both real and fanci-
ful, about the skills and wonders of the audience's own daddies. DS
STEIG, WILLIAM 
When Everybody Wore a Hat; written and illus. by William
Steig. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 2003 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009701-9 
$18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009700-0 
$17.99 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Steig's New Yorker-graphic style comes on strong here as he depicts his childhood
starting at age eight in 1916. Bookending the watercolor cartoons, which are
dominated by bright greens and tan, are black-and-white photographs of William
as child and elder. In between, the observations of life in his immigrant family and
Bronx neighborhood are accessible in terms of picture-book history but randomly
scattered rather than cohesively sequenced. For instance, on one page Mom is
crying over sad news from the Old Country, which scares the children; on the
next, "Pop was an expert rower." Not until nine pages (or six images) later do we
see a possible source of the bad news, "a big war going on in Europe. It was World
War I"-this illustrated by a bleeding German cavalry officer and a legs-up dead
horse. After that we meet the janitor's dog. Even the sequential pictures of various
workmen are not supported by the text. An unidentified grocer is shown under a
line about a mouthy neighborhood girl, which is separated from "our butcher" by
one page about the value of nickels and by another stating that "we moved a lot.
The moving men were very strong" (and possibly cannibalistic, from the size of the
representative's teeth). The compositions and page design are spacious and the
signature Steig twists of visual humor suggest scenes from theater of the absurd,
and individually, each page is effective in the manner of a vividly evocative scrap-
book. Overall, Steig has stayed in his own framework of reference rather than
relating to a young viewer's, so adult fans will need to fill in some blanks with
storytelling connections of their own for young listeners. BH
VAN 
LEEUWEN, 
JEAN 
The Amazing Air Balloon; illus. by Marco
Ventura. 
Fogelman, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2258-3 
$16.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When eighteenth-century Baltimore innkeeper Peter Carnes was stricken with hot-
air-balloon mania, he arranged for a public display of several consecutive tethered
ascents. Extant documents report that a thirteen-year-old boy named Edward
Warren volunteered to go aloft on "the last trip into the air, and behaved with the
steady fortitude of an old voyager." Nothing more is known of Edward, but Van
Leeuwen fills in pages of blanks with a heavily fictionalized account that presents
the boy as an orphaned apprentice to a blacksmith, who kindly gives him time off
to chase errant balloons and travel to Baltimore for the historic flight. When
Carnes demurs from making an ascent himself (in this tale due to credible con-
cerns about his weight), Edward steps forward for his chance of a lifetime. Ventura's
stiffly mannered oil paintings tidy up 1784 Baltimore, countryside, and citizenry
to Disneyland-ish standards, and the balloon ascent, when it finally arrives, is a bit
of a visual letdown. Of more interest are the document reproductions that consti-
tute the endpapers and Van Leeuwen's closing note on Carnes' subsequent (and
JUNE 2003 
* 
425
short-lived) ballooning efforts. For a more involving account of early aeronautics,
consider Wallner's The First Air Voyage in the United States (BCCB 5/96) EB
VENABLES, STEPHEN 
To the Top: 
The Story of Everest. Candlewick,
2003 
96p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7636-2115-3 
$17.99 
R 
Gr. 6-12
There have been a lot of Everest titles in the last few years (Jenkins' To the Top of
the World, BCCB 4/99, Pfetzer's Within Reach, 11/98), but this one offers what
the others haven't: a thorough and detailed history of the mountain and its climb-
ing. Venables touches on geology, meteorology, and politics as he covers both
early history and the twentieth-century expeditions that changed Everest from
untouched to booked years in advance. His personal knowledge (Venables reached
the top in 1988) informs the prose, but he includes his own account as a part of the
bigger climbing picture rather than as the reason for the book, and his detailed
chronicles of the progress and innovations in expeditions are informative and en-
lightening. This is also one of the few books that gives full and genuine credit to
the Sherpa climbers, whose individual records often surpass those of their paymas-
ters (there's as much biographical information for Tenzing Norgay as for Edmund
Hillary, and it's noted that the first person to summit twice was Tenzing's nephew,
Nawang Gombu). The narrative is a bit thick with technical material for those
just looking for adventure, but there are still plenty of thrills, chills, misfortunes
(the author includes a grisly picture of his soon-to-be-amputated toes), and trag-
edy to keep readers interested. Generous employment of arresting period and
contemporary photographs (many in color) adds considerable interest, and thought-
ful and varied layout (particularly good use is made of white text on deep-blue
background) adds impact as well as breaking up the solid text. Route maps, a
glossary, and an index are included, as is a note on the Royal Geographic Society
and its Mount Everest Foundation, which sponsors many expeditions. Armchair
travelers who want to know how as well as who will find this a bracing literary
climb. DS
WATTE, JUDY 
Shopaholic. Atheneum, 2003 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-85138-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old Taylor is on her own with her mother now, since the departure
of her father and the death of her younger sister; she might as well be on her own
entirely, since her mother's severe depression makes Taylor the mainstay of the
household. Already growing away from her friends under her familial burden,
Taylor becomes entranced with Kat, a glamorous girl she meets out shopping.
Shopping, in fact, becomes the core of their relationship, since that's what seems
to attract Kat, and Taylor begins to supply Kat with loans for purchases in fear that
Kat will withdraw her friendship if the shopping opportunities dry up. British
novelist Waite overplays Taylor's tragic secret (she blames herself for her sister's
drowning), thereby somewhat undercutting the main plot, which plays out per-
fectly credibly in its own right; the book is squarely authentic about Taylor's anger
at her mother, however, and about the familiarity a dysfunctional routine can
acquire. It's the shopping/friendship nexus where the book really sparkles, though,
just like all those seductive unbought clothes in the shiny stores, with just enough
detail about every item of apparel and tube of lipstick to allow readers to sympa-
426 
* THE BULLETIN
thize with the allure and to understand that the possibilities offered go beyond
mere clothing. Shopping is such a central activity in a lot of teens' lives that it's
surprising there's been so few books that really address it; without heavy-handedly
hammering home the moral of responsibility, Waite captures the pleasures and
temptations of the mall. DS
WARD, HELEN 
The Dragon Machine; illus. by Wayne Anderson. 
Dutton,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-525-47114-6 
$15.99 
R 
6-9 yrs
Young George sees things other people (e.g., grownups) don't see: "George no-
ticed his first real dragon on a rainy Thursday. And the more he looked, the more
dragons he saw. Ignored and overlooked, the dragons went unnoticed... just like
George." Realizing the dragons (who are now following the boy about because he
fed them "stale cookies and smelly cheese") need to be removed to a place of safety,
he builds a dragonesque flying machine and takes off for the part of the map that
says "Here Be Dragons" ("His dragon machine lumbered, engine ticking gently,
into the night sky. And the dragons followed"). After his machine crash-lands in
the wilderness, the dragons scatter, and a lonely George is recovered by his newly
attentive parents ("George and his dreams of dragons went home"). Ward, adapter
and illustrator of such classic fables as The King ofthe Birds (BCCB 11/97), makes
this dreamlike journey a compelling one, with unerring fantasy logic and smooth
storytelling; her clever use of the name George, traditionally the dragon slayer, is a
nice touch. Anderson's illustrations have a Peter Sfs-like quality to them; vignette
and full-page images, subtly colored and nubbly textured, feature slightly altered
states where the mundane combines with the magical to produce dreamscapes
rendered with airy solidity. This will make an unusual, thoughtful addition to
storytimes for not-quite-readers and possibly even a readalone for adventurous
independent readers with dragons on their minds. JMD
WARHOLA, JAMES 
Uncle Andy's; written and illus. by James Warhola. 
Putnam,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23869-7 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Warhola, nephew of pop artist Andy Warhol, tells of youthful visits to his uncle's
New York house, which was "filled to the brim with all sorts of neat things." Some
of those neat things came from Warhola's father, a junk dealer, who brought his
brother some particularly interesting bits of refuse (much to the dismay ofWarhola's
mother, who "really didn't understand art"), and some of them were Warhol cre-
ations ("In the morning, I noticed that I was surrounded by towers of soup boxes"),
but all of them fascinated young James, who reveled in playing, along with his
siblings, in the overstuffed house. Warhola's writing is somewhat pedestrian, and
it's not entirely clear that his famous uncle relished these spontaneous visits as
much as the young lad believed; this is also, unlike Hartfield's Me and Uncle Romie
(BCCB 1/03), a title whose impact depends on knowing about the artist himself.
As visits to relatives go, however, this is a reasonably entertaining one, and collec-
tion-prone youngsters will envy the house where even the most unprepossessing
item is sacrosanct. In contrast to Warhol's art, Warhola's illustrations have a ro-
bust middle-American normality, with solid round-cheeked figures that suggest a
cross between Fisher-Price and Norman Rockwell. The art doesn't always make
the most of the setting, but there are some enticing views of clutter and one allur-
JUNE 2003 
* 427
ing cutaway, as well as casual depictions of the famous figure of Warhol himself.
This will be more effective if used in conjunction with a more explanatory title
about Warhol, but kids will readily take to the message: "I really liked doing art,
and I learned that art is something that is all around us all of the time." DS
WEST, TRACEY 
Me and My Robot; illus. by Cindy Revell. 
Grosset,
2003 
32p 
(All Aboard Reading)
Library ISBN 0-448-43140-8 
$13.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-42895-4 
$3.99 
R Gr. K-2
Our protagonist, Reese, has a robot (conveniently named Robot), who's every bit
the boon companion a youngster would expect a robot to be. When Reese's friend
Lucy loses her kitten, Robot seems like a useful ally, but since Reese is a bit impre-
cise on the search terms, Robot keeps turning up the wrong critter ("That is not
my kitten!" Lucy says repeatedly). A photograph solves the problem and clues
Robot in, and it turns out that Lucy's kitten has been enjoying a cozy snooze inside
Robot's own console ("I LIKE KITTENS!" says Robot). This manages to carry
off more plot and momentum than many beginning readers, and the repetition of
phrases, for which novice readers will be sincerely grateful, enhances the storytell-
ing rather than seeming forced into it; kids will also appreciate the plot engine of a
mistake-making scientific wonder, since as readers they're likely feeling pretty fal-
lible themselves. Though the compositions are sometimes a little scattershot, the
illustrations' thick, grainy brushstrokes and deep pigments give the artwork a ro-
bustness unusual in beginning readers, and there's a goofy excess to the absurd
figures of the animals. Those still struggling with the printed word will appreciate
the extra appeals here. DS
WESTON, MARTHA 
Act I, Act II, Act Normal. Roaring Brook, 2003 
14 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2859-9 $22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1779-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Topher loves acting, and nothing-not being labeled geeky or gay, not having to
star in a babyish play based on a fairy tale, not being tortured by the Scary Losers
in his eighth-grade class-will keep him from the stage. He's therefore happy
indeed to land the lead role in a musical version of Rumpelstiltskin, even though
that production beat out the original play of his best friend, Kip, in the playwriting
contest. Kip's a good sport, however, who even runs lines with Topher when
Lyndsey, the female lead, finds one excuse or another not to practice. Topher
presses on, dealing as best he can with a bossy writer who wants to dictate how
people perform their lines, a distraught diva who doesn't feel that her character has
enough feminist spunk, and a group of bullies who are constantly questioning his
sexual orientation because of his allegiance to the theater. Despite various setbacks
(oh, the drama of middle-school theater!), the show is a success, even when the
female lead gets sick and Kip has to perform her role in drag. Meanwhile, Topher's
beloved cat, Button, who is suffering from diabetes, goes into seizures and has to
be put down the night before the show. The two plots (the production of the play
and the loss of Button) run parallel to each other, but no connection is made,
either affectively or metaphorically, between the two, and the book suffers from a
rather too convenient ending that capitalizes on the effeminiphobia that it seems
to want to challenge. Nonetheless, there is a dearth of attention to the theater-
loving boy in literature for this age; this book addresses that gap. KC
428 
* 
THE BULLETIN
WILARD, NANCY 
The Mouse, the Cat, and Grandmother's Hat; illus. by Jenny
Mattheson. 
Little, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-316-94006-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Using traditional motifs, Willard launches a cumulative tale that doesn't quite
accumulate: "This is Grandmother's hat./ This is the mouse that hid under
Grandmother's hat./ This is the cat... / that waits to be fed,/ that mewed for the
mouse/ that tried to play dead/ under Grandmother's hat." Then viewers are
introduced to a birthday cake, a gathering of relatives, and back to the escaped
mouse "that tickled my shoe/ as I carried the cake," which rolls out the door like a
gingerbread man with the whole cast in fast pursuit. But what's this at the end? "I
hear a bee/ in Grandmother's purse." The implication that things will start all
over again may get lost in the sudden switch of subject and simply leave young
listeners dangling. On the other hand, Willard is a veteran at the emphatic rhym-
ing of nonsense that makes sense, as she was in her Newbery Medal book, A Visit
to William Blake's Inn (BCCB 12/81). The doll-like Edwardian characters that
populate Mattheson's illustrations roll across the pages in a purple and apricot
glow that unfortunately mutes the romping energy of the text. Like Richard
Egielski's figures in Pam Conrad's The Tub People (11/89), this round-eyed family
seems vaguely to resemble the portly Fisher-Price characters inhabiting ubiquitous
play barns, garages, and playhouses, though they don't quite muster the Tub People's
individuality. While overall this is somewhat short on impact, familiarity of verbal
and visual forms may breed appreciative response. BH
WILSON, SARAH 
Big Day on the River; illus. by Randy Cecil. 
Holt, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6787-6 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Willie is looking forward to her time on the river, "joyful to be alone and grinning
ear-to-ear." She jumps onto the old raft that awaits her at the end of the dock and
prepares for a happily solitary afternoon on the Wallawatchee, but it is not to be.
One after another, her well-meaning relatives race to the end of the dock with
something that she just has to have for her voyage: apples, a watermelon, an um-
brella, a blanket, a bicycle, a rocker, and more, until finally, with the addition of
one last item (Cousin Clyde in full cannonball) the inevitable happens: "Willie's
little raft promptly sank." The sinking results in all the relatives leaping into the
river, and after everyone "straggled back to shore with their rescued flotsam," Willie
finally speaks up: "I love you all to popping, but please take back these wondrous
things! All I really need ... are your hugs, your kisses, and your very best wishes!"
The text is overlong and excessively perky, but there is a cheery insanity about
these well-intentioned grammas, grampas, aunts, uncles, and cousins that almost
makes up for the tendency towards contrivance in the countrified dialogue and the
rather static plot. Cecil (illustrator of Lowell's Little Red Cowboy Hat, BCCB
6/97, etc.) uses acrylic gouache to create a sunny summer atmosphere, and be-
tween the blue of the sky and the green of the hills, the Wallawatchee and its
environs are invitingly bucolic. The surface finish of the paintings is texturally
undifferentiated, making the compositions a bit flat; the human figures, however,
have a comfortably rounded, dePaola-ish look. Images sprawl from spread to spread,
large enough to be seen by a viewing group and colorful enough to keep even
roving eyes from wandering. This will make a summery end-of-school-year (or
anytime) readaloud for the early grades, especially if listeners are looking out the
window wishing for the bell. JMD
JUNE 2003 
* 429
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
BENTON, GAIL 
Ready-to-Go Storytimes: Fingerplays, Scripts, Patterns, Music, and
More; by Gail Benton and Trisha Waichulaitis. 
Neal-Schuman,
2003 
239p 
illus.
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55570-449-2 
$59.95
Benton and Waichulaitis have offered story programs at the City of Mesa Library
in Arizona since 1992, and here they share their practical expertise in an accessible
and adaptable format. The authors build on the traditional storytime format of
readalouds, fingerplays, action rhymes, and flannel or magnet board stories, spiced
with brief sing-alongs and parent-child activities. Six theme-based storytimes (Yum
Yum, Animal Tales, Desert Dash, Beach Party, Color Wheel, and Dressin' Up)
are offered with instructions and content (the only thing not included is the read-
aloud book, but a suggested title is given), followed by the patterns for flannel
boards, puppets, activity cards, activity sheets, etc. used in the program. The pro-
grams are more story-activity than book-oriented (only one book is recommended
for reading aloud in each script), but they are packed with suggestions for partici-
patory play. The included CD features the authors performing more than a dozen
songs they wrote to accompany their programs; the melody lines are simple and
clear, and the voices are unintimidating. While the format promoted will not be
new to seasoned practitioners, the authors' well-organized approach and clear ex-
planations will make this tite useful for novice program givers, and even old hands
may be inspired to pick and choose some new tricks. JMD
MARCUS, LEONARD S. Storied City: A Children's Book Walking Tour Guide to New
York City. Dutton, 2003 [14 4p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-46924-9 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys
In this slim volume, children's book editor and critic Marcus provides an assort-
ment of walking tours of New York City, organized by neighborhoods from Lower
Manhattan to the Upper West Side to the boroughs. The tours are historical as
well as geographical, giving concise and precise traveling directions and mention-
ing a good mix of juvenile fiction and nonfiction related to each area. The itiner-
aries not only discuss children's books and their New York City locales but also
mention museums and architectural and historical landmarks (even giving addresses,
phone numbers, hours, and websites where available). Black-and-white photos,
maps, and illustrations and quotes from relevant books are interspersed through-
out. The author is a conversational and authoritative tour guide whose patter
includes tasty bites of author and illustrator biographical trivia, as well as bits of
the city's history and culture. Information about additional titles are boxed and
framed in checkered borders like checkered cabs. Underlying all of Marcus' savvy
stuff, readers will almost hear him humming "New York, New York, it's a wonder-
ful town," and from the Bronx to the Battery he knows the books to prove it.
Bibliographies and an index will appear in the bound book. JMD
430 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Arrington
Actors and acting-fiction: Weston
ADVENTURE: Allen; Bell; Van
Leeuwen; Venables
African Americans: Crowe
African Americans-stories: Belton
Age-stories: Krishnaswami
Amusement parks-stories: Frazee
Anger-fiction: Kornblatt
Animals: Ashman
Animals-stories: Murphy, M.; Paul;
Rumford
Art and artists: Greenberg
Art and artists-fiction: Koja;
Warhola
Astronomy: Dyson
Athletes-fiction: Deuker; Harrison
Aviation: Collins
Aviation-stories: Van Leeuwen
Babies: Ashman
Babies-stories: Murphy, M.; O'Hair
Basketball-fiction: Ripslinger
Bears-poetry: Schertle
BEDTIME STORIES: Paul
Behavior-stories: Murphy, P.;
Rubel
BILINGUAL BOOKS: Ada
BIOGRAPHIES: Collins;
Greenberg; Mannis; Steig
Birds: Gerstein
Body image-fiction: Going
Books and reading-stories: Auch
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Arrington; Brooks; Fleischman;
Potter
Brothers-fiction: Kraft
Bullies-fiction: Koja
Cats-fiction: Ahlberg; Arrington;
Mass; West
Cats-stories: Bottner; Farish;
Spinelli, E.
Chickens-stories: Auch; Murphy, P.
Circuses-stories: Emberley; Paul
Civil rights: Crowe
Colonial life: Kay
COUNTING BOOKS: Rumford
Crime and criminals: Crowe
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Brooks; Esckilsen; Simmons
Crime and criminals-stories: Derby
CUMULATIVE STORIES:
Willard
Death and dying-fiction: Holt;
Kornblatt; Potter
Depression-fiction: Waite
Differences-fiction: Mass
Dinosaurs-stories: Maloney
Disasters: Murphy, J.; Preston
Dogs-stories: Provensen; Spinelli, J.
Dragons-stories: Meddaugh; Ward
Drama-fiction: Weston
Drug abuse-fiction: Harrison
Ecology: Gerstein
England, history: Mannis
Environmental studies: Gerstein
Ethics and values: Deuker;
Esckilsen; Frank; Murphy, P.;
Rodari; Waite
FABLES: Rodari
Families-fiction: Dowell; Holt
FANTASY: Allen; Bell; Easton;
Lubar; Potter; Sedgwick
JUNE 2003 
* 431
Fathers-fiction: Horniman;
Simmons
Fathers-stories: Spinelli, J.
Fears-stories: Bottner
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Derby; Easton
Food and eating-stories: Emberley;
Maloney
Foster care-fiction: Dowell;
Harrison
Friends and friendship-fiction:
Dowell; Farish; Glick; Mass;
Waite
Frogs-fiction: Easton
Gaming-fiction: Lubar
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Peters;
Ripslinger
GHOST STORIES: Potter
Gifts-stories: Wilson
Grandmothers-fiction: Montes
Grandparents-fiction: Kornblatt
Grief-fiction: Kornblatt
Health: Murphy
HISTORICAL FICTION: Holt;
Kay; Pressler
History, U.S.: Bates; Capuzzo;
Crowe; Kay; Murphy, J.; Myers;
Preston; Steig
History, world: Mannis
Houses-fiction: Dowell
HUMOR: Ahlberg; Allen; Auch;
Bottner; Derby; Fleischman;
Kraft; Lum; Meddaugh;
Provensen; Rubel; Weston
Illness: Murphy
Indian Americans-stories:
Krishnaswami
Jews-fiction: Pressler
Jobs-fiction: Simmons
Knights and chivalry-fiction: Bell
Language arts: Franco
Latinos-fiction: Montes
Lies-fiction: Frank
Literature, children's: Steig
LOVE STORIES: Peters
Machines-stories: Ward
Magic-fiction: Easton
Magic-stories: Milord
Mathematics: Franco; Rumford
Mentors-stories: Belton
Mice-stories: Emberley
Mothers-fiction: Harrison; Hicks;
Pressler; Waite
Mountaineering: Venables
Music and musicians-fiction: Going
Music and musicians-poetry: Myers
Music and musicians-stories: Jones,
M.
MYSTERIES: Ahlberg; Levin
Mythology, classical: Posner
Nature study: Ashman; Gerstein
Neighbors-fiction: Kornblatt
Night-stories: Spinelli, E.
NURSERY RHYMES: Ada
Obesity-fiction: Going
Obsessive-compulsive disorder-
fiction: Harrar
Persecution-fiction: Brooks
Pets-fiction: Hicks
Pets-stories: Meddaugh
Photography-fiction: Glick
Physical education: Deuker;
Foreman; Venables
Pigs-stories: Jones, M.; Milord
POETRY: Franco; Myers
Power-stories: Ingman
Prejudice-fiction: Brooks
Princesses-stories: Lum; Milord
Queens-stories: Mannis
Reading aloud: Capuzzo
Reading, beginning: West
Reading, easy: Ahlberg; Easton;
Kraft; Montes
Reading, reluctant: Allen; Capuzzo;
Collins
Relationships-fiction: Peters;
Ripslinger
Religion-fiction: Koja
Religious education: Posner
RHYMING STORIES: Jones, M.;
O'Hair; Willard
Rivers-stories: Wilson
Robots-fiction: West
Roller coasters-stories: Frazee
Romance-fiction: Peters
Rules-stories: Rubel
Runaways-fiction: Levin
School-fiction: Frank
432 
* THE BULLETIN
Sharks: Capuzzo
Ships and sailing: Preston
Shipwrecks-stories: Meddaugh
Shopping-fiction: Esckilsen; Waite
Soccer: Foreman
SONGS: Bates
Space travel: Dyson
SPORTS STORIES: Deuker;
Foreman
Stepfamilies-fiction: Hicks
Storytime: Belton; Emberley;
Frazee; Ingman; Kay; Lum;
Maloney; Meddaugh; Murphy,
P.; Pattison; Provensen; Scherde;
Spinelli, E.; Spinelli, J.; Ward
Suicide-fiction: Holt
Suspense: Capuzzo; Levin
Teachers-fiction: Frank
Teen parents-fiction: Horniman
Theater-fiction: Weston
Therapy-fiction: Harrar
TODDLER BOOKS: Murphy, M.
Toys-poetry: Schertle
Transportation: Collins
Tricksters-stories: Derby
Twins-fiction: Kraft
Twins-stories: O'Hair
Uncles-fiction: Warhola
Uncles-stories: Krishnaswami
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Fleischman
Voyages and travel-stories:
Meddaugh; Pattison; Van
Leeuwen
War-fiction: Sedgwick
Wizards-fiction: Lubar
Women's studies: Greenberg;
Mannis
Work-stories: Lum
World War I: Preston
World War II-fiction: Pressler
IS
*": *
*'*
