T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
July/August 2007
Vol. 60   No. 11
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
July/August 2007
Vol. 60 No. 11
449  the BIg PICture
 
 The Professor’s Daughter  by Joann Sfar; tr. by Alexis Siegel; illus. by Em- 
 
 manuel Guibert
450  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
451  • Jack Plank Tells Tales  written and illus. by Natalie Babbitt
474  • Strays  by Ron Koertge
475  • Fish, Swish! Splash, Dash!: Counting Round and Round  written and illus.  
 
 by Suse MacDonald
480  • Pictures from Our Vacation  written and illus. by Lynne Rae Perkins
481  • A Darkling Plain  by Philip Reeve
494  suBjeCt And use Index
497  AnnuAL Author And tItLe Index
448 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Katrina Bromann, Reviewer (KB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann
Melissa Zilic
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $80.00; combined print & electronic $112.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $50.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $13.20 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.35. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2007 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Emmanuel Guibert from The Professor’s Daughter ©2007. Used by permission of 
First Second/Roaring Brook Press.
July/AugusT 2007 • 449
the BIg PICture
The Professor’s Daughter
by Joann Sfar; tr. by Alexis Siegel; illustrated by Emmanuel Guibert
A mysterious widower from afar seeks a second chance at love; properly reared 
Lillian Bowell chafes at the repressive mores of Victorian gentility; two overbear-
ing fathers attempt to thwart the lovers. Pretty trite stuff, were it not for the fact 
that the widower in this graphic novel is the revived mummy of Prince Imhotep 
IV, and the aggrieved fathers are an arrogant pharaoh back from the dead and an 
archaeologist supplying pilfered curiosities to the British Museum. Can true love 
triumph when the buttoned-up world of nineteenth-century England collides with 
the bandaged up world of ancient Egypt?
Well, of course it can, even though the path to the sweethearts’ inevitable 
happy ending is strewn with obstacles of the screwball-comedy variety. Imhotep 
IV’s first outing with Lillian is marred by inebriation (three millennia without 
stimulants, and even a cup of tea will get to you). This leads directly to an unfor-
tunate poisoning (how was Lillian to know the harmless sedative she administered 
to a policeman and a complainant was arsenic?). And this, in turn, sets the lovers 
on the lam from the law, dockside thugs, Imhotep III (who has some unresolved 
issues to settle with his son), and even a few palace guards. Several kidnappings, 
incarcerations, and switches of gentlemen’s clothing later, Lillian and her suitor have 
outsmarted, outrun, or simply outlasted all their nemeses. The closing quintet of 
panels, set “a few years later,” wryly assures us that Imhotep IV is now the perfect 
English gentleman from his well-shined shoes to his bowler hat, Lillian is a satisfied 
matron, and their three children, who regard a glass-encased mummy on display at 
the museum with wide-eyed trepidation shared by many of their twentieth-century 
counterparts, will never have a clue concerning their forebears if Mama and Daddy 
have anything to say about it.
Underpinning the chases, lovers’ tête-à-têtes, and legal drama is good-
natured satire of stiff-upper-lipism, in which Londoners are incapable of expressing 
anything but calm regard for the linen-wrapped gentry among them. Queen Victoria 
comes in for her share of ribbing as well—unflappable when a crazed Imhotep III 
crashes her palace; intractable at his demands for marriage (“See to it that this boor 
leaves at once”); paragon of noblesse oblige in knighting her rescuer as he drags her 
out of the Thames; and ever solicitous of the royal corgis. The sharpest critique, 
though, is leveled at the European system of archaeological plunder—no need to 
mention Lords Elgin or Carnarvon by name—by which the noble heritage of one 
nation is reduced to quaint collectibles by another. Teasing starts out fairly tame 
when the arrest of Imhotep IV results in the roundup of hundreds of mummies 
that have obviously been stashed in antique shops and private drawing rooms. It 
takes a deliciously nasty turn, though, at the visual punchline in the dénouement: 
450 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
the Egyptian prince has become the impeccable British gentleman, and his pillaging 
father-in-law is shrouded, mislabeled, and on permanent display for the edification 
of museum-going Londoners and his own grandchildren.
Readers familiar with the Sardine in Outer Space books or Vampire Loves 
will scarcely recognize the work of Sfar and Guibert as they switch author and il-
lustrator roles for this early collaboration, now seeing new life as a French import. 
No spiky inking or bold matte colors here, but rather moody, detailed watercolors 
equally adept at capturing foggy embankments and damp jail cells, prim parlors 
and imposing courtrooms. The action tidily unfolds in six framed panels per page, 
a layout that should prove agreeable to even the most constrained Victorian sensi-
bilities. Only twice does Guibert break into full-page art—under the unbearable 
stress of the professors’ discovery of dead bodies disrupting domestic order, and 
again in a courtroom scene that honors (or sends up?) the majesty of British law. 
Scene changes are signaled by shifts from the dominant sepia and gray tones to rich 
blues for the dream sequences that supply Imhotep IV’s backstory, bilious greens 
of Lillian’s (second!) abduction, and brown and crimson for the stately paneling 
and silken robes of the trial.
Who could resist a masterful storyteller who can pull off lines like “Is it 
my fault if she refuses to marry a dead man?” or “I was thinking of our walk in 
the park that morning when I took you out of your sarcophagus” with a straight 
face. Even YAs who wouldn’t normally be caught dead with a love story (like, for 
instance, guys) will be wrapped up in this stylish mayhem. (See p. 485 for publica-
tion information.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
AlegríA, MAlín Sofi Mendoza’s Guide to Getting Lost in Mexico. Simon, 
2007 291p
ISBN 0-689-87811-7 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Sofia Esmeralda Mendoza de la Cruz was born in Mexico, but she has spent most 
of her seventeen years living out her parents’ version of the American Dream in 
southern California. When a forbidden weekend trip to Tijuana presents itself as 
the perfect opportunity to hook up with her secret crush, Sofi gets a more intimate 
acquaintance with her heritage than she ever expected; when she attempts to return 
to the U.S., her green card is rejected, and she is forced to stay with relatives she has 
never met while the question of her citizenship is settled. Sofi is a fish out of water 
on her uncle’s small farm; à la Paris Hilton and Nicole Richie in The Simple Life, 
she must acclimate to rural life without telephones, TiVo, or the Internet. While 
ostensibly an exploration of one girl’s discovery and acceptance of her own cultural 
identity, this is essentially a typical teen romance settled into a larger social context 
(a topic Alegría treated more convincingly in Estrella’s Quinceañera, BCCB 6/06). 
Sofi’s two-week transformation from spoiled Americana to proud border girl seems 
July/AugusT 2007 • 451
almost as improbable as her rapid acquisition of Spanish-language skills, and there 
is no doubt as to which of the three eligible guys she will finally figure out is her 
true love. Still, Alegría offers spot-on descriptions of the settings, especially dirty, 
teeming Tijuana and its dusty, underdeveloped outskirts, and endows Sofi with a 
certain amount of spunk even as she’s learning her Great Life Lesson. Members 
of the OC fan club may jump at a trip to TJ and remain invested enough to stick 
around and celebrate when a new-and-improved Sofi makes it home.  KB 
Avi The Traitors’ Gate; illus. by Karina Raude. Jackson/Atheneum, 
2007 [368p]
ISBN 0-689-85335-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
John Huffam’s father, who could never muster the wealth to match his aspirations 
as a gentleman, has now landed in London’s Whitcross Street Prison until he can 
discharge his £300 debt. None of his minor gambling embarrassments could have 
landed him in prison on their own, but sinister Mr. O’Doul has consolidated and 
purchased Mr. Huffam’s obligations, and now it’s up to his fourteen-year-old son 
John to find a way to raise the cash and restore the family to respectability. John 
has little more in assets than an honest face, a sensible nature, and a bit of help in 
securing a church-cleaning job through a wealthy great aunt; Mr. Huffam, though, 
actually has the means for his own deliverance at hand—as an employee of the 
Naval Ordinance Office, he’s privy to defense secrets which a number of spies and 
adventurers are beating a path to his cell to obtain. In this homage to nineteenth-
century Victoriana, Avi creates several secondary characters in which Dickens 
himself could have taken pride: Mr. Tuckum, who soothes the ruffled egos of 
debtor “guests” in his shabby “sponging house” even as he drives them deeper into 
debt; Sergeant Muldspoon, proprietor and sole master of Muldspoon’s Militantly 
Motivated Academy (“No retreat before ignorance!”); Mr. Snugsbe, who views his 
cocooning, comforting overcoat as a metaphor for his retreat from society. Unfor-
tunately, the central characters of John and his family, and even the sizable cast 
of police and suspected villains, are not nearly as interesting, and the treason plot 
never becomes compelling. Nonetheless, the short chapters break the long novel 
into manageable segments with frequent stops for atmospheric black-and-white 
artwork, and an enterprising teacher might want to share this with a class in daily 
readings, recreating the experience of Dickens’ serialized works.  EB 
BABBitt, nAtAlie Jack Plank Tells Tales. di Capua/Scholastic, 2007 128p
ISBN 0-545-00496-9 $15.95   
R Gr. 3-6
Mild-mannered Jack Plank hasn’t the flair for plundering of a proper pirate, but his 
mates aboard the Avarice enjoy his company and keep him on to mind the soup 
until they get back from their work. When pirating profits start to go south in the 
early 1700s, though, they reluctantly put him to port in Saltwash, Jamaica, wishing 
him well in finding an occupation to which he is better suited. He secures lodging at 
a boarding house, and with the help of Nina, the little girl whose widowed mother 
runs the place, he seeks what work may be found. At dinner every night, however, 
he relates his disappointment by telling a story that proves that he is ill suited to 
the various jobs that present themselves; each job reminds him of a person from his 
pirating days, the memory of which would make the work impossible. Jack might be 
a poor pirate, farmer, baker, fortuneteller, fisherman, barber, goldsmith, actor, and 
452  •  The BulleTin
musician, but he’s a dab hand at tale-telling, so when his florins and his prospects 
peter out, the widow and her boarders come up with a business proposition that 
will allow him to make money at what he does best. Babbitt’s winsome grace and 
light touch find apt subject matter in the tales of these sentimental old pirates; we 
meet, for instance, a man who bakes a cake to win the heart of a mermaid, an old 
musician who befriends a crocodile with his flute, a rascal who may or may not 
have killed his companions for their share of buried treasure. There are wonder 
tales as well, with a hint of a shiver in them, but all remain gentle and upbeat. The 
boarders provide pleasantly humorous commentary on Jack’s stories, and Babbitt’s 
own illustrations add warmth as she teases out the sheepish grins, awe, regret, 
greed, and fear that render the stories diverse and interesting. Indeed, Jack’s tales 
prove that pieces of eight and gold florins aren’t the only treasures a pirate can pick 
up on the high seas. Softly shaded black-and-white illustrations combine coziness 
with rueful amusement.  KC
Baddiel, ivor Cock-a-Doodle Quack! Quack!; by Ivor Baddiel and Sophie Jubb; 
illus. by Ailie Busby. Fickling/Random House, 2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75105-2 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75104-4 $15.99   
R 2-5 yrs
Poor Baby Rooster: he knows that it’s his job to wake up everyone on the farm, 
but he just doesn’t know what sound to utter. After asking around the barnyard, he 
learns what all the other animals say, and while his attempts at quacking, oinking, 
and mooing are wholehearted, they do not serve to wake up the animals. The wise 
old owl encourages him to learn by listening, so Baby Rooster gets up before dawn 
and, listening very carefully, attempts to mimic the sound he hears coming from 
the next farm; after a few mistaken attempts (“Cock-a-doodle-noo!” and “Cock-
a-doodle-poo!”), he finally nails a perfect crow and wakes everybody up. While 
this doesn’t have quite the exuberance of Palatini’s similarly themed Moo Who? 
(BCCB 7/04), it’s got lots of preschool appeal and immense storytime potential, 
especially given the large-scale, crowd-friendly acrylic paintings. Baby Rooster is a 
determined little clucker, and there is loads of conceptual humor in the idea that 
only a precisely executed cock-a-doodle-doo will serve to wake up a sleeping farm. 
Effective repetition and playful language (each time the rooster is taught a new 
animal sound, he gratefully acknowledges, “Oh, that’s really good” before trying it 
out himself) contribute to the appeal of the fluid narrative. Busby’s bold illustra-
tions employ softly textured brushstrokes to encompass broad fields of color; subtle 
shading and spotty touches of color and texture further the dimensionality. Most 
of the animals are a touch on the enjoyably rotund side, especially the roly-poly 
baby rooster who is approximately as wide as he is tall, with rounded comb, beak, 
and feathers. There’s always room for another tale of barnyard noise, and this one 
will most certainly satisfy.  HM
Blos, Joan W. Letters from the Corrugated Castle: A Novel of Gold Rush California, 
1850-1852. Seo/Atheneum, 2007 310p
ISBN 0-689-87077-9 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Eldora and her guardians, “Aunt” and “Uncle” Holt, have barely settled into their 
new iron house in the California territory when a letter arrives from a woman 
claiming to be Eldora’s birth mother. Meetings are arranged with Señora Ramos, 
and she presents irrefutable evidence of her identity—while gravely ill with cholera 
July/AugusT 2007 • 453
in Panama, she had entrusted her toddler to the care of a ship captain who was to 
deliver the child to her father; when the father proved to be deceased, the captain 
brought Eldora to his own childless aunt and uncle back East. Now Eldora is 
anxious to live with her mother, who owns a posada and ranches inherited from 
her second husband. The move doesn’t prove to be the fairy tale she had hoped 
for, though, since Señora Ramos is often too busy managing her business affairs 
to spend quality time with her teenage daughter. Eldora’s story unfolds beside that 
of another teen, Luke Hall, who is touring California with his journalist father, 
reporting for their hometown Michigan newspaper about the Gold Rush. Luke and 
Eldora’s letters—between each other and their friends and relatives—form the text 
of Blos’ novel, and their observations about the territory and the settlers’ relation-
ships with the Mexicanos are entertaining and informative. Unfortunately, there is 
precious little plot, apart from the melodramatic circumstances of Eldora’s family 
dynamic, to keep the readers invested; neither the family story nor the travelogue 
carries the weight alone, and Eldora and Luke spend so little time together that 
their relationship never quite takes flight either. Gold Rush stories aren’t usually 
presented with such girl appeal, though, and readers who enjoyed Cushman’s The 
Ballad of Lucy Whipple (BCCB 9/96) may want to stick around just to see whether 
Eldora will finally return to the adoptive couple who raised her.  EB
BruchAc, Joseph Bearwalker; illus. by Sally Wern Comport. HarperCollins, 
2007 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-112311-0 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-112309-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
There is an old Mohawk legend of a young boy who saves his tribe from a man 
who has taken on the power of a bear, becoming both man and beast, a bearwalker. 
Baron Braun loves that legend, both because he himself is Mohawk and because, 
as the shortest member of his eighth-grade class, he’s drawn to a tale where the 
smallest guy becomes the hero. When the whole class goes to spend a week in 
the Adirondacks, Baron knows he’ll have to deal with bullies, but his distaste for 
the trip changes to deep foreboding when he meets the man called Walker White 
Bear. Things begin to go wrong at the camp from the start, with Baron discovering 
that unscrupulous relatives are trying to sabotage the aging owners’ intentions of 
making the location a nature preserve; things go from bad to worse when people 
start to disappear. Bruchac spins a striking story, filled with interesting informa-
tion about bears, chilling moments around the campfire, and life-or-death chase 
scenes through the forest. He is less successful, though, when he hammers readers 
with phrases or story connections they would have been unlikely to forget in the 
first place, and he repeatedly makes Baron a little too wise for his years. In spite of 
these shortcomings, readers will return again and again to this adventure tale, and 
it offers plenty of potential for book discussions about other stories wherein the 
littlest one saves the day. Final illustrations not seen.  CW
Buehner, cArAlyn Would I Ever Lie to You?; illus. by Jack E. Davis. Dial, 
2007 32p
ISBN 0-8037-2793-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Our narrator is at the mercy of his older cousin Ed, who “says outrageous things 
with ease,” leaving the poor kid wondering which things are true and which are 
454  •  The BulleTin
lies. In the past, Ed has convinced the narrator that his head is shrinking and that 
there are alligators in Grandma’s attic; on the other hand, it turns out that Ed’s 
claims that Aunt Mary has no teeth and that there are trees so big you can drive 
through them were absolutely true. Now the perplexed narrator faces a piece of 
pie, unsure whether or not to believe Ed’s claim that the dessert is poison. The 
scansion is wildly haphazard in these tetrameter couplets, making reading a bit of 
a challenge, but kids will immediately recognize the situation wherein an older 
kid uses his superior status to play mind games. Ed’s got a good array of tales that 
blend classic kid lies with the unbelievable yet true, and there’s enough reveling in 
crude physicality, especially in Ed’s dire warnings about the pie, to ensure readerly 
snorts of glee. Mixed-media illustrations mine humor from relentless exaggeration, 
especially in the oversized gaptoothed heads of the young cousins; scenes are often 
dominated by chaotic and crowded elements, but that adds to the frenetic humor. 
The best joke of all comes in the finish, when the narrator errs in eating the pie 
and then succumbs as a result—or does he (“Would I ever lie to you?”)? This is 
an amusing stand-alone work, but it could also be slipped into a folklore unit as a 
reminder that kids are the best tricksters of all.  DS 
Bunting, EvE Hurry! Hurry!; illus. by Jeff Mack. Harcourt, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-15-205410-3 $16.00   
Ad 1-3 yrs
Something big is about to happen in the barnyard, and all the animals are eager 
to be a part of the event. The text follows a simple pattern of repeated phrases 
(“Hurry! Hurry!”, “Coming! Coming!”, “Ready? Ready?”, “Yes! Yes!”), each pair 
uttered by a different grouping of farm animals. The instigator of the mass exodus 
of animals turns out to be a proud mama hen, and the event is none other than 
the hatching of her baby chick, who bursts out declaring, “I’m here! I’m here!” 
while all the barnyard citizens beam. The acrylic paintings lack outlining, with 
the animals blending into the similarly textured grass and sky instead of standing 
out against the background. There is liveliness in the illustrations, though, and 
the tonal shift from the animals’ stampeding to the animals’ quiet observation of 
the egg is particularly well executed. The plot offers a nice trajectory and focused 
energy towards the pending surprise, but ultimately this is a fairly thin episode, 
lacking the substance needed for a full-length storybook. Still, little listeners will 
enjoy hearing the different animals shout out, and they will likely join in after a 
reading or two.  HM
CaBot, MEg Prom Nights from Hell; by Meg Cabot, Kim Harrison, Michele Jaffe, 
et al. HarperTeen, 2007 304p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-125310-3 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-125309-X $9.99   
M Gr. 7-10
LEvithan, DaviD, ed. 21 Proms; ed. by David Levithan and Daniel 
Ehrenhaft. Point/Scholastic, 2007  289p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-439-89029-2 $8.99   
R Gr. 7-10
“High school proms are all alike; every unhappy couple is unhappy in its own way,” 
says Rachel Cohn, smartly adapting Tolstoy’s famous first line for her contribution 
to Levithan’s panoply of original short stories about that infamous night of highest 
teen drama. Throughout these two volumes, seemingly every possible constellation 
of prom pleasure and mayhem, natural and supernatural, is explored. Levithan and 
July/AugusT 2007 • 455
Ehrenhaft assemble a star gallery of twenty-one YA authors, and these writers strut 
their stuff, ably working the short-story form to capture the nuances of the satin 
and tulle money pit that is the American Prom. In settings ranging from 1980s 
prep-school banquets to rubber-chicken hotel affairs to tackily be-streamered school 
cafeterias to a magical 1955 Gullah night in an old barn, their characters find what 
they’re looking for on dance floors, in limos, in rented Winnebagos, at after parties, 
or not at all; each story creates its own world and the appropriate mood to go with 
it. Cabot’s crew is no less glittery, but for the most part, their occult-themed stories, 
with the exception of Stephenie Meyer’s, are disappointing. Lauren Myracle’s piece 
is, by her own admission, a reworking of “The Monkey’s Paw,” but as she offers 
no innovation other than making the characters promcentric, the suspense that 
creates the original horror is lost. Meyer’s well-wrought story of romance between 
a determinedly wicked demon and an irresistible angel has considerable appeal, 
but the other efforts fail at the level of form: the long short stories allude to, but 
don’t explain, offstage details that are important for understanding the contexts and 
characters, making these stories seem like tantalizing excerpts from longer works, 
with frustrating rather than evocative gaps. Readers who are looking for a tastier 
supernatural prom bite, or a more satisfying chomp at a prom that bites, will find it 
in Clement-Moore’s Prom Dates from Hell (reviewed below); those finding sufficient 
complexity in reality will relish Levithan’s rewarding collection.  KC  
cArMAn, pAtrick Atherton: The House of Power. Little, 2007 330p
ISBN 0-316-16670-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Edgar has spent his young life helping maintain the fig trees on Tabletop, the 
middle part of the three-tiered world of Atherton, which also includes a virtually 
uninhabitable lower level known as the Flatlands and an exclusive verdant upper 
level known as the Highlands. A hazy memory moves Edgar to explore the steep 
cliffs separating agricultural Tabletop from the powerful Highlands; in a cliff recess 
there he finds an old leatherbound book, which Edgar, illiterate like the rest of his 
class, cannot read. As he sneaks into Highlands seeking an upper-class reader, he 
comes across Samuel, another eleven-year-old, and the two learn from the book 
that Atherton is sinking in upon itself; soon the Highlands will be on the same 
level with Tabletop, upending the social order. When Samuel is discovered with 
the book, it is taken from him and given to ruthless Lord Phineas, who controls 
Atherton’s House of Power and who prepares to go to war. Only Edgar, Samuel, 
and a young girl named Isabel, who is a crack shot with a slingshot and hard black 
figs, stand between the good folks of Tabletop and the authoritarian control of the 
dark-robed Lord Phineas. This is a lively and absorbing adventure; the omniscient 
narrator, who occasionally comments on character’s actions, creates some useful 
distance between the action and the reader that reassures us that Edgar’s story will 
likely end well. Several soft pencil drawings in blacks and grays, scattered throughout 
the book add a hint of menace, and bits of a mad scientist’s journal enhance the 
feeling that this is a world slightly out of control. There is plenty of danger and 
mystery, too, for young adventurers who will eagerly follow Edgar up and over 
cliffs and into dark caves in his quest to save his world.  CW
456  •  The BulleTin
CeCh, John, ad. The Elves and the Shoemaker; illus. by Kirill Chelushkin. Ster-
ling, 2007 26p
ISBN 1-4027-3067-5 $14.95   
R 7-10 yrs
Children’s literature scholar Cech here turns his retelling skills to the classic Grimm 
Brothers fairy tale about a shoemaker’s changing luck. Helped by nocturnal visitors 
who prove to be elves, the cobbler and his wife thank their benefactors with the gift 
of new clothes; the elves recognize the act of emancipation for what it is and take 
off joyfully, while good fortune continues to smile down on the shoemaker and his 
wife. Cech’s adaptation is straightforward and direct, eschewing complex details 
or descriptive passages and focusing on the events. The art, by contrast, is casually 
sophisticated: Chelushkin’s illustrations offer extensively detailed compositions 
that play with a variety of media, including pen and ink, block print, pencil, and 
oil, with the differing styles often overlapping on a single page. The pencil-scribble 
texturing and smoky earth-color pigments make for some intriguing visuals, and 
the playful experimentation is evocative; an element of surrealism pervades many 
of the spreads, with magical creatures peering out from unexpected places. This 
is a moodier take than usual on this familiar tale, and it offers a good excuse to 
revisit a story the youngsters may feel they have outgrown. A lengthy note provides 
information on the Grimm Brothers, the role of elves in both folklore and ancient 
belief, and details about this particular tale.  HM
Chima, Cinda Williams The Wizard Heir. Hyperion, 2007 [464p]
ISBN 1-4231-0487-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
In this companion novel to The Warrior Heir (BCCB 7/06), another teenage boy, 
this time a wizard, is awakening to his powers. Seph has been reared to believe he 
is an orphan; he knows that he belongs to a magical race called the Weir but has no 
idea what that means or how to connect with others like him. Now that his powers 
are emerging in their full, uncontrolled force, he is becoming a danger to those 
around him, so he is actually grateful to be sent away to a secluded boys’ school. 
There he meets Gregory Leicester, who is nursing his wounds over the upset in 
the previous book’s concluding battle and looking to train an army to retake the 
power that the Wizard’s Guild lost in that encounter. Seph is rightfully suspicious 
of his new headmaster, especially as classmates who defy Leicester disappear; after 
months of mental and physical torture, he manages to get a message to his guardian 
Linda Downey, who rescues him and takes him to join Warrior Heir protagonists 
Jack, Ellen, and Nick in the Sanctuary town of Trinity, Ohio. Here Seph joins 
forces with the crew who overthrew the wizards, and they work to cement a new 
constitution that will release the other guilds from their servitude to the wizards. 
Though Chima’s prose is clunky and lackluster at times, much can be forgiven in 
light of her meticulous plotting and her compelling development of a vast array of 
fully realized, complex characters. It’s best to read The Warrior Heir before picking 
this up; while some characters who were developed there drop back to bit players 
here, others require the context of the first book to be fully appreciated. Knowl-
edgeable readers, though, will again be drawn into a world that ably straddles the 
chasm between the ordinary and the magical, and the strong message of teamwork 
and interdependence underwrites the political theme of realizing true democracy 
among the Weirlind.  KC
July/AugusT 2007 • 457
cleMent-Moore, roseMAry Prom Dates from Hell. Delacorte, 2007 308p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90428-2 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73412-3 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Maggie Quinn has always scoffed at what her Irish granny calls her “Sight,” but 
a dream that she is on a roll call for Hell has left her decidedly unsettled. When a 
classmate has a nearly fatal pool accident and barfs up the putrifying-cadaver smell 
from Maggie’s dream along with the pool water, Maggie dials up her inner Nancy 
Drew and gets to work. Aided by Justin, a cute student from the local college who’s 
majoring in the weird and creepy, she begins to track down a shadowy demon 
that understandably seems to be targeting the popular, bullying Jocks and Jessicas 
but inexplicably has designs on her as well. He haunts her backyard and then her 
bathroom mirror, visibly gaining substance with each attack. Prom night, with all 
of its collective angst and emotional turmoil, is all set to be his nadir, but Maggie 
has other plans that involve conquering not only the real demon, but a few of her 
own metaphorical ones as well. This suspenseful, cleverly conceived horror story is 
written in full-on Buffy tradition; there is a big bad evil who uses high-school pet-
tiness to ascend to power, one person who must figure it out and fight it with the 
help of her friends, and some serious throw-down physical fighting. Moreover, as 
Justin, the cute college boy sidekick, remarks, Maggie does indeed “live and die” by 
the wisecrack—her first-person narration is full of smart-alecky jibes at high-school 
traditions and her own place in them. No matter if you’re promphobic, a prom 
fanatic, or just stuck at home, this is one prom night that won’t disappoint.  KC
clinton, cAthryn The Eyes of van Gogh. Candlewick, 2007 [224p]
ISBN 0-7636-2245-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-12
Ellenville, Pennsylvania initially looks like just another stop for Jude and her hard-
drinking and rootless mother, but Jude soon finds herself growing attached. She 
spends time with her institutionalized grandmother, who’s brain-damaged after 
a stroke, and she imagines the woman to be providing the ideal and nurturing 
responses that Jude’s mother never offers; in school she finds friends and solid 
encouragement for her artistic talent. Most importantly, she finds Todd, a gentle 
football player whose devotion, Jude is sure, will lead to his providing the home 
for which she’s always longed. The picture of depressed and lonely Jude is tenderly 
drawn, and it’s credible that such a girl would begin to identify with the tortured 
soul of Van Gogh. Jude’s efforts to find security and approval are poignantly de-
picted, and readers will see early on that her hopes of Todd are somewhat unfair as 
well as misplaced. Unfortunately, the carefully wrought buildup is squandered with 
an abrupt resolution that leaves Jude suddenly hunky-dory after a failed suicide 
attempt and a medically implausible coma, grossly undercutting the subtle accre-
tion of setbacks and sorrow that had put Jude in extremis. Still, she’s compelling 
in her defeat if not in her eventual victory, and readers will empathize with her 
yearning for release.  DS
458 • The BulleTin
clippinger, cArol Open Court. Knopf, 2007 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-94049-9 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-84049-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Tennis has been thirteen-year-old Hall’s life, and she’s being recruited for high-
powered Bickford Tennis Academy, which would give her opportunities for inter-
national play and offer her the best chance to get to the pros. The problem is that 
she’s not sure she wants to go: she’s having fun with new friend Polly, who’s sick 
of the pressure to be a math genius; she’s finally getting attention from her dream 
boy, Luke; most of all, she’s haunted by the memory of the mental breakdown of a 
friend and fellow player. Hall’s narration sometimes sounds a little old for thirteen, 
but her dilemma is cast credibly and unprogrammatically: this isn’t just a caution-
ary or adulatory tale of prodigy but a genuine examination of a girl faced with a 
large and complicated decision. The book is clear-eyed about the commitment, 
financial and otherwise, that Hall’s family has already made to tennis to get her this 
far, and it makes a reasonable case for the logic of moving up to the genuine big 
leagues for financial as well as other reasons (Hall will finally get real sponsorship 
and perhaps even a scholarship to Bickford). Throughout, Hall is a sympathetic 
and three-dimensional figure, a solid and focused athlete who loves the sport but 
who remains uncertain about the price she must pay for following her talent, yet 
she’s also clearly drawn as an everyday kid, with the book reading appealingly like 
a more conventional story of school and friends. Tennis fans will appreciate the 
book’s understanding of the sinewy joys of the game, while bleacher-warmers will 
enjoy the character drama and be both glad and sorry that they’re not faced with 
Hall’s life choice.  DS
coleBAnk, susAn Black Tuesday. Dutton, 2007 264p
ISBN 0-525-47766-7 $16.99   
M Gr. 7-10
Black Tuesday is the day Jayne’s life changes: she starts out as an overburdened 
workhorse focusing on Harvard, but that all comes to a screeching halt along with 
her car—which she drives through a red light and into another vehicle, resulting 
in the hospitalization and eventual death of the six-year-old girl riding in the pas-
senger seat. Jayne’s controlling and polished anchorwoman mother sets Jayne up 
with a great attorney, so her punishment is limited to loss of driver’s license and 
performance of community service (she also perfunctorily attends counseling with 
a family friend). In the aftermath, she begins to ease up on her long-term habit 
of diligent striving and attention to rules, doing the rebellious piercing and edgy-
hairstyle thing and reveling in the attentions of a sexy guy she meets at the youth 
outreach center where she’s performing community service. While the story has 
some thematic commonality with Cooney’s Driver’s Ed (BCCB 9/94), the superfi-
cial writing and muddled emotional exploration preclude the book’s effectiveness 
as either emotional drama or ethical investigation. Jayne is largely unsympathetic, 
starting out as a sour and complaining martyr and then acting out her pain in 
preteen-styled brattiness, and characterization overall is handed out rather than 
established. What’s more, the actual consequence of Jayne’s action, the death of the 
little girl, is only peripherally touched upon as something that has repercussions 
for Jayne, and the people around the victim are oddly villainized (there’s a whiff of 
homophobia in the book’s approach to the girl’s sister, who is Jayne’s classmate, and 
her friend, though it’s never actually clear if they’re lesbians). Ultimately, it seems 
July/August 2007 • 459
less like Jayne worked through her personal and family issues than she got off easy 
because of that very good-girl history she’s trying to reject, and cynical readers will 
wonder if they, too, can increase their chances of Harvard admission by screwing 
up as catastrophically and with as little consequence as Jayne.  DS
Colfer, eoin Benny and Babe. Miramax/Hyperion, 2007 282p
ISBN 1-4231-0283-5 $18.95   
R Gr. 5-7
   Benny and Omar. Miramax/Hyperion, 2007 280p
ISBN 1-4231-0281-9 $18.95   
R Gr. 5-7
Benny can’t seem to catch a break: he is uprooted at the whims of his parents, his 
sarcastic personality doesn’t seem to be winning him any friends, and his drama-
obsessed younger brother always seems to be getting him in more trouble. In 
Benny and Omar, twelve-year-old Benny is forced to move from his native Ireland 
to Tunisia, a country where no one has even heard of hurling, the sport around 
which Benny’s life revolves. After a rough start, Benny finds an ally in Omar, 
a homeless boy whose English is limited to television references. In Benny and 
Babe, Benny is back in Ireland, one year older but not much wiser, as he faces his 
summer home with the same cynical eye as his earlier trip, determined to dislike 
everyone before they can reject him. He meets his match, however, in a smart girl, 
Babe, who not only challenges his hurling ability but also trumps him by having 
a killer, one-eyed dog who can keep Benny in line. In both novels, Benny learns 
similar lessons about perspective: Benny’s life seems rather grand compared to the 
orphaned Omar, whose sister languishes in an ill-equipped rehabilitation center, 
and losing his business opportunity (Benny and Babe sell retrieved fishing lures to 
tourists dumb enough to buy them) ultimately loses its sting once Benny realizes 
how bad the home life of his rival really is. However, both of the imports, packed 
with Irish colloquialisms and pitch-perfect humor, are much more memorable for 
the adventures and continuous scrapes in which Benny finds himself (none of which, 
of course, are ever his fault) than the moral growth of the protagonist. Sardonic 
and impulsive, Benny is easily engaging enough to appeal to Colfer’s fantasy base as 
well as realistic- fiction fans.  AS
Cortez, Sarah, ed. Windows into My World: Latino Youth Write Their Lives. Pi-
ñata/Arte Público, 2007 [224p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55885-482-7 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 10-12
Thirty-six contributors offer personal stories in this collection of memoirs showcas-
ing the lives of young Hispanics in the United States. Most of the writers hail from 
the Houston area, and this narrower focus lends a beneficial cohesiveness to the 
assortment. Topics range from death to homosexuality, eating disorders to immigra-
tion, and while all of the stories focus on Latino experience (a young man evaluates 
the Machismo lifestyle in “Men Also Cry”; a working mother tries to learn English 
in “Inglés in Thirty Minutes”), many of the vignettes treat subjects that are more 
broadly applicable (losing a loved grandparent in “See You When God Says So”; 
fitting in with a high school group in “Glamour”; moving away from a childhood 
home in “Waterloo Street”). Some of the essays dip into the didactic, sounding 
like answers to a college entrance essay asking what the applicant appreciates about 
his heritage (and most of the contributors are indeed college-aged or older, rather 
460 • The BulleTin
than the reader age-mates the title suggests), but the majority of the pieces are 
thought-provoking recollections, several with eloquently interspersed untranslated 
Spanish. Some of the shorter essays could translate into effective monologues for a 
high-school speech team, and the wide variety of childhood memories may appeal 
to older teens ready to settle in for a more reflective read. Contributor biographies 
are included.  KB
crilley, MArk Miki Falls Book One: Spring; written and illus. by Mark 
Crilley. HarperTeen, 2007 165p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-084616-X $7.99   
R Gr. 7-9
In this manga-influenced graphic novel, Miki is beginning her senior year in high 
school, and she is desperate for something new in her life. A stand-offish (and 
gorgeous) new student, Hiro, presents a challenge for Miki, but she is determined 
not only to befriend him but also to uncover the reasons for his constant spying on 
people. After doing some spying herself, Miki learns that Hiro is a Deliverer, one of 
few chosen to control the limited flow of love in the world; by accepting this fate, 
Hiro became a non-human, sacrificing his own normal life to serve this role. After 
learning this secret, Miki should have had her memory erased, but her stubbornness 
is such that even powerful magic cannot deter her. Rather than being angry, Hiro 
seems relieved to have a friend who knows his secret, and the first novel in the series 
ends quietly, with the two pursuing their bond. A seven-page introduction before 
the title page seems to set up the main climax of the whole series, which makes for a 
slightly confusing start for this particular outing. However, as with his middle-grade 
Akiko series, Crilley’s gripping and well-written plot and intriguing characters will 
easily lure readers back to see the series through. The black-and-white illustrations, 
softened with crosshatching and smoky grayshading, augment the text effectively: 
the art reflects the humor and emotional depth in Miko’s story that is occasionally 
missing in her fact-heavy past-tense narration. Romance readers will appreciate 
the elegant and well-developed magical twist to the typical boy-meets-girl story: a 
boy who has forsworn his own love so that he may manage it for others, and the 
girl who is determined to find a loophole around this vow while not risking the 
balance of love in the world.  AS 
dAly, niki Pretty Salma: A Little Red Riding Hood Story from Africa; ad. and illus. 
by Niki Daly. Clarion, 2007 29p
ISBN 0-618-72345-5 $16.00   
R 5-8 yrs
In this retelling of “Little Red Riding Hood” set in Ghana, young Salma takes a 
shortcut home from the market through the “wild side of town.” Here she meets 
Mr. Dog, who tricks her into handing over not only her purchases but also items of 
dress, and then sends her off (“Now run away, little girl, before I bite you in two!”). 
Salma dashes to her grandfather, who is telling stories to a group of children in the 
town center; in the meantime, the dog, disguised as Salma, goes to visit Granny. 
Grandfather and Salma, dressed in dramatic costumes gleaned from Grandfather’s 
storytelling, arrive just in time; thinking he is witnessing Ka Ka Motobi the Bogey-
man, the dog runs off in fear, and Granny is freed from the cookpot in which she 
was trapped. Daly’s retelling offers a pleasing blend of familiar and original elements 
(there is no note, so other sources and influences are unknown); he is particularly 
adept at creating the Ghanaian setting, from the bustling market to the seedy wild 
side of the town. The story sparkles with kid-friendly humor, from the lanky male 
July/AugusT 2007 • 461
dog’s disguising himself as a little girl to the hilarious series of interactions between 
Granny and the fake Salma (Mr. Dog greets her with a big sloppy kiss, chases after 
a rooster at the suggestion of eating, and happily allows Granny to give him a 
shampooing and rubdown). The illustrations recall storyboards, with several scenes 
following one after another on each spread; composed of watercolor and digital 
media, they possess a somewhat muted vibrancy, with the brightness softened by 
pencil shadings and plentiful pale earthtones. This is an LRRH version that beams 
with sassy good fun, and it would make a terrific partner to James Marshall’s Red 
Riding Hood (BCCB 9/87).  HM
dAvis, deBorAh Not Like You. Clarion, 2007 [272p]
ISBN 0-618-72093-6 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Yet another move is no surprise to fifteen-year-old Kayla, who’s accustomed to being 
dragged along whenever her alcoholic mother takes a fancy to a new destination 
or a new man. This time they’re in small-town New Mexico, where Kayla’s mother 
has been given cheap rent in a mobile home, and where Kayla, as usual, finds work 
that will serve as the family’s economic mainstay. On one of her dog-walking jobs, 
she finds Remy, a sexy twenty-four-year-old musician (she tells him she’s almost 
eighteen) who makes her feel important, wanted, and valued in a way that her 
home life never has. This is a strongly written portrait of a sympathetic young 
woman who isn’t quite as matured by her life as she thinks. Characterization is 
acute throughout: the picture of Kayla’s mother, who tries to be better but fails so 
repeatedly that Kayla would be a fool to trust her, and who breezily helps herself 
to her daughter’s income, is sharp but not cruel, and Remy isn’t an evil charlatan 
but a self-indulgent dreamer a little too eager to take what’s offered to him. It’s 
also absolutely believable that Kayla would yearn for escape from such a situation, 
even to the point of deceiving herself about her own behavior; what she deserves, 
though, is real possibility rather than an impulsive flight of fancy, and readers will 
be glad to see her heading toward a better future at the end.  DS
dAy, kAren Tall Tales. Lamb, 2007 229p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93773-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83773-6 $15.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Before Meg’s family moved, her father promised that he’d stop drinking. Now 
twelve-year-old Meg is stuck in a new school and she’s finally making a friend in 
sweet and popular Grace Bennett, but she’s got the same old father, angry, vio-
lent, and alcoholic. To save her pride and to abide by her mother’s wish that their 
problems stay family business, Meg invents tales about her family and history that 
explain their repeated moves, her unwillingness to let people into the house, and, 
as things deteriorate, her mother’s bruises and her brother’s broken arm. The story’s 
elements are predictable in the extreme, but such dysfunctional situations do tend 
to follow familiar patterns, and the story’s messages are blessedly subtle rather than 
heavy-handed. There’s some real creativity in the characters, especially Grace, who 
just wants people to get along, and her family; Day also gives full credit to the 
complexity of Meg’s emotions, making her father’s eventual departure a genuinely 
sad scene despite the necessity of the action. Just about every kid can relate to the 
desire to cover up family flaws, so they’ll understand Meg’s dilemma and they’ll be 
glad to see her reach better times.  DS
462 • The BulleTin
de guzMAn, MichAel Finding Stinko. Farrar, 2007 136p
ISBN 0-374-32305-4 $16.00   
R Gr. 6-10
A dozen years in foster care have left Newboy guarded, suspicious, and, for the last 
three years, completely mute. Finally, he flees the home of the Knoxes, his cruel and 
mercenary current foster parents; in a dumpster, he finds a ventriloquist’s dummy, 
whom he names Stinko and who becomes Newboy’s voice. On the streets, Newboy 
finds a shadowy network of kids on their own, some powerful, some at the mercy 
of the powerful, and he develops the idea of fleeing the city for a new life with his 
new allies, if they can get away from the street overlords and the pursuing Knoxes. 
Between the chaotic underground milieu and resonant nicknames of the street kids 
and the relentless threat of recapture by the villainous Knoxes, the elements here 
are Dickensian gothic, yet de Guzman’s style is spare and laconic, making for an 
interesting combination. Newboy’s mutism is effectively employed; while Stinko 
operates in a well-established tradition by voicing even sentiments that Newboy 
knows would be better unsaid, the dialogue—sometimes between Newboy and 
Stinko—is crisp and sardonic. The city existence created is believable yet slightly 
surreal, making for a world wherein the kids’ eventual escape to Florida seems a 
viable solution rather than just a relocation of their problems. Drawing on both 
orphan stories and hard-bitten urban survival sagas, this will appeal to a range of 
reading tastes, satisfying both those kids who long for escape and those who yearn 
to see everybody find a place.  DS
diAkité, BABA WAgué Mee-An and the Magic Serpent: A Folktale from Mali; ed. 
and illus. by Baba Wagué Diakité. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-88899-719-1 $16.95   
R 6-8 yrs
Beautiful and vain Mee-An is looking for the perfect husband; she will not accept a 
mate who has “a single scratch, scar or blemish on any part of his body.” Her hopeless 
quest soon becomes a point of humor among the men of her village, and a powerful 
serpent who hears of her ridiculous standards sees an opportunity, disguising himself 
as a perfect, unblemished man and easily winning Mee-An’s hand in marriage. After 
Mee-An’s younger sister Assa follows custom and accompanies the newlyweds to 
their new home, the two sisters discover the serpent’s deception and sinister plans 
for them (“Mee-An and her sister . . . can make a delicious meal”). Fortunately, Assa 
has her own powers, and she calls upon a black heron to rescue the two sisters and 
bring them safely home. This folktale from Mali is brought vividly to life in Diakité’s 
rich paintings composed on ceramic tiles. Most effective is the portrayal of village 
life—the colors, textures, activity, flora, and fauna are captivatingly composed in 
lush, earthy tones bordered by thick black outlines. The smoothly turned text is well 
suited for a readaloud, and kids will immediately get its point; while the ending is a 
little overambitious (it not only concludes the plot, it provides explanations for why 
the heron is now white and why herons hang out on the backs of land animals), 
young listeners will likely consider that merely added value. Use this with a selection 
of African folktales or teaching tales for a rousing storytime.  HM
duey, kAthleen Skin Hunger: A Resurrection of Magic. Atheneum, 
2007 [368p]
ISBN 0-689-84093-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Gentle Sadima becomes an uncomfortable third in the complicated partnership 
July/AugusT 2007 • 463
between idealistic Franklin (whom she comes to love) and perpetually angry Somiss, 
who is obsessed by his desire to bring magic back into the world. In a parallel story, 
young Hahp, disinherited by his rich family, and Gerrard, a slum-born orphan, 
are trapped in a school where no one is allowed to un-enroll and students die in 
their attempt to become wizards. The brutal school that Hahp and Gerrard attend 
is actually Somiss’ academy, the fruit of his early struggles to reinstate magic, and 
Somiss’ story with Franklin and Sadima is the prequel to the young boys’ time in 
school. Somiss, casually cruel, stands at the nexus of the two stories; he is a man 
willing to sacrifice nearly anything to achieve his goals, and at the end of this first 
book in the Resurrection of Magic trilogy, it is unclear how far he will go. Readers 
will be quickly captured as much by the mystery of the connection between the two 
stories as the relationships Duey skillfully develops to tell the seemingly disparate 
tales. Sadima and Franklin’s slowly evolving romance is set against the troubled 
relationship between Franklin and Somiss, while Hahp and Gerrard struggle with 
their humanity in a place where they are told that to help each other means fail-
ure. The school-story setting, which mimics the ascetic feel of a religious school, 
is startlingly harsh, and it creates a dramatic foil for the more domestic feel of the 
Sadima-Franklin-Somiss triangle. There is a lot to appreciate here: intriguing char-
acters in challenging situations, the hunt for the roots of magic, and the struggle 
between humanity and obsession—meaty stuff that will appeal to readers, who will 
devour this book and eagerly await the next in the trilogy.  CW
durst, sArAh Beth Into the Wild. Razorbill, 2007 [272p]
ISBN 1-59514-156-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Julie has a “tangled mass of green,” known as the Wild, living un-
der her bed, which is somehow connected to her mother’s secret past. In fact, the 
Wild encompasses the pure essence of all fairy tales, and it daily makes attempts 
to return the world to a time when plot, scenery, and characters were all laid out 
along strictly traditional lines. Julie’s mother, Rapunzel (aka Zel), faced off against 
the Wild centuries earlier, risking and ultimately losing Julie’s father in a battle that 
eventually forced the grasping thing into its present shape. Unfortunately, it only 
takes a wish to set the force free, and someone gets past the three bears guarding 
the Wishing Well and gives the Wild the fuel to begin its conquest of present day 
Northboro, Massachusetts, and the world. Julie’s mother, grandmother, and a 
whole lot of civilians are sucked back into the Woods, and Julie follows them in an 
effort to turn Tradition upon itself and free princesses, heroes, and witches from a 
fate worse than the end of a story. The author takes readers on a grand adventure 
involving candy houses and ogres, providing plenty of opportunities to watch for 
favorite fairy-tale characters and chances to spy traditional story traps before Julie 
becomes caught up in them. Durst has her tongue firmly in cheek when it comes 
to occupations (Rapunzel owns a hair salon), adopted names (Mary Hadda—ac-
companied by her lamb), and even the source of the wish that sets new fairy tales 
in motion (the librarian did it). Young readers may not catch all the allusions and 
humor, but Julie’s imaginative quest and the presence of some mainstream names 
(Cinderella, Snow White) will be enough to keep their attention and, perhaps, send 
them back to the shelves in search of additional stories, or those they may have 
forgotten they knew and loved once upon a time.  CW
464 • The BulleTin
ellsWorth, lorettA In Search of Mockingbird. Holt, 2007 181p
ISBN 0-8050-7236-5 $16.95   
M Gr. 6-9
Erin’s mother died when Erin was a week old; now it’s 1986, Erin’s sixteen, and 
she’s still clinging to a fantasy that she can somehow forge a connection with her 
mother through their shared love of the book To Kill a Mockingbird. Armed with 
her mother’s teen-years diary, Erin runs away to Monroeville, Alabama, to try to 
meet the reclusive Harper Lee. Aboard the Greyhound, she meets a host of diverse 
people, starting with Sedushia the itinerant stripper, who get behind her project 
of seeking out a connection with her mom through Lee. She also meets Epp, an 
overweight geek with a dream of his own—to design a game for an Atari 800—who 
takes responsibility for her and helps her avoid police and hitch a ride to her final 
destination. Initially, Erin’s character is scantily developed, making her flight seem 
absurdly abrupt and ill-conceived; indeed, in the end she admits that it was stupid 
to think that Harper Lee could make her feel better about never knowing her mom. 
The events of her trip are what they invented the word “hokey” for: after helping 
Sedushia reconnect with her estranged son, Erin becomes a folk hero on the bus, 
accompanied by a soundtrack of actual applause and well-wishing from a cast of 
hackneyed and overladen characters. By the time she realizes that the two women 
in the Monroeville diner who overhear her conversation and offer her the advice to 
write a letter to her mother are in fact Harper Lee and her sister, the narrative has 
moved beyond hokey into mawkish country-ballad territory with no return ticket. 
Readers looking for an exploration of a single book’s effect will fare far better with 
Portman’s King Dork (BCCB 5/06).  KC
elyA, susAn Middleton Oh No, Gotta Go #2; illus. by Lynne Avril. Putnam, 
2007 32p
ISBN 0-399-24308-9 $15.99   
R 3-5 yrs
The spunky little Latina who learned the limits of bladder control in Oh No, Gotta 
Go! (BCCB 7/03) isn’t taking any chances on her current outing to the park for 
a picnic. Not only does she dutifully visit the baño before leaving home, she also 
makes a grand effort at dehydration: “I didn’t drink jugo or pink limonada./ I 
didn’t drink agua. I didn’t drink nada!” But on her tricycle, blocks from home, 
she realizes that the spinach salad wants out—now—and her parents are again 
called upon to make a mad dash for the facilities before disaster strikes. Although 
this particular little gal’s intestinal woes play out bilingually in English and Span-
ish (with glossary provided), there are no cultural borders to potty panic, and all 
listeners and their long-suffering parents will recognize the scenario. The frantic 
urgency is underscored by Avril’s chalk pastels, which segue from cool greens and 
relatively static compositions of a leisurely trip to the park, to the fiery reds and 
oranges of the bolt for the bathroom. Will this cautionary tale convince little ones 
of the need for preemptive bathroom visits? Not likely. But perhaps they and their 
parents will face the next accident with better grace.  EB 
eMMett, JonAthAn She’ll Be Coming ’Round the Mountain; illus. by Deborah 
Allwright. Atheneum, 2007 28p
ISBN 1-4169-3652-1 $16.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
In this playful interpretation of the familiar folk song, a guitar-playing cactus 
rocking on the front porch invites listeners to “Gather ’round now!” as he sings 
July/August 2007 • 465
of the pending arrival of the titular she, in this case, a spunky mite of a girl in a 
ten-gallon hat, red cowboy boots, and ruffly pink pajamas. Emmett takes extensive 
creative liberty with the lyrics, adding details, new verses, and, most notably, a pair 
of rhymed lines in the middle of each verse that diverge from the first and last line 
(e.g., “She’ll be driving six white horses when she comes, WHOA BACK!/ She’ll 
be driving six white horses when she comes, WHOA BACK!/ They’re called Misty, 
Moonbeam, Milkshake,/ Stardust, Silvermane, and Snowflake/ She’ll be driving 
six white horses when she comes, WHOA BACK!”). The verses are chock full of 
silliness (“And you won’t believe how nimbly/ She can boogie round the chimbly”), 
and each comes with a gesture, described in directions on the last two-page spread. 
Those preparing for a readaloud will want to have a trial run or two, as the metric 
scheme sometimes unexpectedly starts a half-beat early or late, but young listeners 
will likely forgive a slip-up in the name of rollicking good fun. There is a retro mid-
century vintage look to the mixed-media illustrations, which incorporate acrylic, 
watercolor, pencil, and occasional collage, that is reminiscent of an old-fashioned 
reader. Multiple fonts and scattershot composition lessen the impact of the spreads, 
and the lack of visual focus undercuts the book’s storytime potential. Still, the 
hybrid mix of familiar and original works to good effect, and the opportunities for 
participation and singing will make this popular for group use.  HM
ErskinE, kathryn Quaking. Philomel, 2007 236p
ISBN 0-399-24774-2 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
It’s been a rough childhood for Matt, scarred by life with a savagely abusive father 
and with a succession of distant relatives after her mother’s death. Now she’s taken 
in by Sam and Jessica, a young Quaker couple already foster parents to a devel-
opmentally delayed young boy, Rory. Against her will, the fourteen-year-old finds 
herself increasingly comfortable in her new household, but that attachment comes 
at a price when Sam and his fellow Quakers’ opposition to the Iraq war puts Matt’s 
new family at risk from violent war supporters. The characters are often overwritten 
as heroes or villains, and the story is somewhat formulaic, including the histrionic 
climax that unfortunately overshadows the subtler points; the exploration of anti-war 
beliefs and, more often, Quaker principles turns into heavy-handed proselytizing. 
Smart-alec toughie Matt is a lively figure, though, and her inner demons make her 
a sympathetic character. The book also thoughtfully champions the right to dis-
sent (kids will especially understand the stacked deck and price of disagreement in 
the opinion-crushing World Civ class), making it particularly appealing to young 
challengers of the status quo; they and other readers will be relieved to see that Matt 
finally wins a safe home as well as the courage to voice her opinions.  DS
FlEtchEr, charliE Stoneheart. Hyperion, 2007 450p
ISBN 1-4231-0175-8 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
In a moment of pent-up rage, twelve-year-old George smashes the head off a 
dragon carving on the side of the Natural History Museum in London; suddenly, 
his previous frustrations seem nothing compared to the fear of watching a stone 
pterodactyl hiss to life and label George as its target. The next twenty-four hours are 
a nightmare for George as he tries to make sense of his new world, an un-London 
wherein carvings come to life with alarming regularity. The only other person who 
can see what he sees is a twelve-year-old girl named Edie, who also happens to be a 
glint (a person who can read the pain of the past) and who is possibly more trouble 
466 • The BulleTin
than she’s worth. Nevertheless, the two team up in order to right George’s wrong 
while vicious taints (statues filled with an empty hunger) pursue them relentlessly 
and mostly friendly spits (statues endowed with a bit of their human creator) save 
their lives more than once. Fletcher entrances readers with his fantastic premise and 
memorable cast of inanimate statues come to life, including the heroic Gunner (a 
soldier from a World War I memorial), verbose Dictionary (a statue of eighteenth-
century lexicographer Samuel Johnson), and a pair of enigmatic sphinxes; he creates 
an especially haunting villain in the creepy and cursed Walker, a man forced to pace 
endlessly until he can make his own amends to the stone. For readers looking for 
an intense sprint through an atmospheric, otherworldly London fantasy, George 
and Edie are key pair to follow.  KB
friend, cAtherine The Perfect Nest; illus. by John Manders. Candlewick, 
2007 36p
ISBN 0-7636-2430-6 $16.99   
R 6-9 yrs
Jack the cat has a plan: he’ll build the perfect nest, attract an egg-layer, and get 
himself the makings for a breakfast omelette. Much to his delight, the nest (com-
plete with cushions, a fan, and Christmas lights) attracts not one but three birds—a 
chicken (who speaks Spanish), a duck (who speaks French), and a goose (who 
speaks enthusiastic American-ese). So begins the real-estate debate as all three avian 
mamas, after laying three perfect eggs, fight over who gets to stay. Realizing he’ll 
never get the omelette if the birds don’t leave, Jack executes a series of entertaining 
attempts to chase them out, ultimately succeeding with the invented promise of 
a much better nest at the next farm. In a surprise ending, Jack, already licking his 
chops in anticipation, watches as the three eggs hatch; rather than tucking into a 
meal, Jack finds himself cuddling up with the three baby birds in what turns out to 
be the perfect nest after all. This original tale is chock full of humor, characteriza-
tion, and effective plot twists that will surprise young listeners. Jack is especially 
well developed, most notably in the way his priorities shift from getting a meal to 
making sure the babies (who call him “Mamá,” “Maman,” and “Ma,” respectively) 
are safe and warm. Manders’ loopily exaggerated gouache illustrations capitalize 
on the character development, depicting Jack vividly whether he’s a ravenous cat, 
sly trickster, or bighearted softy, and clever details add amusement. This would be 
a riot to act out in a small group, but it would work as a lively readaloud, perhaps 
even as a surprisingly cozy bedtime tale.  HM 
friesner, esther Nobody’s Princess. Random House, 2007 305p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-97528-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-87528-X $16.99   
R Gr. 7-9
Even as a child, Helen of Troy was stunning, and she learned early that she could use 
it to gain further advantages. In Friesner’s interpretation of the legendary beauty’s 
early years, though, Helen is essentially saved from herself by wily adults (mostly 
outside her own doting family) who help her see that there are myriad ways in which 
humans can achieve, few of which are tied to beauty. Helen is a prototype feminist 
who is determined to learn more than womanly skills; aided by her mother and, 
later, Atalanta, she learns to hunt, ride horses, fight, and challenge the authority 
of men. Although Helen certainly faces adversity and heartbreak, this is more a 
story of the triumph of a determined young woman over her own fate as a coddled, 
indulged object of beauty. The author wisely entrusts the story to Helen’s own nar-
July/AugusT 2007 • 467
ration, allowing readers direct access to the sometimes contradictory, often flawed 
reasoning that leads Helen into many painful life lessons. In addition, although 
the male characters are largely interchangeable, Helen is surrounded by an array 
of compelling, brilliant women who will certainly appeal to both the fantasy and 
myth fans who are the audience for this novel. An author’s note will lead interested 
readers to the classical texts and myths on which Friesner based her Helen, and a 
map is included.  AS
gifford, peggy Moxy Maxwell Does Not Love  Stuart Little; illus. with photo-
graphs by Valorie Fisher. Schwartz & Wade, 2007 92p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93915-6 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83915-1 $12.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Moxy’s lack of love for Stuart Little has become a real problem: she was supposed 
to read the book before the start of school, and now it’s the day before fourth 
grade begins and she still can’t get the process going. The problem isn’t her read-
ing ability—she’s an avid reader, and she’s been carrying the book around with 
her all summer—it’s just that she’s always got some sort of plan bubbling up, 
and her plans don’t seem to leave her time for her assignment. The book’s energy 
comes not from the plot, which is a little thin (though it’s spiced up with some 
slapstick mayhem), but from Moxy’s forceful character and the book’s lighthearted 
and quirky approach. The tone is matter-of-factly comedic, and the chapters are 
humorously episodic (many of them only one page, one paragraph, or even one 
word), interspersed with credibly inept photographs of the proceedings taken by 
the participants. Though sophisticated touches in the vocabulary require a more 
advanced reader than the formatting and length might suggest, this would also 
work as an offbeat readaloud, perhaps as an enjoyable departure for kids slogging 
through their own reading homework.  DS
gipi Garage Band; written and illus. by Gipi. First Second/Roaring Brook, 
2007 128p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59643-206-3 $16.95   
R Gr. 9-12
Italian writer-artist Gipi excels at portraying adolescent isolation and anxiety in this 
translated graphic novel about four teens in a band. In five sections, each loosely 
based around a song the band hopes to record, the boys encounter the usual obstacles 
for garage bands: they have a practice space that is uncertain at best, their equipment 
is old and malfunctioning, and their one insider connection has told them they have 
no chance. In addition, the teens themselves are awkward bandmates, and frequent 
personality clashes, portrayed effectively through both dialogue and well-paced silent 
panels, threaten their success almost as much as outside forces. The characters are 
unevenly explored, with irascible lead singer Stefano and Hitler-obsessed drummer 
Alex emerging as the memorable protagonists over the much quieter Giuliano and 
Alberto. However, the point here isn’t so much the individual characters, the suc-
cess of the band, or even the life-threatening drama around a stolen amp: Gipi has 
evoked the perfect sense of potential and despair that accompanies any indie band 
that could go somewhere but likely will not. The angular yet delicate watercolor 
illustrations, reminiscent of Robert Andrew Parker’s work, add to this atmosphere, 
hinting at a weatherbeaten small town wherein dreams languish more often than 
they are fulfilled. Countering the somber tone, however, are the four protagonists 
whose youth and still viable optimism are especially clear in the confident, joyful 
468 • The BulleTin
body language in the scenes where everything comes together and they are able 
to just play their music. Supplemental material shows early sketches of the four 
boys and illustrates the gradual individualization of each character. Although the 
languid pacing and eloquent silences may not carry universal appeal, thoughtful 
readers and wannabe musicians will revel in this deceptively simple but ultimately 
profound graphic novel.  AS
goldBlAtt, stAcey Stray. Delacorte, 2007 276p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90448-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73443-3 $15.99   
R Gr. 6-10
Even though Natalie has made it through sophomore year as a well-behaved student 
who tends diligently to her grandmother, works at her veterinarian mother’s animal 
hospital, and stays out of trouble, her mother keeps her on a short leash. When 
Carver, the son of Natalie’s mother’s old friend, comes to stay for the summer, 
Natalie’s immediately smitten with the hot young guy, and she’s increasingly tempted 
to breach her mother’s strictures in order to hang out—and maybe more—with 
him. While the animal-behavior similes (a dog-training principle begins each 
chapter) are overforced at times, Natalie’s dilemma is depicted with perception 
and sympathy. The book is wise and yet understanding about her habit of deceiv-
ing her mother; though the freedoms she sneaks aren’t unreasonable, she’s clearly 
ducking acknowledgment of her own evasions rather than dealing directly with 
her mother’s unfairness. Nor is Carver a cutout emissary from the dark side—he’s 
a genuinely appealing and hardworking guy who just runs a little toward teenaged 
foolish misjudgment. Many readers will empathize with Natalie’s overcontrolled 
existence, and even if they don’t follow her eventual example of honestly facing 
her too-restraining parent, they’ll be reassured by the sympathetic treatment of a 
similar experience.  DS
hArper, chArise Mericle Fashion Kitty versus the Fashion Queen; written and 
illus. by Charise Mericle Harper. Hyperion, 2007 89p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7868-3726-8 $8.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Fashion Kitty (BCCB 12/05) introduced readers to fashionable Kiki Kittie and 
her superheroic alter ego, Fashion Kitty, who flies to the rescue of those suffering 
fashion emergencies. A new kitty at school, Cassandra, is now challenging Kiki’s 
fashion supremacy, declaring herself the Fashion Queen and forbidding the wear-
ing of bright colors. Cassandra even produces a fashion guide that touts her rules, 
claiming it’s the work of Fashion Kitty; this is certainly the last straw for Kiki, but 
how can she redeem Fashion Kitty’s reputation without giving away her secret 
identity? This tends to ramble somewhat, lacking the tight focus of the first book 
and relying on knowledge of it to succeed, but the appeals are still strong and al-
luring: Fashion Kitty’s ability to intercede with bratty peers is the stuff of wistful 
fantasy, while the at-home exchanges between Kiki and her demanding four-year-old 
sister evince some deliciously absurd humor along with their believability. Readers 
will also enjoy getting to know Kiki herself better—Harper deftly weaves in some 
basic school-story interest as Kiki genuinely resents her bossy new schoolmate and 
nearly falls out with her best friend as she tries to avoid giving too much away. The 
graphic-novel formatting remains the same, with black and grayscale touched chicly 
with pink predominating in most spreads, so yellow-haired Cassandra stands out 
sharply and even overshadows the hero (as good villains are prone to do). Young 
July/AugusT 2007 • 469
fashionistas who have prowled through the first book won’t want to miss this chic 
superheroine’s new showing.  DS
hArper, chArise Mericle Just Grace; written and illus. by Charise Mericle 
Harper. Houghton, 2007 138p
ISBN 0-618-64642-6 $15.00   
R Gr. 2-4
Third-grader Grace, called Just Grace (yuck!) by her teacher to distinguish her from 
Grace W., Grace F., and Gracie, has the special ability to tell when other people are 
sad. The problem is that her gift for empathy acts like a “teeny tiny superpower”; 
when she feels it, she has to do something about it, and that sometimes gets her in 
trouble or makes her do things she doesn’t want to do, like smile at the loathsome 
Sammy Stringer—what if he thinks she wants to be friends? When she finds out that 
her neighbor, whom Grace suspects to be a witch, is sad, Grace devises a perfectly 
fabulous plan to make the woman feel better: she’ll photograph her neighbor’s cat 
around town and send the images to her as feel-better postcards. When the cat goes 
missing, however, the postcards are mistaken for ransom notes, and Grace has a lot 
of explaining to do. This simple, well-conceived, and tightly plotted mystery with 
a purr-fectly plausible outcome will delight readers with an energetic penchant for 
creative do-gooding and nosy neighboring; Grace’s character is delightfully pos-
sessed of the trouble-averse logic of an elementary-schooler with minor aspirations 
of glory and a reluctant morality. The text is peppered with spot art that is funny 
and expressive without being overly clever, perfectly in keeping with a third-grade 
sensibility. Hand this to readers who are so over Junie B. Jones but not yet ready 
for anything long or deep.  KC 
heide, florence pArry A Promise Is a Promise; illus. by Tony Auth. Candlewick, 
2007 40p
ISBN 0-7636-2285-0 $15.99   
R 5-8 yrs
“I’m probably the only kid in the whole world who doesn’t have a pet,” mourns 
George, a point that causes his parents to relent and give him pet-acquisition per-
mission. Each time he brings home a prospective pet (a huge dog, a mouse family, 
and a shark), though, his parents lay down more restrictions. Finally he elicits 
the firm promise that he can have a bird, but when he brings home the shrieking 
and disrespectful parrot Horatio (who responds to George’s mother with “SHUT 
UP, YOU BIG BOOB!”), will even that possibility disappear? The plot’s a little 
wobbly (what store is allowing George to drag all these pets back and forth?), but 
audiences will get a kick out of the adults’ getting stuck with the consequences of 
their own words; diligent repetition and accumulation of parental rules add comic 
exaggeration to the grownup stuffiness and make it all the riper for puncturing. 
Auth’s ink lines are wiggly and kinetic, with lighthearted touches of springy color 
adding hue without overbalancing against the open white space of the backgrounds. 
Pet-yearning youngsters will sympathize with George’s struggle, and they’ll applaud 
his victory over legalistic authority.  DS
heneghAn, JAMes Payback. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 2007 [168p]
ISBN 0-88899-701-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Charley Callaghan enters junior high with a lot on his mind: he and his family 
have recently moved from Dublin to Vancouver, and his mom has just died from 
470 • The BulleTin
an unexpected recurrence of the cancer they thought she had beaten. His Irish 
accent makes him a target of some school bullies, but hard looks and a refusal to 
back down cause them to troll elsewhere, and they land on a quiet, well-dressed 
boy named Benny, who has fewer self-protective impulses. Charley wants to help 
Benny, but he doesn’t fancy being back on the bullies’ hit list himself, so he keeps 
quiet. When Benny then commits suicide, Charley is wracked with guilt. He takes 
to wandering over to Benny’s house, where he meets Benny’s mom and younger 
brother, and he and his little sister start hanging out after school, Charley trying to 
work up the courage to confess to Benny’s mother that he didn’t do enough to help 
her son. A violent encounter with Benny’s stepfather gives Charley the chance to 
redeem himself by rescuing Benny’s little brother from a parental kidnapping, and 
he finally manages to come clean to Benny’s mom. Charley’s emotional trajectory 
is convincingly portrayed; especially poignant are the imagined conversations he 
has with his late mom while skipping school to lie in her closet, surrounded by 
her scent. Because they are seen through the fog of Charley’s depression and guilt, 
secondary characters are less well articulated, but overall this is a quietly affecting 
tale of grief and emotional healing.  KC 
hinds, gAreth, ad. Beowulf; ad. and illus. by Gareth Hinds. Candlewick, 
2007 118p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7636-3022-5 $21.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7636-3023-3 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
This graphic-novel presentation of the traditional three-part tale of Beowulf gives 
young readers the Geatish warrior as the hypermuscular, hard-hitting, proto-comic-
book superhero he’s always been. Grim, rugged faces stare out of action-packed 
spreads peppered with palpably realistic black blood spatters and onomatopoeic 
fight grunts as the monsters chomp on various warrior appendages and our hero 
kicks, rips, and thwangs his various enemies into grisly submission and death. 
Hinds manages his palette to good effect, sticking mainly to sepia and burnt umber 
in the mead hall and teals for under the sea, so that the occasional punctuations 
of flame and the stark blackness of the monsters really stand forth, and the dusky 
purples of the final chapter lead readers visually into Beowulf’s shadowlands. The 
text, though colloquial, remains a challenging read, as it retains the archaic rhythms 
and bardic vocabulary of the heroic epic; the adapter clearly provides history and 
some character-developing storytelling to establish the encounters, but leaves the 
fight scenes unencumbered with any text at all, allowing readers to immerse them-
selves in the flesh-ripping violence. The final chapter may be a little confusing for 
those not familiar with the story, but attentive observers will be able to follow the 
main plot through the pictures and will ponder over the thematics of including a 
distant cityscape, complete with suspiciously familiar twin towers, as a backdrop 
to Hrothgar’s warning that Beowulf use his God-given gifts—fame, fortune, the 
power to command an empire—wisely and without arrogance, and remain ever 
mindful that death awaits us all. With treatments like this available, honors English 
may never be the same.  KC
holMes, elizABeth Pretty Is. Dutton, 2007 216p
ISBN 0-525-47813-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
“I was running out of friends to lose,” says Erin sadly, as yet another former comrade 
heads into the orbit of glamour-girl Kayla. This means that Erin is on the verge 
July/AugusT 2007 • 471
of heading without allies into middle school; worse still, she’ll be tagged as the 
younger sister of dorky, friendless Monica. She finds a congenial pal in rebellious 
Hannah, and the two girls launch a night attack on a camping Kayla, scissoring off 
the golden girl’s long hair. As a consequence, Erin is sent off to camp for a “fresh 
start”—but that fresh start means even closer proximity to Monica, who’s not only 
attending the same camp but ends up in Erin’s cabin. This is a family dynamic 
we don’t usually see in books for young people, and Holmes offers an interesting 
exploration, making it clear that Erin isn’t entirely wrong about her fears but that 
she’s unfair nonetheless. Erin’s total reformation by the end is highly unrealistic (and 
there’s not a kid in the world who’d have convicted her for reading Monica’s diary, 
which she nobly leaves undisturbed), but as a flawed and desperate struggler amid 
a punishing peer group she’s utterly believable. The reality of social economics is 
sharply observed; readers will find hope in the eventual rising of Erin’s stock, and 
they will sympathize with her authentic desperation.  DS
hutchins, hAzel A Second Is a Hiccup: A Child’s Book of Time; illus. by Kady 
MacDonald Denton. Levine/Scholastic, 2007 36p
ISBN 0-439-68400-5 $16.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Originally published in Canada, this rhyming picture book presents time concepts 
in child-centered terms. Each section begins with a question (“How long is a sec-
ond?”; “How long is a day?”), then moves on to a series of examples, taken from a 
child’s range of experiences, that might match the given unit of time (“A second is a 
hiccup—/ The time it takes to kiss your mom/ Or jump a rope/ Or turn around”). 
The concept is a solid one, and some of the given examples are actually comparable 
to the time unit (a hiccup does take about a second, it does take about a month for 
a scraped knee to heal). Others, though, are purely subjective (a month to learn to 
tie your shoes, a minute to sing “one small song”), and the combination of literal 
and figurative can be rather confusing; what’s more, the rhyming text is often 
clumsy in its inconsistent meter and form. Denton’s watercolor illustrations evince 
an appealingly informal delicacy, with a jovial cast of smiling families engaged in 
all manner of timely activities. The action-packed pastel compositions offer lots 
of opportunity for early language development as young browsers describe what 
is happening in the individual paintings. With some additional adult assistance, 
this could be a cozy one-on-one way to help kids grapple with the complicated 
concept of time.  HM 
hyde, cAtherine ryAn The Year of My Miraculous Reappearance. Knopf, 
2007 228p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93257-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83257-2 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
As thirteen-year-old Cynnie watches her mother disappear into a bottle of gin fol-
lowing the death of her father, she vows to stay strong so that she can care for her 
three-year-old brother, Bill, who has Down’s Syndrome. When her grandparents 
take Bill away, however, her resolve and good sense crumble, and she starts to follow 
her mother down the same path of alcoholism and despair. After trying to kidnap 
Bill, she ends up with a court-ordered mandate to attend AA, which she does more 
to impress Zack, one of her mom’s former lovers on whom she has developed an 
inappropriate crush, than because she believes she has a problem. The book paints 
Cynnie’s misery with a gloppy brush before she begins her transformation, and at 
472 • The BulleTin
first, Cynnie’s characterization is all over the map: her naïveté about sex doesn’t 
mesh with her worldliness in other ways, and her desire to play around the neigh-
borhood seems at odds with her adult acceptance of responsibility for Bill and 
her desire to gain the attentions of a much older man. As Hyde settles in to her 
subject, however, Cynnie’s contradictions become more believable. It’s ultimately 
a credible portrait of teen depression: Cynnie’s emotional distance from her true 
feelings is contextualized by Cynnie’s sponsor, who explains to her that depression 
makes it difficult to recognize feelings for what they are. Cynnie’s desire to hang 
on to her brokenness is also true to life; she likes Zack because she recognizes in 
him a kindred spirit, and when he starts to heal she experiences that as a betrayal 
of sorts. Soon enough, however, she works through her own problems to the point 
where she can start to make amends. Though the time frame is unclear, this has all 
the earmarks of a ’70s problem novel, written with access to an updated manual on 
co-dependence and ACOA pathologies. Bring Kleenex, and expect to be dragged 
down before being uplifted.  KC
isAdorA, rAchel Yo, Jo!; written and illus. by Rachel Isadora. Harcourt, 
2007 32p
ISBN 0-15-205783-8 $16.00   
R 3-6 yrs
As this picture book opens, Mama is leaning out the window, asking Franklin to 
watch after his brother Jomar and reminding the two boys that dinner is almost 
ready. Franklin and Jo head out into the neighborhood, and elements of their world 
come into vivid focus; friends pass by, music plays, people dance, new shoes are 
inspected, dogs bark. Jo’s story is, at heart, an exploration of the myriad ways of 
saying hello; while one friend greets the boys with “Yo, bro!” and a passer-by on 
rollerblades sings, “Hey, Jomar!”, a toddler offers “S’up, Jomar!” and a friend, slap-
ping Jo’s hand, responds “Hey, Shorty!” to Jomar’s greeting. In the end, Grandpa 
arrives and asks Jo how he’s doing; when Grandpa is unsatisfied with his response 
of “Yo! Chillin’!”, Jo tries again with “I love you, Grandpa,” a far more satisfactory 
(if less conversationally congruent) response in the elder relative’s view. In a story 
that resembles Raschka’s Yo! Yes? (BCCB 4/93) gone to town, Isadora has created 
a complex view of a community with very little text; the simple phrases of greet-
ing ring with voice and character and a sense of urban energy fills every exchange. 
The oil paintings are textured, with lines from the brush bristles evident in the 
thick paints, adding dimensionality and directionality to the scenes. Small scraps 
of newsprint and painted paper rain down in each spread, contributing additional 
color and a playful sense of chaos to the pages. There’s lots of opportunity for group 
discussion about greetings here; young viewers will also be just as satisfied to sit 
down and pore over the vibrant illustrations.  HM 
JonsBerg, BArry Am I Right or Am I Right? Knopf, 2007 240p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93637-8 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83637-3 $15.99   
R Gr. 8-12
Sixteen-year-old Calma Harrison (from The Crimes and Punishments of Miss Payne, 
BCCB 9/05) seeks answers even when she might be overstepping her boundaries, 
and her wild imagination comes up with connections and conclusions even when 
there are none to be had. She’s on overload as of late: her best friend, Vanessa, is 
keeping a secret; her mother (whom she calls “The Fridge” in reference to their 
typical correspondence via notes tacked up in the kitchen) is also keeping a secret; 
July/AugusT 2007 • 473
and her father, who has been gone for five years, has suddenly and infuriatingly 
returned. Add to that the drama of falling in love with the checkout boy at the 
Crazi-Cheep (and her subsequent unwise decision to apply for a job there) and 
Calma’s pretty much up to her ears. Calma speaks directly and candidly to the 
reader, and her narrative is laced with great humor and a keen eye for the hilarious. 
Interspersed throughout the first-person perspective are creative imaginary asides 
(e.g., she is being interviewed by a tabloid, she composes “Fact Files” on the various 
characters in her life) which add an entertaining touch of the overdramatic. The 
surprise here is that this turns out to be not only a light, witty read but also one 
that deals with some pretty heavy issues (Vanessa is cutting herself, Calma’s father 
has returned because he is dying and wants to make peace with his daughter), and 
it is revealed that Calma has come to some fairly faulty conclusions on her own. 
What’s more, the people whom Calma has been blaming all along are the same 
ones to gently point out that, had she avoided her typical leap to conclusions, she 
may have come to the right answers herself. By using Calma’s own point of view, 
Jonsberg cleverly protects the readers from Calma’s flaws until they’re unmissable 
and makes her sympathetic along the way. As well as being an engaging read, this 
novel is an excellent exercise in voice and viewpoint, and readers may find them-
selves wanting to reread passages once the alternate possibilities have presented 
themselves.  HM
JordAn, sherryl Time of the Eagle. Eos/HarperCollins, 2007 [480p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-059555-8 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-059554-X $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
On her sixteenth birthday, young Shinali healer Avala is kidnapped by wounded 
Ramakoda, the oldest son of an Igaal chieftain, who takes her to his camp. De-
spite the coercion, she’s willing to go, since she hopes that saving Ramakoda may 
be the first step in her destiny to unite the Shinali, Igaal, and Hena tribes against 
the cruel Navoran emperor bent on exterminating her people (events foretold in 
Secret Sacrament, BCCB 3/01). Although the Igaal chieftain is grateful for his 
son’s recovery, he decides to keep Avala as their healer, rather than honor his son’s 
promise to return her to her home. Helped by the man she saved, Avala finds a 
way to escape, only to become lost in a mountain snowstorm that deposits her 
at the door of a hidden learned society, where she is taught full command of her 
psychic powers, and from where she decides to return to the Igaal to try again. 
Avala narrates her own story, which is told simply and intimately, as though it is a 
conversation shared by the fire at day’s end. Her voice has an appealing sweetness 
and innocence, and the enormity of her quest and her wavering confidence that 
she can indeed accomplish it will resonate with adolescents who struggle daily to 
meet challenges to their self-esteem. Readers who relished the previous title will 
be intrigued by the playing out of events, and they will find in this epic fantasy 
the stuff of daydreams.  CW
kelly, toM Finn’s Going. Greenwillow, 2007 278p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-121454-X $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-121453-1 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Finn and Danny are twins, or rather, they were; shortly before their tenth birthday, 
a nighttime excursion to see otters left one brother drowned and the other trauma-
474 • The BulleTin
tized, so traumatized, in fact, that he stops speaking, flings a brick through a window 
at a taxidermized otter, and runs away from home. He travels to an old family 
vacation spot, an island beach, trying to recapture the happy family times before 
the tragedy; there he connects with an adult recluse coming to terms with his own 
past pain through a huge mural—featuring, of all things, a huge otter—and learns 
his own way into acceptance and return home. This is poignantly and perceptively 
written, with the narrator believably ten in his meandering colloquial voice, in his 
rejoicing in brotherly fart contests, and in his unschooled agony at facing both a 
personal loss and a harsh truth about the possibilities of the world that makes him 
fear for everyone else he loves. The book deftly makes the otters into a motif that 
makes sense realistically as well as artistically, with their importance becoming clear 
as the backstory unfolds through the narration. The conceptual complications of 
the text and its gradual pacing demand a fairly sophisticated reader, especially for 
the massive twist at the end (the narrator and protagonist is the twin that readers 
have been led to believe was the fatality, not the survivor) that’s conveyed largely 
by easily misreadable implication. Young readers may therefore decode the end-
ing as a new psychological twist rather than a revelation about what they’ve just 
experienced, but they’ll feel for the bereaved hero and his struggle to make a whole 
life when he’s lost what feels like half of himself.  DS
koertge, ron Strays. Candlewick, 2007 167p
ISBN 0-7636-2705-4 $16.99   
R* Gr. 7-12
“I know my parents are dead,” thinks Ted tiredly, “but going over and over it isn’t 
going to help.” To be honest, even before their deaths his parents were so absorbed 
in their animals and their pet store business, which was assumed to be Ted’s future as 
well, that they were pretty poor parents to him anyway, leaving him to gain most of 
his emotional education from animals, whose speech he can magically understand. 
Now he’s a sixteen-year-old foster kid under the care of a martinet foster father 
and weird and troubled foster mother; fortunately, he begins to learn the rules of 
human pack life from his new foster brothers and their friends. This is a fresh and 
imaginative departure from the conventional foster-home tale: Ted’s not getting 
rescued by loving adult attention but educated by the experiences of his peers, who 
know better than any outsider what it takes to make it in the situation he’s landed 
himself in. That’s a direction eminently suited for Koertge’s brisk and unsentimental 
humor, and Ted’s gradual acquisition of the ways of young humans is warmly told, 
with his rough-and-tumble friendships with his foster brothers believably depicted. 
The supernatural touch of Ted’s animal communication adds interest, but it also 
serves as a marker for his misfired socialization, since his understanding of animals 
has come at the expense of an ability to communicate with people. Ultimately, this 
is a strongly hopeful tale wherein socialization by peers is given importance and 
honor, an approach that will be valued by YAs whose friends are what get them 
through the day.  DS
lAyBourn, eMMA Missing Magic. Dial, 2007 [193p]
ISBN 0-8037-3219-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
After eleven-year-old Ned has been found to be completely without magic in a 
world where everyone else has it, powerful “Uncle” Kelver (actually a second cousin) 
swoops in and enrolls him in Leodwych, a well-respected boarding school where 
Ned is sure he can learn something of the magic arts. Unfortunately, school only 
July/August 2007 • 475
further emphasizes the gap between the magic users and non-magical Ned, who is 
hassled by bullies and spellbound furniture alike. The talk of the school is not Ned 
but the Necromancers, a mysterious band of pirates that help themselves to other 
people’s children and belongings at will; when the Necromancers strike again, an 
abducted Ned finds himself on a great airborne ship, where stolen children are gal-
ley slaves and Ned is suddenly important because only he has learned the practical 
daily skills that can help the children escape. He is nearly undone, though, when 
he realizes that he is connected to the nefarious man who is the head and heart 
of the Necromancers, and that the man, Syron, has taken something irreplaceable 
from him. This British import is a pleasant reversal of the typical “loner with magic 
saves the day” plot, since in this case it is the un-magic kid who becomes a model 
worth emulating. Laybourn places the gently humorous story in an alternative world 
strongly resembling a traditional British country boarding school, and she evokes 
Harry Potter with clever magical touches such as math sums that work themselves 
in mid-air and furniture that has been magicked so many times it has a mind of its 
own. Young fantasy readers will bond with Ned, identifying with his struggles and 
celebrating his success in a world where being different can be just as important as 
being like everyone else.  CW 
Levithan, DaviD, ed. 21 Proms; ed. by David Levithan and Daniel Ehrenhaft. 
See review under Cabot, p. 454.
MacDonaLD, SuSe Fish, Swish! Splash, Dash!: Counting Round and Round; written 
and illus. by Suse MacDonald. Little Simon, 2007 [26p]
ISBN 1-4169-3605-X $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 2-5 yrs
A yellow fish with orange fins and spots emerges from its hiding place among the 
sea-floor flora and fauna to issue the invitation, “Follow the leader/ and count with 
me/ the fish that live/ beneath the sea.” As the sturdy card-stock pages turn, die-cut 
openings in the center of each recto feature the accumulating number of colorful 
fishes. The charm lies in the contrast between the simplicity of the concept (the 
bottom of each page border tersely notes, “1 fish,” “2 fish,” etc.) and the nifty paper 
engineering that allows bits of several layers of board to show simultaneously, sur-
prising viewers at every turn with the transformation of the hitherto hidden design. 
Once we hit ten, our ichthyological guide reappears, swimming up the side of the 
last page to demonstrate how to turn the book upside down and begin the count-
down from ten to one, this time with written number names rather than numerals. 
Colors are crisp and vibrant, deriving much of their pizzazz from the juxtaposition 
of contrasting hues—yellow and aqua, lime and orange, teal and magenta. A dash 
of metallic lettering on the cover adds an alluring shimmer and an invitation to 
touch. Since our swimming host never tires of leading children from front to back 
and back to front, expect to make at least a few rounds per sitting.  EB
MaLone, Peter Close to the Wind: The Beaufort Scale; written and illus. by Peter 
Malone. Putnam, 2007 [40p]
ISBN 0-399-24399-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
In the opening years of the nineteenth century, Captain Francis Beaufort of the 
British Navy devised a system for numbering wind strength, based on observations 
476 • The BulleTin
of the wind’s effect on sea and land. Although measurable wind speed is now a 
component of the Beaufort scale, the original designations of 0 to 12 (from dead 
calm to hurricane force) still apply. Malone takes readers on a fictional cruise with 
midshipman William Bentley aboard the man-of-war Zephyr, bound from Naples to 
Barbados, as the crew encounters every condition Beaufort described. The recto of 
each spread features a handsome watercolor and gouache illustration of the Zephyr 
at sea or crew and natives in port; the verso is devoted to the Beaufort number 
and definition, an excerpt from William’s letter to his sister, and a paragraph or 
two of Malone’s commentary on weather, seamanship, or sailors’ lore. That’s an 
ambitious order for a picture-book format, but Malone’s execution is admirable, 
both in its able demonstration of how Beaufort’s observations apply to actual 
weather phenomenon and in its brief but convincing storyline. End matter includes 
biographical information on Beaufort, a diagram of the Zephyr under full sail, a 
glossary of nautical terms, and a map of Bentley’s travels across the Atlantic. While 
this will be an effective addition to a science unit on weather, it could engross any 
middle-schooler who’d rather skip class and run off to sea.  EB
MArr, MelissA Wicked Lovely. HarperTeen, 2007 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-121466-3 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-121465-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
In a realistic city where most people are blind to the fey as they work their small 
and medium-sized mischiefs, Aislinn can see them all, but she’s been taught from a 
young age to give the impression she’s as faery-blind as the rest of the human race. 
This gets more difficult when Keenan, faery’s Summer King, attempts to get to know 
her, following her around and even temporarily enrolling in her high school. He 
is in search of a queen who will help him wrest the power of the seasons from his 
mother (the Winter Queen), but each earlier potential mate has failed the Winter 
Queen’s trial, and the last girl who attempted and failed it is fated to warn off any 
future prospects. With Keenan’s mind set on Aislinn, the deal is all but done and, 
rather than avoid her fate, she can only hope to make a deal that will help him 
defeat his mother while she gets to keep a budding relationship with mortal Seth. 
Literary quotes about fairies, from the likes of W. B. Yeats and Andrew Lang, open 
each chapter and hint at the action to come, but this is ultimately a modern-day 
fairy tale, wherein the girl saves herself and the dénouement involves a negotiated 
partnership rather than an exchange of wedding rings. There’s a mature sensibility 
about the prose and the characters that speaks very effectively to older teens who 
can appreciate its restrained tone. This offers the human-faery interaction and 
urban fantasy feel of Holly Black’s Tithe (BCCB 1/03) with a more benign view 
of its imagined world, and many fantasy readers will find themselves happily at 
home here.  CW
MArtínez, Arturo o. Pedrito’s World. Texas Tech University, 2007 131p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-89672-600-2 $16.95   
R Gr. 4-6 
Life is simple and good for six-year-old Pedrito in South Texas in 1941. He is finally 
old enough to travel with his father to San Antonio to sell watermelons, he is ready 
to start school, where his teacher, Miss García, is patient and kind, and he has an 
older friend, Juanito, who looks after him. This fictive memoir, written in lively, 
straightforward prose, follows Pedrito through his school year, where he works 
July/AugusT 2007 • 477
hard to learn English so that he can teach it to his parents. Each chapter relates an 
aspect of Pedrito’s life on their small farm: he recounts the homely details of what 
they eat and how his mother cooks it, how difficult it is to say goodbye to beloved 
animals that end up in his mother’s tasty tamales, how his family spends their 
evenings telling stories and singing songs, how they communicate with relatives 
across the river, and how important Doña María, the village curandera, is in their 
lives. He also writes simply but effectively of the sadness he faces when Juanito 
dies of pneumonia. His awareness of his family’s poverty and the prejudice they 
sometimes face is softened by his mother’s less materialistic, more spiritual and 
people-oriented value system and his father’s persistent hope for Pedrito’s future. 
Through the voice of Pedrito, Martínez pays attention to the things that children 
care about, such as food, school, friends, privacy, and family; combine this with 
books like Little House on the Prairie and Erdrich’s The Birchbark House (BCCB 
7/99) for a multicultural look at children’s everyday lives in different times and 
places in America’s history. A glossary of Spanish words and an author’s note on 
source material, including family pictures, are included.  KC
MAtAs, cArol The Whirlwind. Orca, 2007 [144p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55143-703-1 $8.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
As this short novel opens, fifteen-year-old Ben Friedman and his family have just 
escaped from Nazi Germany and relocated to Seattle, Washington. When Ben be-
friends a Japanese-American boy, John, he begins to project his own memories of 
fear onto the growing prejudice affecting John’s family after the bombing of Pearl 
Harbor; when John’s family is sent to an internment camp, a traumatized Ben flees 
north to Canada and his uncle Isaac. Only when his father brings him back to the 
United States does Ben begin to see his new country differently. Matas’ novel offers 
a quiet examination of one boy’s struggle to understand the terrible circumstances 
that have fallen upon his family. Unfortunately, the story relies too heavily on plot 
summary and not enough on character development, so that by the time Ben is at 
the climax of his troubles, the reader may have little compassion or understand-
ing for his recklessness and distrust; the Book of Job motif (Ben and his father are 
translating the passages) results in some slow and labored discussions of biblical 
teachings. There are, however, some interesting plot points—the friendship between 
a German Jew and a Japanese-American boy in the 1940s—and some valuable 
themes to explore, such as the way a young teen might deal with circumstances 
seemingly beyond anyone’s control. No historical note is provided.  HM 
MccArthy, MeghAn Strong Man: The Story of Charles Atlas; written and illus. 
by Meghan McCarthy. Knopf, 2007 [34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92940-1 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82940-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-4
You work out to lose weight, right? Not Italian immigrant Angelo Siciliano, the 
original “97-pound weakling” who later transformed himself into he-man Charles 
Atlas. His “dynamic tension” exercising was the path to a muscular body and good 
health. In this light-hearted picture-book account, McCarthy traces his career from 
scrawny to brawny, relishing the many not-quite-verifiable tales that comprise his 
sketchy biography. Did a bully really humiliate him in front of his girlfriend at 
478 • The BulleTin
the beach? Just what were his ideal measurements, written down and sealed in a 
vault at Oglethorpe University? Atlas’ eyes bulge as prominently as his muscles 
in the acrylic cartoon illustrations, heavily outlined in black, that portray him in 
many moments of fully flexed glory—pulling a railroad car, posing for one of the 
dozens of civic statues for which he modeled, ripping up a phone book, leading his 
staff in exercises on the beach. A concluding biographical note admits that much 
extant “biography” of Atlas is pretty hopelessly mired in legend, but that won’t 
stop readers from enjoying the feats of strength noted herein or even attempting 
a little bodybuilding on their own, following the four exercise routines included 
courtesy of a pair of physical therapists, not apparently of the Atlas method itself. 
Pair this with Debon’s The Strongest Man In the World: Louis Cyr (BCCB 5/07) for 
a perfectly proportioned readaloud.  EB 
McneAl, lAurA The Decoding of Lana Morris; by Laura and Tom McNeal. Knopf, 
2007 289p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93106-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83106-1 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-12
Lana Morris “lives in a foster home for retards”; the sixteen-year-old was moved 
to this small-town Nebraska house only to find that her foster siblings were four 
special needs kids (colloquially termed “Snicks”), which has completely tanked 
Lana’s social rating with her peers. She’s therefore reduced to driving around with 
a group of troublemakers who treat her contemptuously, which is how she ends up 
in a distant village with a vintage shop where she buys a lovely old drawing pad. 
Events begin to suggest that the drawing paper, of which there are only thirteen 
sheets, has magical powers: when Lana erases the hand from a drawing of her 
venomous foster mother, the woman loses a hand in an accident, and when she 
draws a maternal visit to one of the Snicks, his long-lost mother indeed turns up. 
The result is a sequence of whirlwind changes, but they don’t always turn out as 
Lana would hope, and she’s determined to use her remaining paper to bring good 
fortune to her and those she cares about. As usual, the McNeals (authors of Crushed, 
BCCB 2/06) carefully craft a three-dimensional and original reality, their smooth 
writing making the intricate human world of their protagonists seem artless and 
natural. The fantastical touch of the supernaturally charged drawing paper adds 
sparkle to the story without unbalancing it, helping to foreshadow the fairy-tale-
esque ending that solves all the problems. There’s still plenty of reality, though, in 
Lana’s gradual realization that her inappropriately adored foster father is using her 
and in her growing attachment to and responsibility for her foster siblings; there’s 
also realism in her slowness to grasp that the boy next door, who moves from being 
the least dangerous of the troublemakers to Lana’s ally, really likes her. A colorful 
character drama with genuine spice and impact, this will appeal to fans of the rich 
fictions of Ruth White or Jacqueline Woodson.  DS
neWton, roBert Runner. Knopf, 2007 209p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93744-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83744-2 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
It’s only been a few months since his father succumbed to the Spanish influenza of 
1919, and with cold weather setting in on Melbourne, Australia, fifteen-year-old 
Charlie Feehan knows he’ll have to scrape up a job to keep himself, his mother, and 
his baby brother from destitution. His fleet feet catch the attention of local crime 
boss Squizzy Taylor, and after winning a rigged competition to become Squizzy’s 
July/August 2007 • 479
runner, Charlie’s able to tuck some money aside. Moreover, family problems seem 
to go away as soon as Squizzy intervenes: the man who’s been demanding sex of 
Mrs. Feehan in return for firewood now sports a bandaged head and a willingness 
to part with all the logs Charlie can haul away. The work is relatively easy, running 
errands and making a few late-night contraband liquor deliveries, and Charlie can 
even throw a little work in the way of his best friend, Norman “Nostrils” Heath, 
an amiable guy who’s just embarked on a promising career on the local footy team. 
When Squizzy takes on a pair of rival bosses out of his league, Charlie’s errands 
(which now include collecting protection money) take on new peril, and after Nos-
trils gets kneecapped on a liquor run, Charlie knows it’s time to quit the business. 
Newton’s tale is most convincing when it revolves around hardscrabble Melbourne 
and the mercurial Squizzy Taylor, but when Charlie turns in his fancy work shoes 
and trains for the Ballarat Mile foot race, the plot strays into the realm of wishful 
thinking. Not only does Charlie sever his mob connection with improbable ease, 
but he bags the first place purse at Ballarat, bets and wins on his own performance 
at long odds, and uses his newfound wealth to buy a lumber yard for himself and 
Nostrils, and so presumably live happily and guilt-free ever after. Still, despite his 
series of unrealistically lucky breaks, Charlie’s a likable kid who sets himself on an 
ethical course just in the nick of time, and readers are unlikely to begrudge him a 
prosperous future.  EB 
Parker, robert b. Edenville Owls. Sleuth/Philomel, 2007 194p
ISBN 0-399-24656-8 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Bobby Murphy and his eighth-grade buddies on the Edenville Owls basketball 
team are up against a definite challenge—they have only five members, no coach, 
and little knowledge of game strategy beyond a couple of flashy trick shots. Their 
problems pale, though, in comparison to those of their new teacher, Miss Delaney, 
who is being harassed by a man who waylays her after school, and who shows up 
in class with bruises on her face. But Bobby is a guy who likes to figure things out, 
and he attacks both problems with the same methodical, if unorthodox, precision. 
On the basketball front, he simply attends lots of well-coached games at other 
schools and drills his friends on what he’s observed. To save Miss Delaney, though, 
he defies her wishes and the law, breaking into her apartment, spying from the 
attic on her shady visitor, and infiltrating the white supremacist group that her 
tormentor runs under an assumed name. The setting, a small Massachusetts town 
right after World War II, is integral to the plot—the neo-Nazi cant of “Reverend” 
Tupper (who turns out to be Miss Delaney’s ex-husband) is baffling to a boy who’s 
grown up red, white, and blue in the war, and the probability of the teacher’s losing 
her job when her marriage becomes known is all too real. The action, however, is 
predictably scripted, and a subplot involving Bobby’s romantic feelings toward an 
old pal, Joanie, is superfluous and awkwardly drawn. Still, short chapters, plenty of 
dialogue, and an intriguing combination of sports, mystery, and social fanaticism 
make this an enticing choice for reluctant middle-school readers.  EB 
Paul, ann Whitford Fiesta Fiasco; illus. by Ethan Long. Holiday House, 
2007 32p
ISBN 0-8234-2037-X $16.95   
R 5-8 yrs
Good friends Culebra (a snake), Tortuga (a tortoise), Iguana, and Conejo (a rabbit) 
are back (from Mañana Iguana) and busy preparing for another party; this time, 
it’s Culebra’s birthday celebration. While out shopping for birthday gifts, tricky 
480  •  The BulleTin
Conejo convinces Tortuga and Iguana to buy their snake friend gifts more suited 
to a rabbit than a snake, and at the party Conejo generously (and duplicitously) 
offers to take the unwanted presents for himself. Though he is initially banished 
from the party by his peeved friends, he’s welcomed back with open arms—well, 
claws and whatever a snake hugs with—when he makes amends. While this new 
tale lacks the fairy tale tie-in of its predecessor, it is a creatively executed original 
trickster tale. The text bounces between Spanish and English and, while a glossary 
is included, most of the Spanish terms are clear within their context. The friend-
ship dynamic is very real, and the movement from breach of friendship back to 
solid relationship will likely be familiar to listeners just figuring out social relations 
themselves. Long’s gouache and colored-pencil illustrations employ a zingy palette 
of red, orange, bright green, and yellow, with figures popping with energy and 
cartoonish rotundity. This would pair effectively with the friends’ first outing or 
fit nicely into a unit on trickster stories.  HM 
Perkins, Lynne rae Pictures from Our Vacation; written and illus. by Lynne Rae 
Perkins. Greenwillow, 2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-085098-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-085097-3 $16.99   
R* Gr. 2-5
The narrator, her brother, and their parents are taking their vacation on the old 
family farm, along with the children’s grandparents. A long car trip leads to a place 
filled with memories for the kids’ dad but, at least initially, dull disappointment 
for the narrator (“I asked our dad if on our next vacation, we could go someplace 
like Disney World”). When a memorial service brings other relatives to the farm, 
though, life returns to the old place and the girl and her brother settle into a classic 
family holiday. Perkins takes this conventional story and lifts it into a metanarra-
tive that accessibly discusses the way stories get told and memories get made: our 
narrator, given a small instant-print camera and a notebook in which to record her 
vacation impressions, realizes when looking back at an unevocative series of images 
and jottings that “it’s hard to take a picture of a story someone tells, or what it feels 
like when you’re rolling down a hill or falling asleep in a house full of cousins and 
uncles and aunts.” The book is more than up to this difficult task, however, vividly 
depicting the tedium and random interests (“The second day was almost exactly 
the same as the first day except that for lunch, we stopped at a place where you 
could get gravy on your french fries”) of a lengthy car trip and the alienness and 
disappointments of a strange vacation spot. Yet it gives full and feeling credit to the 
small and lasting joys of such vacations: the inventions of new desserts, the finding 
of weird bugs, the sound of adult conversation floating up to the bedrooms of the 
sleep-bound children. Perkins’ unprettified line-and-watercolor art is well suited 
to a realistic vacation story, and she cleverly channels the scrapbook/combinative 
format in laying out her narrator’s imaginings and in sequences of events, with 
creative overhead views and map formats adding literal as well as philosophical 
perspective. The correlation of pictures taken to events experienced could elicit 
some interesting discussion and assignments, but this will also do families across 
the board a favor by encouraging them to reconceptualize vacations as experiences 
rather than glossy photo-ops, and all the more memorable for that.  DS
July/AugusT 2007 • 481
piven, hAnoch My Dog Is as Smelly as Dirty Socks and Other Funny Family Por-
traits; written and illus. by Hanoch Piven. Schwartz & Wade, 2007 34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-94052-9 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-84052-4 $15.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs
A little girl tackling a school assignment explains a new artistic approach to the book’s 
audience as she creates portraits of her family members. Her technique involves 
describing someone with four or five concrete similes (“My daddy is as jumpy as a 
SPRING and as playful as a SPINNING TOP”), then creating a picture from the 
specific objects in the figures of speech: Daddy’s eyebrows are springs, his nose is 
a top, his mouth is a knotted length of rope (“because sometimes he’s as stubborn 
as a KNOT in a ROPE”), and so on. This offers some interesting possibilities for 
assignments blending the language and visual arts; the book is particularly effec-
tive at contrasting the initial line drawings of the girl’s family members, which 
are energetic but conventional, with the vivid and creative photographic portraits 
wherein included realia lift a basic painted shape into three-dimensional hypersil-
liness. The book’s story is largely superfluous, though, and the narrator’s voice isn’t 
credible; the portraits vary somewhat in creativity, and these would be mighty 
expensive projects to do well on any classroom-sized scale. Nonetheless, this could 
spark some imaginative discussion or just add some sparkle to classic family-portrait 
assignments.  DS
reeve, philip A Darkling Plain. Eos/HarperCollins, 2007 [576p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-089056-8 $19.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-089055-X $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-12
The concluding volume of the Hungry City Chronicles quartet (see Mortal Engines, 
BCCB 3/04, etc.) opens with a tenuous truce between the “urbivore” traction cities 
and their Eastern enemy, Green Storm. General Naga of Green Storm, inspired 
by his wife, the former Dr. Zero, rallies for a permanent peace, and counterparts 
among the Traktionstadtsgellschaft such as Kobold of Murnau are also ready to come 
to terms, but zealots on both sides will stop at nothing to secure total victory for 
their cause. Against the backdrop of world war, the Natsworthy family plays out its 
own domestic drama. Tom and daughter Wren go on a trading mission, in part to 
try to forget Hester, the wife and mother who betrayed them. When Tom catches 
sight of an old acquaintance he believed to be dead, he and Wren become entangled 
with a group of survivors from the cataclysmic destruction of the traction city of 
London, and with their plans to launch a new mobile city—one that hovers above 
earth without devastating the landscape and has no part in the Municipal Dar-
winism that entails feeding off of weaker entities. Again Reeve strikes a masterful 
balance between domestic drama and high-stakes global warfare, hinging Earth’s 
fate on both the split second decisions and the long-held obsessions of characters 
that fans have come to know intimately. There are plenty of twists and surprises 
left, particularly as Stalkers Anna Fang and Grike wrestle with memories of their 
former lives that threaten to make them too human to perform their militaristic 
missions, and as Tom and Hester are reunited for an achingly brief period—long 
enough to reconcile, share one final adventure, and die. This is a bold, sprawling 
conclusion that befits a bold, sprawling series, and when Reeve sends New London 
off on its maiden journey, outrunning the voracious traction cities, he offers a real 
hope for a future that will make better use of its technologies.  EB 
482 • The BulleTin
rettig, liz My Desperate Love Diary. Holiday House, 2007 [320p]
ISBN 0-8234-2033-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
“If I were blonde, the flat chest and spots wouldn’t matter so much.” So begins 
Brit chick Kelly Ann’s comical chronicle of her devoted if misguided love for fellow 
high-school student, G. (as he’s pseudonymously dubbed in Kelly Ann’s diary). G. 
isn’t the only problem in Kelly Ann’s messy and disorganized life: her mother falls 
for a young Greek guy during a vacation away from Kelly Ann’s father; her sister, 
Angela, is pregnant; her best guy friend has been acting strangely around her lately; 
and her best girlfriends think G. is a “tosser.”  A year’s worth of diary entries detail 
the ups and downs of Kelly Ann’s attempts to snag G. as all the while she misses 
every signal sent by Chris, the sweet boy who lives nearly next door. Rettig fresh-
ens a standard story through clever humor and subplots involving quirky feminist 
teachers, steadfast friends, and a dysfunctional family. Although this is a busy book 
plotwise, she is careful not to overload readers, filtering and contextualizing every-
thing through Kelly Ann’s angsty but amusing adolescent voice. Girls who can’t get 
enough of the cheeky British humor in Sue Limb’s Girl, 15, Charming but Insane 
(BCCB 10/04) will find more giggles and a snort or two here.  CW
riddleBurger, sAM The Qwikpick Adventure Society; written and illus. by Sam 
Riddleburger. Dial, 2007 127p
ISBN 0-8037-3178-7 $16.99    
R Gr. 3-6
It’s a long, boring, celebration-free Christmas Day for three middle-school chums—
Dave, who’s Jewish; Marilla, who’s a Jehovah’s Witness; and Lyle, whose parents must 
work the day shift at the Qwikpick minimart, where the trio generally hang out. 
A quirky story in the local paper provides inspiration, though: the sewage plant is 
taking its decades-old sludge fountain off-line and replacing it with a new aeration 
system on the first of the year. Clearly a farewell visit to the “poop fountain” is in 
order, and the friends, having appropriately dissembled to their parents, are off. 
The fountain turns out to be even more impressive—and expansive—than they 
expected; having been splattered, and in Lyle’s case soaked in sludge while trying 
to retrieve Marilla’s lost camera, they are actually relieved when their break-in is 
discovered by a sympathetic plant worker, who gets them cleaned up, gives them a 
private tour and an invitation to return anytime, and even takes them home in the 
municipal truck. Lyle chronicles the event in alternating pages of manuscript and 
type, peppered with black-and-white snapshots of local landmarks (but not, alas, 
the poop fountain itself), and even several haiku written in tribute to the marvel of 
waste treatment. Although the grossout factor is in full play, there’s also a genuine 
sweetness to Lyle’s observations about his pals and their friendship, and the day-trip 
adventure has a ring of authenticity. Whether this is a series in the making isn’t 
entirely clear, but readers who’ve beheld the wonders of the poop fountain would 
certainly sign on for ensuing adventures.  EB
rocks, MisAko Rock and Roll Love; written and illus. by Misako Rocks. Hy-
perion, 2007 156p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7868-3685-7 $7.99   
Ad Gr. 5-7
In this new manga from the author of Biker Girl (BCCB 9/06), sixteen-year-old 
Misako is fearless in her pursuit of adventure as she willingly leaves her family and 
July/AugusT 2007 • 483
home in Japan to live in the United States for an entire year. Although Misako does 
face moments of insecurity and homesickness, most of her year is marked by positive 
experiences with her host family, in her new school, and at a summer puppet camp. 
The last remaining challenge is the finding of true love, and Misako has her boy in 
mind—gorgeous rocker Zac. Although warned away because of his player reputa-
tion, Misako won’t be deterred, even when Zac rejects her as anything more than a 
friend. Rocks’ inked and shaded pencil drawings utilize expected manga formatting 
and style, although preteens with an eye for fashion will appreciate her attention to 
clothing details, an element that is usually more generic. While the book is true to 
its influences—shojo books are often marked by idealized romances—the fact that 
Misako’s obsession discovers the error of his ways only days before she leaves and 
enters into a perfect, cross-continent relationship with her is too convenient and 
pat and the book is in general fairly predictable. Middle-school readers may still 
enjoy the sweet wish-fulfillment of an adventurous teen and a sparkly star-crossed 
romance in this accessible format. One of the most intriguing features comes in 
the form of an odd but amusing end-of-book interview between the author and 
her manga self, which demystifies the artistic process by briefly enumerating the 
many steps from first idea to finished product. That’s not enough to lift this beyond 
a fairly standard romance, but it may add a gloss of edginess that will enhance 
reader satisfaction.  AS
rylAnt, cynthiA Annie and Snowball and the Dress-Up Birthday: The First Book 
of Their Adventures; illus. by Suçie Stevenson. Simon, 2007 40p (Ready-to-
Read Books)
ISBN 1-4169-0938-9 $14.99   
Ad Gr. 1-2
Cousin Annie and her pet rabbit, Snowball, have just moved in next door to Henry 
and his big dog, Mudge. In this first book of her adventures, Annie prepares for her 
birthday party, which, she has decided, is going to be a dress-up affair. Told in three 
consecutive chapters, this easy reader introduces Annie and Snowball, discusses plans 
for the party, and tells of the unexpected events of the party day (when Annie said 
dress-up, she meant fancy clothes, but Henry and his family arrive to the celebration 
dressed in costumes). Annie is all girl, with a definite propensity for “ribbons and 
bows and lace and fancy little shoes”; the relationship between Annie and Henry 
is nicely developed, with the two spending time together and spoiling each other’s 
pets (Annie gives Mudge good brushings while Henry gives Snowball good scratch-
ings). This is well geared to the early reading audience; there is lots of opportunity 
to match text to illustrations, new vocabulary is effectively introduced, and the 
sentence structure is just varied enough to maintain appeal for newly independent 
readers. This pales by comparison to classic Henry and Mudge, though: Snowball 
is far less of a fully developed character than big, sloppy Mudge, the text lacks some 
of the boisterous energy readers of that series have come to expect, and frilly Annie 
is a specialized taste. The illustrations are cleanly composed, offering just enough 
color and detail without being distracting. There is no question that Annie and 
Henry are related; in fact, they both have the exact same facial expression in every 
single illustration throughout the book (save the picture where Annie is surprised 
by the costumed guests and her mouth forms a little o), and the compositions are 
thus a bit repetitive. Henry and Mudge fans will nevertheless welcome the newest 
kid on the block; expect many more adventures to follow.  HM 
484 • The BulleTin
scott, elizABeth Bloom. Simon Pulse, 2007 231p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-4169-2683-6 $8.99   
R Gr. 7-12
It seems like Lauren’s got it made: at seventeen, she’s finally entered the popular 
crowd, as the adored girlfriend of the handsome, kind, and considerate It Guy Dave. 
Now she and her friend Katie, who’s dating sports star Marcus, sit at the in lunch 
table and always have a party to go to, and Lauren doesn’t have to spend time in her 
empty house listening to apologetic phone messages from her distant, workaholic 
father. She feels like something’s missing, though, and she discovers what it is when 
Evan Kirkland joins her class; back when she and Evan were little, his mother was 
involved with her father and the two kids became close friends, but his return evokes 
in her a desire for a much deeper and more romantic bond. Soon she’s leading a 
double life, playing Dave’s happy and predictable girlfriend and Katie’s chipper 
buddy while she’s secretly seeing Evan. This is a spicy and emotional blend of new 
realism and old-style romance. Lauren is believably struggling with the legacy of 
a deserting mom and her conviction that succumbing to emotion merely leads to 
disaster, even as she denies how much she’s betraying both Dave, by cheating, and 
Katie, by emotionally absenting herself from the friendship. Her encounters with 
Evan, though, are described in lusciously torrid prose that’s thoroughly enjoyable 
in its own right as well as marking Lauren’s unaccustomed letting down of her 
guard: “He is standing there silent and bruised, and I have been reckless, I have 
been worse than reckless, and I want it all and more again.” While Scott is more 
merciful to her straying protagonist than readers might have been (Dave accepts 
the truth with sadness but no anger, and Katie immediately forgives Lauren), those 
who have followed Lauren’s delicious dilemma will adore seeing her so wrong she’s 
finally right and firmly in the arms of the guy who inspired her growth.  DS
scott, MichAel The Alchemyst: The Secrets of the Immortal Nicholas Flamel. Dela-
corte, 2007 [384p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90372-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73357-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
It is fortunate that fifteen-year-old twins Sophie and Josh have learned adaptability 
and more than a bit of history from their archaeologist parents: after witnessing 
a brutal magical battle involving golems, an immortal alchemist, and an evil man 
working to secure an Earthly home for the banished Elder Race (incredibly powerful 
and millennia-old beings), they will need any advantages they can muster. Since 
Josh grabbed two pages out of the Codex (an ancient text that alchemist Nicholas 
Flamel has been guarding for over 700 years) before it was stolen, the twins are now 
irrevocably involved in this epic transdimensional battle between good and evil. 
The entire novel, complete with vampires, were-creatures, mythical gods and god-
desses, and, of course, prophesied twins who will determine the fate of everything 
(“The two that are one will come either to save or destroy the world”), takes place 
over only two days. It all adds up to an extraordinary amount of plot, even for a 
lengthy novel with an obviously planned sequel, but Irish author Scott ably suc-
ceeds in juggling cross-genre horror, fantasy, and mythology elements while never 
losing focus on developing his core protagonists as distinct individuals with whom 
readers will empathize. The novel ends abruptly with Sophie the only twin awoken 
into her powers, Nicholas aging rapidly without access to the immortality formula 
July/AugusT 2007 • 485
in the Codex, and the stage set for the end of civilization as it is known if the evil 
forces succeed. Happily, the author has created such an engaging and multilayered 
novel that enthusiasts can content themselves with a second read while waiting for 
the next installment.  AS 
sensel, Joni Reality Leak; illus. by Christian Slade. Holt, 2007 218p
ISBN 0-8050-8125-9 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 5-7
A boy who lives in a remodeled garage bay and sleeps on a hydraulic lift isn’t likely 
to be easily fazed by unusual events. Even Bryan is nonplussed, however, when a 
man whom he just saw climb out of a crate opens a factory overnight in his small 
town. If it means earning more money for a computer (right now, budding detective 
Bryan keeps his files in a pillow), though, then the eleven-year-old is more than 
happy to give up his lemon milk stand in favor of factory work. Of course, factories 
that spring up overnight are rarely trafficking in legal and ordinary substances, and 
Acme (Astro-Chrono-Magical Enterprises) Inc. is no exception, as Bryan and his 
friend Spot (a girl who fears eventually turning into a dog) soon discover. In fact, 
Acme Inc. is the cover for an urgent investigation into a local reality malfunction 
caused by a tear in the imagination layer that surrounds the Earth. It’s all too much 
for this brief novel, and the individual characters are mostly lost under the complex, 
convoluted plot; even the curiously tall and prescient Mr. Keen, the man from the 
crate, seems flat when paired with his outrageous factory and the goings-on within. 
However, Sensel effectively reins in the freewheeling plot in time for a surprising final 
twist and satisfying conclusion. Slade’s half-page black-and-white illustrations mostly 
serve to add humorous touches to the text, particularly in the visual representation 
of the odd Mr. Keen. The book will likely satisfy action-driven adventure fans, and 
small-town readers will be particularly impressed with the realistic and endearing 
exploration of the havoc any large change (not to mention one that causes teabags 
to change into mice) will have on a quiet place like South Wiggot.  AS
sfAr, JoAnn The Professor’s Daughter; tr. by Alexis Siegel; illus. by Emmanuel 
Guibert. First Second, 2007 80p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59643-130-X $16.95   
R* Gr. 7-12
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 449, for review.
shAlAnt, phyllis The Society of Super Secret Heroes: The Great Cape Rescue; illus. 
by Dan Santat. Dutton, 2007 244p
ISBN 0-525-47404-8 $15.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Finch and his three best friends have spent their whole lives playing superheroes, 
but now that they are going into fourth grade they reluctantly agree that this is 
something only young children would do. Just when they think they’ve got the 
habit kicked, Finch begins hearing a voice in his head, which he determines to be 
emanating from a towel that was adapted into a superhero cape years before. Finch 
is deeply relieved when his friends also hear the boastful voice of the towel, which 
claims thousands of years of experience with various masters, and the four form a 
secret superhero club with the towel serving as mentor. As there aren’t any damsels 
in distress or burning buildings, the boys content themselves with such missions 
as finding friends for their new teacher. Even the most inexperienced readers will 
predict that, when the towel is stolen, the boys will discover that whatever superhero 
486 • The BulleTin
powers they’ve been calling on were in them all the time. However, Finch is such 
an affable, well-developed character that he saves the book from its own predictable 
core. His well-intentioned interventions in the lives of others (from his teacher to 
the classroom hermit crabs) rarely go as planned, but Finch’s wry sense of humor, 
earnestness, and generosity are enough to garner him fierce allies in his friends 
and family, who help him resolve each new problem. Though Shalant sneaks in a 
moral lesson about thinking being preferable to fighting, she does it so subtly that 
it never detracts from the novel’s rollicking and adventurous feel. A sequel is all 
but guaranteed; in the meantime, fans will have to content themselves with some 
of the other “heroes with capes” stories mentioned herein (Sinbad and Superman, 
for example) while waiting to see who or what the boys and towel will save next. 
Black-and-white illustrations are tidy but slightly cheeky, adding a pleasingly but 
not overwhelmingly comic touch.  AS
singer, nicky The Innocent’s Story. Holiday House, 2007 [224p]
ISBN 0-8234-2082-5 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
“Murdered. That’s nice. I probably made the local paper,” dryly says thirteen-year-
old Cassina, blown up, along with her little sister, when a terrorist bomb explodes 
in an English railway station. Cassina is now a para-spirit, a collection of mist stuck 
floating around the world, catching rides in congenial human—or sometimes ca-
nine—bodies. Happenstance brings her into the body of Ahim, who initially seems 
to be merely a lost and victimized soul; soon, though, she realizes that Ahim is in 
fact the railway-station bomber, determined to be a religious martyr but instead 
doomed to be immortal. This is an ambitious and conceptually challenging novel, 
with obvious and discussable implications for real-world situations (though Ahim 
and his cohort are members of a fictional faith and country). Singer, author of the 
intriguing Feather Boy (BCCB 4/02), is particularly good at creating a history and 
emotional circumstances for Ahim that make both his violence and his protective 
impulses credible, and the para-spirit experience is creatively imagined. The fantasy 
and real elements of the novel sit uneasily together, however; the story becomes sur-
prisingly static and talky for such a meaty plot, the fictionalization of the terrorists’ 
origins is intrusively evasive, and the exploration is ultimately rather heavy handed 
and preachy. The originality of the notion is still impressive, though, and the book 
succeeds in an interesting fable-like trajectory that gives a pleasing aesthetic shape 
that keeps things from bogging down in message. Readers intrigued by the many 
recent explorations of the afterlife may therefore enjoy following the adventures of 
the late Cassina even as they consider the import of her experiences.  DS
sMith, rolAnd Peak. Harcourt, 2007 [256p]
ISBN 0-15-202417-4 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Climbing is in Peak’s blood, but that’s not enough to get him out of trouble when 
he’s caught ascending a New York skyscraper for kicks. Though his mother (her-
self a former mountain climber) and his stepfather do their best to get him out of 
the ensuing legal predicament, it’s his birth father who really comes to the rescue: 
Joshua Wood swoops in, covers Peak’s fine, and takes his son away with him—not 
to his home in Thailand but to his mountaineering expedition in Tibet. There Peak 
discovers that his father is not only leading a team up Everest, he’s planning that 
July/AugusT 2007 • 487
fourteen-year-old Peak himself will make the summit, thus bringing publicity to 
his father’s expedition company by being the youngest climber ever to make it to 
the top of the world’s tallest mountain. The writing is superficial and unpolished, 
and characterization is largely rudimentary, with Peak’s evolution into a self-sac-
rificing kid who values his family above all never really credibly set up. However, 
Smith marries dramatic action adventure to some interesting political issues about 
mountaineering and makes the latter accessible even to casual readers; the book 
touches on the lack of consideration for the locals, Sherpas, and environment and 
the money-making pressures and dubious clients of the professional guided expe-
ditions. This might therefore make a lively companion to Mark Pfetzer’s factual 
account of a young Everest climber, Within Reach (BCCB 1/99), and it will likely 
appeal to those who would enjoy an undemanding read about a very demanding 
pastime.  DS
toksvig, sAndi Hitler’s Canary. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2007 191p
ISBN 1-59643-247-0 $16.95   
R Gr. 6-10
This British import about the Danish Resistance is told from the point of view 
of Bamse, a young Danish boy who, as the German occupation progresses, joins 
the resistance movement along with his friend Anton, who is Jewish. Despite 
Bamse’s father’s strong urgings that the times would change on their own, in the 
end, Bamse’s entire family becomes deeply involved in helping Jewish friends and 
neighbors when news leaks that the German troops have begun gathering all Danish 
Jews for immediate relocation to the East. The dramatic final episode depicts the 
remarkable historical events of the autumn of 1943, when more than 7000 Danish 
Jews were safely and secretly transported to Sweden with fewer than 500 actually 
captured and sent to concentration camps. Toksvig is successful both in describ-
ing the immediate action and filling in the background information necessary to 
understand the significance of that action. The story is well paced, with moments 
of high drama, humor, and riveting danger all melding together in a strong nar-
rative line. The description of the climate of Copenhagen during the war years is 
particularly striking; unlike many Nazi strongholds, the general public sentiment 
remained pro-Dane, anti-Nazi despite the efforts of the Nazi propaganda machine. 
At the center of Bamse’s character evolution is the realization that nothing is clear 
cut, that there are bad Danes and good Nazis mixed in among the masses. This will 
provide a useful counterpoint to Lowry’s Number the Stars (BCCB 3/89) as well 
as a compelling story in its own right. A final note provides historical data, and an 
author’s note links events in the novel to Toksvig’s own family history.  HM
verrillo, ericA Elissa’s Quest: Phoenix Rising, Book One. Random House, 
2007 [352p] 
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93946-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83946-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Thirteen-year-old Elissa is a talented animal-speaker apprenticed to High Crossing’s 
local wise woman, but she finds her simple fortunes changed when she is unexpect-
edly introduced to the father she never thought she would meet. When she leaves 
the only home she has ever known to travel with him, she discovers she is being 
offered to a desert khan as security for troops and money that her father, the prince, 
needs to stave off threats to the kingdom. After the khan attempts to take Elissa as 
488 • The BulleTin
one of his many wives, she is rescued by her young servant, Maya, and members of 
a desert clan known as the Blue People. When the khan’s forces pursue the escapees, 
Elissa must use all her talents if she is to save herself and free the Blue People from 
their corrupt ruler. The story makes the most of exotic locations, and Elissa is a 
strong, plucky heroine accompanied by well-written and interesting companions, 
such as island-born Maya, described with veiled selkie-like references that tease the 
reader about future events in the series. The enchanting desert city and its creatively 
conceived denizens, like the vultures that attempt to situate Elissa on their family 
tree (“Is that Sam’s daughter?”), elevate a standard story to an absorbing and even 
amusing adventure. Verrillo has laid in character and plot hints aplenty to grab 
readers for this entry in the series and keep them coming back for more.  CW
volponi, pAul Rucker Park Setup. Viking, 2007 149p
ISBN 0-670-06130-1 $15.99   
R Gr. 9-12
This is the year Mackey and J. R. should have been running the court at the pres-
tigious Rucker Park streetball tourney, playing for rapper J. Greene’s Greenbacks. 
Instead, Mackey’s on his own, with his soul and conscience burdened by his 
friend’s death, his lies to J. R.’s referee father, a burning desire for revenge against 
J. R.’s murderer, and his bought-and-paid-for promise to throw the game by con-
trolling the point spread. Most of the action takes place on the court during the 
playoff final, flashing like lightning between the game itself and Mackey’s tortured 
thoughts, with an occasional peek inside the minds of the three adults most closely 
involved—Stove, who’s certain Mackey knows more than he’s telling about his son’s 
death; Fat Anthony, who’s got Mackey on his payroll; and Greene, who’s beginning 
to suspect that the player who betrayed him isn’t the one who was stabbed. While 
this title isn’t riddled with the moral perplexities of Volponi’s previous efforts (Black 
and White, BCCB 6/05; Rooftop, BCCB 7/06), readers will be caught in the un-
nerving tension as they wait for the killer’s identity to be revealed and to find out 
just how Mackey will manage to wriggle through his own self-made hell. Language 
is raw, the game is intense, and the contrast between the celebrated Rucker Park 
tournament and its fictional evil underbelly is richly imagined.  EB
WAlden, MArk H.I.V.E.: Higher Institute of Villainous Education. Simon, 
2007 309p
ISBN 1-4169-3571-1 $15.99   
R Gr. 5-7
The Higher Institute of Villainous Education (H.I.V.E.) is a selective secret school 
for children around the world who show strong potential in various evil pursuits. 
Otto, a thirteen-year-old orphan who hypnotized the Prime Minister and possesses 
an eidetic memory, is an ideal candidate. Rather than settling into the idea that he 
will spend the next six years harnessing his abilities for evil, Otto hates the idea of 
having been forced to attend, and he is determined to escape. Even if Otto were 
not marked by the shadowy and sinister global leader, Number One, for some 
undisclosed future purpose, fleeing a school specifically built to train (and contain) 
geniuses is a challenging feat. Although H.I.V.E. could be envisioned as a darker 
counterpart to Hogwarts, Walden presents his students as complex individuals 
whose impressive powers come out of determination and intelligence rather than 
magic. An intriguing examination of the fluid and contextualized natures of good 
and evil is effective in justifying the school; happily, philosophy is quickly set aside 
in favor of nonstop action adventure scenes that are more in line with a school about 
July/August 2007 • 489
villains-in-training. Given the theme, it is perhaps appropriate that the diaboli-
cally open-ended conclusion will leave readers breathlessly anticipating the sequel; 
adventure fans can at least console themselves that this means more time spent 
in the well-developed maelstrom that is H.I.V.E. For readers not quite ready for 
Catherine Jinks’ Evil Genius (BCCB 6/07), this book will be an ideal introduction 
to kids who are learning to embrace their own villainy.  AS
Watson, C. G. Quad. Razorbill, 2007 296p
ISBN 1-59514-138-3 $16.99   
M Gr. 7-12
On Monday, April 6, the high-school quad becomes the scene of chaos as shots ring 
out and panicked students stampede for cover. Scenes of past happenings intercut 
with the events of the present to provide a window into the seething enmities 
between the school groups (each chapter is introduced with a clique name such 
as “Drama Queens,” “Jocks,” or “Techies,” indicating the subject group) and to 
provide clues—and red herrings—as to the identity of the shooter. The contrived 
and awkward style keeps this from being successful even as a shallow high-action 
story; characterization goes beyond reductive to dismissive, with most of the cast 
interchangeable in their unsympathetic and spiteful wrongdoing and differentiated 
only by variance of stereotype. Acceptance of superficial causality—apparently any-
one who’s the victim of taunting becomes murderous—means that the revelation 
of the actual shooter lacks impact, since a multitude of students were apparently 
preparing their own bloodthirsty revenge anyway. This isn’t exactly an undertreated 
subject in literature these days, and readers with an interest will be much better 
served by Walter Dean Myers’ Shooter (BCCB 6/04), Adam Meyer’s The Last Domino 
(BCCB 6/05), or Todd Strasser’s Give a Boy a Gun (BCCB 10/00).  DS
Weatherly, lee Kat Got Your Tongue. Fickling/Random House, 
2007 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75122-2 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75117-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
There’s something terrible in Kat’s past, something that she did to one of her friends. 
Unfortunately, she has no idea what it is, because she’s developed near-total amnesia 
(though her memory loss follows a modest head injury, the doctor suspects it’s 
psychological in origin), and she’s not only unable to remember her misdeed, she 
doesn’t remember her friends or her mother. Interspersed excerpts from the diary 
of pre-accident Kat, then called Kathy, reveal that Kathy was achingly jealous of 
new student Tina, an enthusiastic violinist with a devoted father (gifted musician 
Kathy gave up the violin, and she never again saw her father, who died not long ago, 
after her parents’ divorce). When Kat discovers the diary, she’s horrified to finally 
learn just how she alienated her friends (she stole Tina’s violin and then smashed 
it in front of her), but it’s family emotional history that really holds the key to her 
behavior. The premise of amnesia and the convenient existence of the explana-
tory diary are contrived as all get out, but the devices take Kat to a mesmerizing 
emotional and ethical place. The notion of seeing one’s life and household utterly 
afresh is an immediately riveting one, and the book takes an interesting direction 
by making Kat particularly at ease with her mother’s calm boyfriend, Richard, who 
had been the source of embittering rage and resentment for Kathy. There’s also 
clever handling of the dark secret, which could have been either unworthy of the 
490 • the Bulletin
drama or too horrible for forgiveness; instead, it’s a thematically relevant action 
that also allows for both credible ostracism and the hope of absolution. British 
author Weatherly (Missing Abby, BCCB 11/04) has been making a specialty of such 
booktalk catnip, and this title will be well-nigh irresistible, leaving young readers 
arguing vigorously about mental states and culpability as they imagine themselves 
into the drama.  DS
Weeks, sarah Ella, Of Course!; illus. by Doug Cushman. Harcourt, 
2007 32p
ISBN 0-15-204943-6 $16.00   
R 4-6 yrs
Ella the pig is a noted problem-solver, but when she receives an umbrella from 
her grandmother for her birthday, she becomes a problem-causer, leaving a wake 
of disaster wherever she and her cumbersome but beloved umbrella go. When her 
umbrella is officially uninvited from her dance recital, Ella is devastated. Fortunately, 
however, she hadn’t “forgotten who she was, for heaven’s sake,” so she solves the 
problem by converting her umbrella into a tutu and subsequently stealing the show. 
This unusual tale of a security object deemed unwelcome by adults has at its center 
a delightfully self-confident porcine who is as entertaining in her MacGyver role 
as she is in her destructive mode. The framing concept—that the Ella who used to 
solve problems is now causing them—elevates the text beyond being merely a story 
of a girl who refuses to give up her special possession when pressured to do so by 
an adult. Cushman’s bold acrylic paintings fill nearly every inch of every spread; 
thick outlines provide definition to foreground elements while subtle texturing and 
shading prevent the compositions from appearing flat. The cast, an assorted crew 
of animals, often provides an additional touch of visual humor (the lizard looks 
particularly fetching in ballet togs), and there is a consistent energy to the paintings. 
The titular refrain is sprinkled throughout the story, and young listeners will likely 
catch on and participate after a few rounds. Pair this with Henkes’ Owen (BCCB 
10/93) for an entertaining glimpse at the lengths to which the preschool set will 
go to keep their beloved belongings close at hand.  HM
Wein, elizabeth e. The Lion Hunter: The Mark of Solomon Book One. Viking, 
2007 227p
ISBN 0-670-06163-8 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-12
It is with unbridled pleasure that readers will return to Wein’s Aksumite empire 
of the sixth century (from The Sunbird, BCCB 5/04, etc.). Our hero Telemakos 
is visiting the emperor’s mostly tame lions while awaiting the birth of his sister; 
when news of her arrival comes, he unwisely runs across the pit, causing the male 
lion to attack. He lives, but infection results in the loss of his arm at the shoulder, 
and his wounds fester in the hearts of his parents as well, estranging them from 
his infant sister. Telemakos, though a picture of waking resilience, is plagued by 
nightmares, not of the wounds given him by his beloved lion but by memories of 
the torture inflicted when he was spying for the emperor and his aunt Goewin, 
the British ambassador, in the salt mines. When it becomes clear that not all of the 
traitors to the emperor’s quarantine have been caught and that they are still looking 
to avenge themselves on the spy, Telemakos is sent to study with his uncle in the 
royal court at Himyar, where he uncovers a plot that will pit his well-honed talent 
for espionage against his genuine affection for his new home and his instincts for 
self-preservation. Telemakos grows more and more likable as his vulnerabilities 
July/August 2007 • 491
surface behind his childlike springiness; his devotion to his sister, his desire for a 
less distant father, and his determination to overcome the residual effects of his 
imprisonment render him humble and accessible despite the fact that he is clearly 
exceptional, even kingly, at twelve years of age. After the lion attack shatters the 
quiet domesticity to which Telemakos has returned after his earlier adventures, 
Wein keeps the tension quiveringly high even at moments of rest and relative calm; 
readers sense that Telemakos must never again make the mistake of complacency 
in the presence of those who are only mostly tame, be they lions or men. Sequel 
to follow—quickly, one hopes.  KC 
Wells, rosemary Red Moon at Sharpsburg. Viking, 2007 236p
ISBN 0-670-03638-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
India Moody enters her teens just as the Civil War destroys the peace within her 
Appalachian Virginia community. Her family’s connection with the wealthy Trimble 
family, though, will prove to be a lifeline to the young woman. Their son Emory, 
too asthmatic to enlist in the Army of Northern Virginia, is engaged to tutor India; 
she soon brushes aside the intended lessons in Scripture and household economics 
and pressures him into teaching her about his own interests in medical sciences, 
particularly in the battle against infection. She’s a promising pupil, and although 
her parents are decidedly skeptical about the value of this eccentric education, they 
don’t forbid it, tacitly acknowledging that their daughter simply cannot conform 
to the role of genteel Southern lady. Moreover, India’s friend Julia, who has moved 
to Ohio to escape the coming battles, writes to her about women who enroll at 
Oberlin College and pay their tuition through work programs, which now brings 
India’s dreams into the realm of possibility. But although the war has in some ways 
enabled India to imagine a life for herself (and quite possibly with Emory) outside 
the norm, it also puts all plans on hold as her father loses his life to camp fever, 
her mother is forced upon the cold charity of relatives, and the treachery of jealous 
neighbors threatens to bring down the Trimbles and all who come under their pro-
tection. This is no run-of-the-mill tale of a feisty, anachronistic feminist but rather 
an exploration of a pivotal moment in history when the unthinkable becomes the 
possible—understanding the connection between microorganisms and infection 
will push medical practice forward, and opening higher education to women will 
offer life options to marginalized young women like India. Historical fiction fans 
will therefore embrace this finely crafted coming-of-age tale.  EB
Willems, mo My Friend Is Sad: An Elephant & Piggie Book; written and illus. by 
Mo Willems. Hyperion, 2007 57p
ISBN 1-4231-0297-5 $8.99   
R Gr. K-1
   Today I Will Fly!: An Elephant & Piggie Book; written and illus. by Mo 
Willems. Hyperion, 2007 57p
ISBN 1-4231-0295-9 $8.99   
R* Gr. K-1
Willems has already proven himself a master at expressing much with great economy 
of line, color, and text, and this is truer than ever in these two easy readers featuring 
good friends Gerald the Elephant and Piggie the Piggie. In Today, Piggie decides, 
despite Gerald’s sardonic skepticism, that she is going to fly. After a misfired at-
tempt, she accepts help from a bird, and several spreads later, Gerald spots Piggie 
in mid-air: “You . . . you are flying!” Gerald gushes. “My friend can fly! She can 
492  •  The BulleTin
fly!” That’s when Piggie reveals that she is merely hanging from the flying bird. In 
My Friend, Piggie executes a series of heartfelt attempts to cheer up sad Gerald, 
dressing up as a cowboy, a clown, and a robot. When Piggie arrives as Piggie, Ger-
ald recalls the wonderful series of visitors he had, explaining that while he loves 
cowboys, clowns, and robots, it only made him sadder because his “best friend was 
not there to see it” with him. There is something decidedly Bert-and-Ernie-esque 
about the friendship dynamic in these two short tales: Piggie possesses unfettered 
enthusiasm, confidence, and spirit whereas Gerald offers a despondent, wet-blanket 
take on the world that is lifted by the joyful input of his friend. The vocabulary is 
controlled without feeling repetitious, and the conceptual simplicity—the stories 
consist entirely of character dialogue and action, no setting, background, descrip-
tion—allows young readers to really focus. Both stories offer a fair dose of dry and 
ironic wit that’s pitched effectively to the young readership. The illustrations stick 
to a simple palette, with simply lined figures mono- or self-colored against wide 
open white backdrops, and the tiniest of line details carries enormous emotional 
weight in the friends’ expressions. As is typically the case with Willems, the illus-
trations are well coded for emotion, and novice readers will find these stories an 
excellent exercise in reading with expression. Fans of Willems both young and old 
will enthusiastically welcome Gerald and Piggie to the world of early readers—let’s 
hope there are many more adventures to follow.  HM
Wilson, n. D. Leepike Ridge. Random House, 2007 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93873-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83873-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-8
Tom was only looking for a bit of time to himself, away from his mother and the 
man who’s courting her, when he embarked on his ride down the river on a slab 
of packing foam. Now, though, he’s been sucked into a series of streams, falls, and 
pools under the mountain outcrop, discovered a dead body, picked up an equally 
distressed dog, and been plucked up at last by a fellow castaway, Reg, deep beneath 
the mountain. Reg has spent the last three years surviving on albino crawdads and 
plotting a way out, and as the man (Reg) and eleven-year-old (Tom) compare sto-
ries, they discover not only a pivotal family connection but also reason to believe 
that the persons who murdered Tom’s father and left Reg for dead in the cave are 
probably on Tom’s tail and persecuting his mother up above ground. This is a 
ripping good adventure yarn, made even better by its loose but clever patterning 
on the Odyssey, with the widow fending off villainous suitors and clinging to the 
belief that her beloved will make his way home and the voyager passing through 
the underworld before returning to claim his kingdom—in this case rights to the 
archaeological treasure buried beneath the mountain. Villains are deliciously stupid 
and nasty, the toggles between above- and below-ground action are deftly paced, 
and even the nature of the treasure—evidence that pre-Columbian Asiatic peoples 
arrived in North America by ship—is intriguing. Here’s the perfect remedy for any 
summer that’s been disappointingly short on thrills.  EB
YanceY, Rick Alfred Kropp: The Seal of Solomon. Bloomsbury, 2007 329p
ISBN 1-59990-045-9 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Our ungainly hero Alfred Kropp is back in his foster home, lamenting that saving 
the world (as he did in The Extraordinary Adventures of Alfred Kropp, BCCB 2/06) 
July/AugusT 2007 • 493
doesn’t seem to come with as many benefits as one might have hoped. Heir to an 
enormous fortune, he is unable to stop his greedy foster father from trying to adopt 
him; as he is running away, however, he is kidnapped and nearly killed by his old 
nemesis, the traitor Mike Arnold. Mike has stolen artifacts that have held the entire 
fallen-angel brigade at bay since the time of Solomon, and when he unleashes them, 
it’s up to Alfred, with the help of a taciturn agent known only as Op Nine, to save 
the world, again. It soon becomes evident, however, that Op Nine is using Alfred 
in an unethical way; Alfred’s blood has some power to temporarily discombobulate 
the demons, and Op Nine is stealing it bit by bit to make weapons. Ultimately, 
though, it is Alfred’s shaky faith, combined with his noble Round Table bloodline, 
that proves just enough to make him a fit vessel through which God himself can 
send the demons back where they belong. Alfred’s wisecracking naïveté, which 
worked so well in the first book, is less successful here; his deadpan humor lacks the 
dynamism it acquired from bouncing off the well-conceived secondary characters, 
Op Nine being a rather pale and uninteresting substitute for the memorable and 
beloved Bennacio. The plot is similarly less substantial; the action, though ample, 
has a flat, forced quality that depends entirely too much on supernatural explosions. 
Nevertheless, the cinematic, or rather videogame, quality to Alfred’s exploits will 
appeal to visual learners who can fill in the pictures themselves—budding graphic 
novelists could have a lot of fun bringing this text to life—and readers committed 
to Alfred from the first book will be glad to walk with him as he slowly comes to 
terms with his mother’s death.  KC
yee, lisA So Totally Emily Ebers. Levine/Scholastic, 2007 280p
ISBN 0-439-83847-9 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 5-7
In this companion novel to Millicent Min, Girl Genius (BCCB 11/03) and Stanford 
Wong Flunks Big-Time (BCCB 12/05), Yee completes the trilogy of perspective 
of three friends experiencing the same summer with each other. Emily has been 
dragged across country from New Jersey to California as her mother tries to start 
over after the divorce, and she desperately misses her aging rock-star dad, who is 
on a comeback tour with his band. The story is told through a letter journal that 
Emily writes to her dad, in which she’s predictably bratty to her mom, whom 
she blames for the divorce, predictably chummy to her dad, whom she absolves 
of all responsibility, and predictably wrong on both counts. Emily is in fact a bit 
of an emotional bulldozer, rolling over the people in her life with big, clumsy as-
sumptions that suit her and paying little heed to the original landscapes. Those 
assumptions make it easy for Millicent and Stanford to keep their secrets, but they 
make Emily less sympathetic, and her puppylike exuberance, grounded as it is in 
obvious denial, becomes tedious. Emily is certainly a realistic character, but without 
the distinctive and original characteristics that set Stanford and Millicent apart, 
her story is an ordinary and run-of-the-mill one of a girl doing her best to cope 
with divorce and estrangement from her beloved father, settle into a new place, 
and negotiate her way among the friends she finds there. Still, it is ultimately as 
upbeat and cheery as the other two, and it will be a must-read for those who want 
to complete the set.  KC 
494  •  The BulleTin
Accidents–fiction: Colebank
Adventure: Bruchac; Car-
man; Chima; Friesner; Hinds; 
Laybourn; reeve; riddleburger; 
Scott, M.; Sensel; Sfar; Shalant; 
Smith; Walden; Wilson; Yancey
Africa–folklore: diakité
Africa–stories: daly
African Americans–stories: Isadora
Alcoholism–fiction: davis; day; 
Hyde
Animals–fiction: Koertge; rylant
Animals–stories: Baddiel; Bunting; 
Friend; Heide; Paul; Weeks
AntHoLogIeS: Cabot; Cortez
Art: Piven
Art and artists–fiction: Clinton; 
Mcneal
Art and artists–stories: Piven
Athletes: McCarthy
Athletes–fiction: Clippinger; new-
ton; Parker
Bathrooms–stories: elya
BILInguAL StorIeS: elya
BIogrAPHIeS: Cortez; McCarthy
Books and reading–fiction: Carman; 
ellsworth; gifford
Brothers–fiction: Kelly
Brothers–stories: Isadora
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Hyde; 
Scott, M.
Bullies–fiction: Heneghan
Campers and camping–fiction: 
Holmes
Cats–fiction: Harper Fashion
Cats–stories: Friend
Chickens–stories: Friend
Cities–fiction: reeve
Civil War–fiction: Wells
Clothing–fiction: Harper Fashion
ConCePt BooKS: Hutchins
CountIng BooKS: Macdonald
Cousins–fiction: rylant
Crime and criminals–fiction: 
Bruchac; Colebank; de guzman; 
newton; Singer; volponi; Wat-
son; Wilson
Current events: erskine
dance–stories: Weeks
death–fiction: ellsworth; Kelly; 
Singer
depression–fiction: Clinton
deserts–fiction: verrillo
detectives–fiction: Sensel
divorce–fiction: Yee
elves–stories: Cech
ePIStoLArY FICtIon: Blos; 
rettig; Yee
Ethics and values: Chima; Cole-
bank; erskine; goldblatt; 
Heneghan; Matas; Scott, e.; Sing-
er; toksvig; volponi; Weatherly
Fairies–fiction: Marr
Faith–fiction: erskine
Families–fiction: Alegría; Colebank; 
day; Hyde; Jonsberg; Martínez; 
Mcneal; Scott, e.; Weatherly; 
Wein
Families–stories: Piven
FAntASY: Carman; Chima; Crilley; 
duey; durst; Fletcher; Jordan; 
Laybourn; Marr; reeve; Scott, 
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
July/AugusT 2007  •  495
M.; Sensel; verrillo; Walden; 
Yancey
Farm life–stories: Baddiel
Fathers–fiction: Smith
Fish–stories: Macdonald
FoLKtALeS And FAIrY tALeS: 
Cech; daly; diakité
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: 
durst
Foster care–fiction: de guzman; 
erskine; Koertge; Mcneal
Friends–fiction: Colfer; day; duey; 
Holmes; Jonsberg; Koertge; 
Martínez; riddleburger; Shalant; 
Weatherly; Willems; Yee
Friends–stories: Paul
grAPHIC noveLS: Crilley; gipi; 
Harper Fashion; rocks; Sfar
grief–fiction: Kelly
guilt–fiction: Heneghan
Heroes–fiction: Shalant
HIStorICAL FICtIon: Avi; 
Blos; ellsworth; Friesner; Mar-
tínez; Matas; newton; Parker; 
Sfar; toksvig; Wein; Wells
History, U.S.: Blos
Horror: Clement-Moore
HuMor: Buehner; Colfer; daly; 
elya; Friend; gifford; Heide; 
Jonsberg; rettig; Sfar; Willems
Identity–fiction: Alegría
Jews–fiction: toksvig
Latinos: Cortez
Latinos–fiction: Alegría; Martínez
Latinos–stories: elya
Lies–fiction: Buehner; day
Literature, English: Hinds
Magic and magicians–fiction: duey; 
durst; Laybourn
Meteorology: Malone
Mothers–fiction: davis; ellsworth; 
goldblatt
Mountaineering–fiction: Smith
Music and musicians–fiction: gipi
MYSterIeS: Harper Just
Myths, classical: Friesner
native Americans–fiction: Bruchac
orphans–fiction: Koertge
Parties–fiction: rylant
Pets–stories: Heide
Photography–fiction: Perkins
Physical education: Clippinger; 
McCarthy; volponi
Pirates–fiction: Babbitt
Poverty–fiction: Avi; Martínez
Prejudice–fiction: Matas
Proms–fiction: Cabot; Levithan; 
Clement-Moore
Reading aloud: Babbitt; gifford
Reading, beginning: rylant; Wil-
lems
Reading, easy: gifford; Harper 
Fashion; Harper Just; riddle-
burger
Reading, reluctant: gipi
relationships–fiction: Clippinger; 
Crilley; davis; Marr; Mcneal; 
rettig
Religious education: erskine
rHYMIng StorIeS: Buehner; 
elya; emmett
romance–fiction: goldblatt; rocks; 
Scott, e.; Sfar
royalty–fiction: verrillo
School–fiction: duey; Harper Fash-
ion; Laybourn; Walden; Watson
Secrets–fiction: Jonsberg
Ships and sailing: Malone
SHort StorIeS: Cabot; Levithan
Sisters–fiction: Holmes
SongS: emmett
Spies and espionage–fiction: Avi; 
Wein
SPortS StorIeS: Clippinger; 
Parker; volponi
Storytelling–fiction: Babbitt
Storytime: Baddiel; emmett
Suicide–fiction: Clinton; Heneghan
Summer–fiction: Perkins
SuPernAturAL StorIeS: 
Cabot; Clement-Moore; Sfar
SurvIvAL StorIeS: de guzman
SuSPenSe: volponi; Watson
terrorism–fiction: Singer
time: Hutchins
toddLer BooKS: Bunting; 
Macdonald
tricksters–stories: Paul
twins–fiction: Scott, M.
urban life–fiction: Fletcher
496  •  The BulleTin
War–fiction: Jordan; Matas; toksvig
Women’s studies: Friesner; Wells
World War II–fiction: Matas; toks-
vig
urban life–stories: Isadora
vacations–fiction: Perkins
violence–fiction: Watson
voyages and travel: Malone
voyages and travel–fiction: Alegría; 
Carman; Colfer; ellsworth; Kelly; 
rocks; verillo
July/August 2007 • 497
t h e  B u l l e t i n
 
of the Center for Children’s Books
Author/title index, volume 60
septemBer, 2006—July/August, 2007
15 Minutes. Young. 46.
1607. Lange. 299.
17 Things I’m Not Allowed to Do Any-
more. Offill. 184.
21 Proms. Levithan. 454.
39 Apartments of Ludwig van Beethoven. 
Winter. 150.
7 Days at the Hot Corner. Trueman. 346.
Abrahams. Behind the Curtain. 4.
Abundance of Katherines. Green. 69.
Ada. Tales Our Abuelitas Told. 282.
Adventures of Marco Polo. Freedman. 169.
Adventures of Max and Pinky. Eaton. 166.
Adventures of Michael MacInnes. Carney. 
247.
Adventures of the Dish and the Spoon. 
Grey. 15.
After Life. Ehrenhaft. 166.
After the Wreck. Oates. 88.
Aftershock. Easton. 209.
Ahlberg. Runaway Dinner. 112.
Alabama Moon. Key. 175.
Alchemyst. Scott. 485.
Alegría. Sofi Mendoza’s Guide to Getting 
Lost in Mexico. 450.
Alexander. Gift of the Unmage. 400.
Alfred Kropp: The Seal of Solomon. 
Yancey. 492.
All for Pie, Pie for All. Martin. 84.
All Hallows’ Eve. Vande Velde. 98.
All of the Above. Pearsall. 140.
All the Stars in the Sky. Taylor. 232.
Allen. Harriet Tubman, Secret Agent. 202.
Almond. Clay. 5.
Alphabet of Dreams. Fletcher. 212.
Alter. Phantom Isles. 322.
Am I Right or Am I Right? Jonsberg. 472.
Amato. Please Write in This Book. 283.
Amazing Flight of Darius Frobisher. Harley. 
292.
American Born Chinese. Yang. 152.
American Story. Armstrong. 54.
Anahita’s Woven Riddle. Sayres. 308.
Anatomy of a Boyfriend. Snadowsky. 386.
Andersen. Tinderbox. 400.
Anderson, L. Twisted. 323.
Anderson, M. Astonishing Life of Octavian 
Nothing. 112.
Andreasen. Giant of Seville. 358.
Andy Warhol. Rubin. 188.
Angelmonster. Bennett. 5. 
Angels on Sunset Boulevard. de la Cruz. 
365.
Anne Frank and the Children of the Holo-
caust. Lee. 177.
Annie and Snowball and the Dress-Up 
Birthday. Rylant. 483.
Another Day in the Milky Way. Milgrim. 
260.
Antieau. Broken Moon. 323.
Anything but Ordinary. Hobbs. 370.
Arctic Thaw. Lourie. 428.
Armstrong. American Story. 54.
_____. Once upon a Banana. 162.
Arnold. Rat Life. 401. 
Aronson. Up Close: Robert F. Kennedy. 
401. 
Arrington. Paper Heart. 163.
498 • the Bulletin
Art for Kids. Roche. 383.
Aston. Seed Is Sleepy. 402. 
Astonishing Adventures of Fanboy & Goth 
Girl. Lyga. 178.
Astonishing Life of Octavian Nothing. 
Anderson. 112.
At the Firefly Gate. Newbery. 341.
Atherton. Carman. 455.
Auch. One-Handed Catch. 283.
Augarde. Celandine. 54.
Avi. Crispin at the Edge of the World. 203.
_____. Traitors’ Gate. 451.
Avielle of Rhia. Calhoun. 246.
Babbitt. Jack Plank Tells Tales. 451.
Bad Bear Detectives. Pinkwater. 90.
Bad Bears Go Visiting. Pinkwater. 435.
Bad Girls, Bad Girls. Voigt. 40.
Bad Tickets. O’Dell. 434.
Baddiel. Cock-a-Doodle Quack! Quack! 
452.
Banerjee. Looking for Bapu. 163.
Banjo Granny. Busse. 205.
Banks. Fox. 358.
Baptism. Moses. 378.
Barkbelly. Weatherill. 100.
Barkley. Dream Factory. 402.
Barnes, D. Making of Dr. Truelove. 242.
Barnes, J. Golden. 55.
_____. Tattoo. 284.
Barnstormers. Long. 335.
Barnum Brown. Sheldon. 309.
Barth-Grözinger. Something Remains. 203.
Baskin. Company of Crazies. 55.
Bass Ackwards and Belly Up. Craft. 10.
Bateman. Fiona’s Luck. 324.
Bateson. Boyfriend Rules of Good Behav-
ior. 113.
Bauer, C. Harley’s Ninth. 403.
Bauer, M. Mama for Owen. 284.
Be Water, My Friend. Mochizuki. 261.
Beah. Long Way Gone. 359.
Beam. Getting to First Base with Danalda 
Chase. 243.
Bearwalker. Bruchac. 453.
Beast. Kennen. 78.
Beast of Noor. Carey. 62.
Beasts of Clawstone Castle. Ibbotson. 75.
Beaty. When Giants Come to Play. 113.
Beaudoin. Going Nowhere Faster. 359.
Beautiful City of the Dead. Watts. 41.
Beauty and the Beast. Eilenberg. 289.
Beccia. Who Put the B in the Ballyhoo. 
360.
Becker, B. Holbrook. 243.
Becker, S. Horris Grows Down. 244. 
Beddor. Looking Glass Wars. 114.
Behind the Curtain. Abrahams. 4.
Behind the Eyes. Stork. 36.
Behold the Bold Umbrellaphant. Prelutsky. 
141.
Being. Brooks. 245.
Being Teddy Roosevelt. Mills. 378.
Belinda and the Glass Slipper. Young. 153.
Bell. Prophecy. 56.
_____. Shield of Stars. 403.
Ben and the Sudden Too-Big Family. 
Rodowsky. 343.
Bennett. Angelmonster. 5. 
Benny and Babe. Colfer. 459.
Benny and Omar. Colfer. 459.
Benson. John Lewis in the Lead. 253.
Beowulf. Hinds. 470.
Beowulf. Morpurgo. 303.
Berenice Abbott, Photographer. Sullivan. 
37.
Berkeley. Palace of Laughter. 114.
Berkowitz. Jurassic Poop. 56.
Berman. Vintage. 404.
Best Best Friends. Chodos-Irvine. 9.
Best Father’s Day Present Ever. Loomis. 
336.
Best Teacher in Second Grade. Kenah. 78.
Better Than Yesterday. Schneider. 384.
Bidner. Is My Dog a Wolf? 204.
Big One-Oh. Pitchford. 435.
Biker Girl. Rocks. 30.
Bildner. Barnstormers. 335.
Birdsall. Notes on a Near-Life Experience. 
285.
Birdseye. Tough Nut to Crack. 285.
Birdsongs. Franco. 366.
Black Tattoo. Enthoven. 121.
Black Tuesday. Colebank. 458.
Black? White! Day? Night! Seeger. 145.
Blackbeard, the Pirate King. Lewis. 22.
Blacker. Parent Swap. 57.
Blackford. Tiger’s Story. 404. 
Blackwood. Just-So Woman. 244. 
Bledsoe. How to Survive in Antarctica. 57.
Bleed. Stolarz. 192.
July/August 2007 • 499
Blind Mountain. Thomas. 232.
Block. Psyche in a Dress. 115.
Blood Confession. Libby. 133.
Bloom. Scott. 484.
Bloor. London Calling. 115.
Blos. Letters from the Corrugated Castle. 
452.
Blue Bloods. de la Cruz. 11.
Blume. Cornelia and the Audacious Esca-
pades. 58.
Bogaert. Journey into Mohawk Country. 
116.
Bohnhoff. Kino No Tabi. 230.
Bolden. M. L. K. 360.
Bondoux. Life as It Comes. 324.
Boo’s Dinosaur. Byars. 117.
Book of Lies. Moloney. 432.
Book of One Hundred Truths. Schum-
acher. 190.
Booth’s Daughter. Wemmlinger. 440.
Bottner. You Have to Be Nice to Someone 
on Their Birthday. 324.
Bounce. Cronin. 410.
Bowsher. My Lost and Found Life. 58.
Boy in the Striped Pajamas. Boyne. 60.
Boyce. Framed. 59.
Boyfriend Rules of Good Behavior. Bate-
son. 113.
Boyne. Boy in the Striped Pajamas. 60.
Bradman. My Dad’s a Punk. 6. 
Braid. Frost. 170.
Brashares. Forever in Blue. 361.
Bread and Roses, Too. Paterson. 305.
Breathed. Mars Needs Moms! 325.
Bremen Town Musicians. Grimm. 368.
Broken Moon. Antieau. 323.
Brooks. Being. 245.
Brotman. Larry. 249.
Brown. Notorious Izzy Fink. 116.
Browne, A. Silly Billy. 203.
Browne, N. Silverboy. 361.
Bruchac. Bearwalker.  453.
_____. Jim Thorpe. 6.
_____. Return of Skeleton Man. 60.
Buckingham. Demonkeeper. 405.
Buckley-Archer. Gideon the Cutpurse. 7.
Buehner. Would I Ever Lie to You?  453.
Bulion. Hey There, Stink Bug! 61.
Bunnies Are Not in Their Beds. Russo. 
228.
Bunting. Hurry! Hurry! 454.
_____. Pop’s Bridge. 7.
_____. Reggie. 203.
Burger Boy. Durant. 120.
Burgess. Sara’s Face. 406.
Buried. MacCready. 82.
Burleigh. Stealing Home. 204. 
Burningham. Edwardo. 406. 
Burns. Tracking Trash. 362.
Busse. Banjo Granny. 205.
Butterfly Eyes. Sidman. 94.
Butterworth. Sea Horse. 61.
By the River. Herrick. 18.
Byars. Boo’s Dinosaur. 117.
Cabot. How to Be Popular. 62.
_____. Prom Nights from Hell. 454.
Caletti. Nature of Jade. 245.
Calhoun. Avielle of Rhia. 246.
Call Me Henri. López. 23.
Calmenson. May I Pet Your Dog? 407.
Campbell. Robert Cormier. 286. 
Campoy. Tales Our Abuelitas Told. 282.
Candy Darlings. Walde. 99.
Captain Abdul’s Little Treasure. McNaugh-
ton. 24.
Cárdenas. Letters to My Mother. 8.
Carey. Beast of Noor. 62.
_____. Dragon’s Keep. 362.
Caring for Cheetahs. Hansen. 330.
Carman. Atherton. 455.
Carmody. Little Fur. 246.
Carney. Adventures of Michael MacInnes. 
247.
Carroll. Quantum Prophecy. 407.
Carter. Love, Football, and Other Contact 
Sports. 8.
Cassie Was Here. Hickey. 419. 
Cat with the Yellow Star. Rubin. 32.
Cathy’s Book. Stewart. 310.
Cave Sleuths. Lindop. 258.
Cech. Elves and the Shoemaker. 456.
Celandine. Augarde. 54.
Chae. How Do You Count a Dozen Duck-
lings? 117.
Chambers. This Is All. 164.
Champions on the Bench. Weatherford. 
233. 
Changeling. Sherman. 34.
Changing Woman and Her Sisters. Tchana. 
37.
500 • the Bulletin
Charlton. Hey Batta Batta Swing! 247.
Charlton-Trujillo. Feels Like Home. 363.
_____. Prizefighter en Mi Casa. 63.
Cheng. Eclipse. 206.
Cheshire. Prince and the Snowgirl. 286.
Chestnut Soldier. Nimmo. 379.
Chicken Joy on Redbean Road. Martin. 
337.
Chicken-Chasing Queen of Lamar County. 
Harrington. 418.
Chickens to the Rescue. Himmelman. 126.
Chicky Chicky Chook Chook. MacLen-
nan. 429.
Child. Snow Is My Favorite and My Best. 
164.
Children of Alcatraz. Murphy. 138.
Chima. Wizard Heir. 456. 
Chodos-Irvine. Best Best Friends. 9.
Christmas Remembered. dePaola. 120.
Christmas Tree Farm. Purmell. 141.
Christopher Killer. Ferguson. 13.
Citrin. Fall of the Amazing Zalindas. 179.
City of Bones. Clare. 408.
Clancy the Courageous Cow. Hume. 295.
Clare. City of Bones. 408.
Clark. Snow. 118.
Clarke. One Whole and Perfect Day. 408.
Clay. Almond. 5.
Clementine. Pennypacker. 140.
Clement-Moore. Prom Dates from Hell.  
457.
Clements. Room One. 9.
Clever Ali. Farmer. 168.
Clever Beatrice Christmas. Willey. 149.
Clinton. Eyes of van Gogh. 457.
Clippinger. Open Court. 458.
Close to the Wind. Malone. 475.
Coburn. Glint. 287.
Cock-a-Doodle Quack! Quack! Baddiel. 
452.
Codell. Vive la Paris. 206.
Cohn. Cupcake. 363.
Colebank. Black Tuesday. 458.
Coleman, J. Secrets, Lies, Gizmos, and 
Spies. 118.
Coleman, R. Ruby Parker Hits the Small 
Time. 287.
Colfer. Benny and Babe. 459.
_____. Benny and Omar. 459.
Comets, Stars, the Moon, and Mars. 
Florian. 413.
Company of Crazies. Baskin. 55.
Compestine. Real Story of Stone Soup. 
325.
Confessions from the Principal’s Chair. 
Myers. 182.
Converting Kate. Weinheimer. 311.
Conway. Melting Season. 207.
Cook. Hey Batta Batta Swing! 247.
Cookies. Rosenthal. 31.
Cooley. Shelter. 207.
Coombs. Runaway Princess. 63.
_____. Secret-Keeper. 10.
Cooney. Enter Three Witches. 364.
_____. Friend at Midnight. 165.
Cooper. Hero of the High Seas. 248.
_____. Jamestown, 1607. 409.
Corbenic. Fisher. 121.
Cornelia and the Audacious Escapades. 
Blume. 58.
Corrigan. Ordinary Ghosts. 409.
Cortez. Windows into My World. 459.
Costume Copycat. Macdonald. 24.
Cow Who Clucked. Fleming. 67.
Cowell. That Rabbit Belongs to Emily 
Brown. 410.
Cracker! Kadohata. 332.
Craft. Bass Ackwards and Belly Up. 10.
Crazy in Love. Mackall. 337.
Crilley. Miki Falls Book One: Spring. 460.
Crisler. Tough Boy Sonatas. 326.
Crispin at the Edge of the World. Avi. 203.
Croggon. Riddle. 208.
Cronin. Bounce. 410.
Crush. Mac. 23.
Cummings. Three Names of Me. 165.
Cupcake. Cohn. 363.
Cupid. Lester. 301.
Cures for Heartbreak. Rabb. 342.
Curtis. Mr. Chickee’s Messy Mission. 326.
Cushman. Loud Silence of Francine Green. 
63.
Daemon Hall. Nance. 433.
Daffodil, Crocodile. Jenkins. 422.
Dahl. Problem with Paradise. 288.
Dairy Queen. Murdock. 26.
Daisy Jane, Best-Ever Flower Girl! McDon-
ald. 431. 
Dalecki. Kid B. 248.
Daley. Shanghaied to the Moon. 364.
Daly. Pretty Salma. 460.
July/August 2007 • 501
Dark Water Rising. Hale. 172.
Darkling Plain. Reeve. 481.
Darkness Creeping. Shusterman. 385.
Darrow. Trash. 64.
Dart. Larry. 249.
Davies, J. House Takes a Vacation. 327.
Davies, N. Extreme Animals. 64.
Davis. Not Like You. 461.
Dawn and Dusk. Mead. 377.
Day My Mother Left. Prosek. 263.
Day of the Scarab. Fisher. 13. 
Day. Tall Tales. 461.
de Guzman. Finding Stinko. 462.
de la Cruz. Angels on Sunset Boulevard. 
365.
_____. Blue Bloods. 11.
_____. Masquerade. 411.
De Mari. Last Dragon. 208.
Deacon. While You Are Sleeping. 119.
Dead Connection. Price. 28.
Dead High Yearbook. Velez. 390.
Dear Author. Kaywell. 424.
Dear Mr. Rosenwald. Weatherford. 53.
Debon. Strongest Man in the World. 365.
Decoding of Lana Morris. McNeal. 478.
DeFelice. One Potato, Two Potato. 65.
Delaney. Last Apprentice: Curse of the 
Bane. 119.
Delilah D. at the Library. Willis. 348.
Demonkeeper. Buckingham. 405.
dePaola. Christmas Remembered. 120.
Derailed. Ripslinger. 143.
Desperate Journey. Murphy. 303.
Devil’s Tango. Jubert. 256.
Devilish. Johnson. 129.
Dexter the Tough. Haddix. 330.
Diakité. Mee-An and the Magic Serpent. 
462.
Diary of a Wimpy Kid. Kinney. 426.
Dick Whittington and His Cat. Hodges. 
18.
Different Kind of Heat. Pagliarulo. 27.
Dimity Dumpty. Graham. 329.
Dingle. Periodic Table. 411.
Dirty Magic. Hughes. 173.
Diva. Flinn. 250.
Diving to a Deep-Sea Volcano. Mallory. 
180.
Dizzy. Winter. 151.
Do Not Pass Go. Hill. 241.
Do Re Mi. Roth. 227.
Doder. Dog Called Grk. 327.
Dog. Van Fleet. 272.
Dog and Bear. Seeger. 437.
Dog Called Grk. Doder. 327.
Dog for Life. Matthews. 181.
Dogar. Waves. 412.
Dogboy. Kelleher. 297.
Dogs and Cats. Jenkins. 422.
Donutheart. Stauffacher. 231.
Doppelganger. Stahler. 36.
Dorfman. Playing It Cool. 11.
Double Cheeseburgers. Ichord. 296.
Douglas. More Confessions of a Hollywood 
Starlet. 288.
Dowd. Swift Pure Cry. 412. 
Dragon Dancing. Schaefer. 309.
Dragon Slippers. George. 416.
Dragon’s Keep. Carey. 362.
Dragonology Chronicles Volume One. 
Steer. 268.
Drawing the Ocean. MacCullough. 178.
Dream Factory. Barkley. 402.
Dream Job Profiles. Green. 124.
Dream Journal. Schreck. 145.
Drescher. Hubert the Pudge. 209.
Drowned Maiden’s Hair. Schlitz. 144.
Duble. Hearts of Iron. 249. 
Duey. Skin Hunger. 462.
Dumpster Diver. Wong. 391.
Dunmore. Ingo. 65.
Durant. Burger Boy. 120.
Durst. Into the Wild. 463.
E. E. Cummings. Reef. 186.
Easton. Aftershock. 209.
Eaton. Adventures of Max and Pinky. 166.
Eclipse. Cheng. 206.
Edenville Owls. Parker. 479.
Edwardo. Burningham. 406. 
Edwina, the Dinosaur. Willems. 101.
Eggs. Spinelli. 438.
Ehrenhaft. 21 Proms. 454.
_____. After Life. 166.
Ehrhardt. This Jazz Man. 289.
Eilenberg. Beauty and the Beast. 289.
Elissa’s Quest. Verrillo. 487.
Elkeles. How to Ruin a Summer Vacation. 
167.
Ella, Of Course! Weeks. 490.
Ellis, D. I Am a Taxi. 167.
502 • the Bulletin
Ellis, S. Odd Man Out. 168.
Ellsworth. In Search of Mockingbird. 464.
Elves and the Shoemaker. Cech. 456.
Elya. Oh No, Gotta Go #2. 464.
Emily Goldberg Learns to Salsa. Ostow. 
305.
Emlyn’s Moon. Nimmo. 379.
Emma-Jean Lazarus Fell Out of a Tree. 
Tarshis. 269.
Emmett. She’ll Be Coming ’Round the 
Mountain. 464.
Enter Three Witches. Cooney. 364.
Enthoven. Black Tattoo. 121.
Epic. Kostick. 333.
Epossumondas Saves the Day. Salley. 229.
Erskine. Quaking. 465.
Escape! Fleischman. 66.
Escape of Oney Judge. McCully. 430.
Esckilsen. Outside Groove. 12. 
Everlost. Shusterman. 191.
Evil Genius. Jinks. 423.
Extraordinary Adventures of Ordinary 
Basil. Miller. 260.
Extraordinary Ordinary People. Govenar. 
69.
Extreme Animals. Darrow. 64.
Extreme Pets! Harrington. 418.
Eyes of van Gogh. Clinton. 457.
Faerie Path. Jones. 297.
Fain. Bass Ackwards and Belly Up. 10.
Fairest. Levine. 132.
Falconer. Olivia Forms a Band. 12. 
Falconer’s Knot. Hoffman. 421.
Fall of the Amazing Zalindas. Mack. 179.
Fallout. Krisher. 298.
Fan. Swordbird. 290.
Fardell. Flight of the Silver Turtle. 210.
Farmer. Clever Ali. 168.
Farnell. Mark II. 250. 
Fashion Kitty versus the Fashion Queen. 
Harper. 468.
Father and Son. McCaughrean. 137.
Feathers. Woodson. 348.
Feels Like Home. Charlton-Trujillo. 363.
Feinstein. Vanishing Act. 66.
Ferguson. Christopher Killer. 13.
Fetch. Humphreys. 75.
Fields. Holdup. 413.
Fiesta Fiasco. Paul. 479.
Fighter. Greif. 70.
Finding Day’s Bottom. Ransom. 186.
Finding Stinko. de Guzman. 462.
Fine. Frozen Billy. 169.
Finest Kind. Wait. 232.
Finn’s Going. Kelly. 473.
Fiona’s Luck. Bateman. 324.
Firehorse. Wilson. 273.
Firestorm. Klass. 79.
First Grade Stinks! Rodman. 31.
Fish, Swish! Splash, Dash! MacDonald. 
475.
Fisher. Corbenic. 121.
_____. Day of the Scarab. 13. 
FitzGerald. Soccer Chick Rules. 210.
Five Little Gefiltes. Horowitz. 254.
Fix It, Sam. Ries. 382.
Fleischman. Escape! 66.
_____. White Elephant. 211.
Fleming, C. Tippy-Tippy-Tippy, Hide! 
211.
Fleming, D. Cow Who Clucked. 67.
Fletcher, C. Stoneheart. 465.
Fletcher, S. Alphabet of Dreams. 212.
Fletcher and the Falling Leaves. Rawlinson. 
90.
Flight of the Silver Turtle. Fardell. 210.
Flinn. Diva. 250.
Floca. Lightship. 366.
Flora Segunda. Wilce. 312.
Flores-Galbis. Raining Sardines. 413.
Florian. Comets, Stars, the Moon, and 
Mars. 413.
Flotsam. Wiesner. 44.
Flush! Harper. 293.
Fly by Night. Hardinge. 17.
Flying Bed. Willard. 391.
Foreman. Mia’s Story. 122.
Forest in the Hallway. Smith. 267.
Forever in Blue. Brashares. 361.
Forged in the Fire. Turnbull. 438.
Forman. Young Cornrows Callin Out the 
Moon. 414.
Fossils. Walker. 40.
Fourth King. Sieger. 146.
Fox. Banks. 358.
Foyt. Virtual Life of Lexie Diamond. 414. 
Fradin. Jane Addams. 290.
Fragments. Johnston. 332.
Framed. Boyce. 59.
Franco. Birdsongs. 366.
July/August 2007 • 503
Frankenstein Makes a Sandwich. Rex. 29.
Fredericks. In the Cards. 212.
Freedman. Adventures of Marco Polo. 169.
_____. Freedom Walkers. 170.
Freedom Ship. Rappaport. 263.
Freedom Walkers. Freedman. 170.
French. Rover. 415.
Friend at Midnight. Cooney. 165.
Friend, C. Perfect Nest. 466.
Friend, N. Lush. 213.
Friendship for Today. McKissack. 338.
Friesner. Nobody’s Princess. 466.
_____. Temping Fate. 14.
Friskative Dog. Straight. 268.
Fritz. Who’s Saying What in Jamestown, 
Thomas Savage? 415.
Frog Princess. Kimmel. 20.
Frost. Braid. 170.
Frozen Billy. Fine. 169.
Funke. Ghosthunters and the Incredibly 
Revolting Ghost! 68.
_____. When Santa Fell to Earth. 122.
Gallo. What Are You Afraid Of? 68.
Game. Jones. 423.
Games. Gorman. 328.
Garage Band. Gipi. 467.
Gee Whiz! Goodman. 69.
Gelletly. Gift of Imagination. 291.
Gemini Summer. Lawrence. 176.
George. Dragon Slippers. 416.
Gerstein. Leaving the Nest. 367.
_____. White Ram. 123.
Get Real. Hicks. 73.
Getting It. Sanchez. 189.
Getting to First Base with Danalda Chase. 
Beam. 243.
Ghosthunters and the Incredibly Revolting 
Ghost! Funke. 68.
Giant of Seville. Andreasen. 358.
Gideon the Cutpurse. Buckley-Archer. 7.
Giff. Water Street. 213.
Gifford. Moxy Maxwell Does Not Love 
Stuart Little. 467.
Gift of Imagination. Gelletly. 291.
Gift of the Unmage. Alexander. 400.
Giles. What Happened to Cass McBride? 
171.
Gilliland. Strange Birds. 14.
Gipi. Garage Band. 467.
Glint. Coburn. 287.
Go to Sleep, Gecko. MacDonald. 179.
Going. Saint Iggy. 123.
Going Nowhere Faster. Beaudoin. 359.
Going Under. Koja. 130.
Gold. Kids Cook 1-2-3. 171.
Goldblatt. Stray. 468.
Golden. Barnes. 55.
Goldenberg. Little People and a Lost 
World. 251.
Golding. Secret of the Sirens. 328.
Gone. Johnson. 296.
Gonzalez. Ricochet. 367.
Goobie. Hello, Groin. 124.
Good Day. Henkes. 369.
Good Sports. Prelutsky. 306.
Goodman. Gee Whiz! 69.
Goosebumps Graphix #2. Stine. 388.
Gorbachev. Red Red Red. 416.
Gorman. Games. 328.
Gourley. War, Women, and the News. 368.
Gourse. Sophisticated Ladies. 251.
Govenar. Extraordinary Ordinary People. 
69.
Goy Crazy. Schorr. 144.
Graff. Thing about Georgie. 329.
Graham. Dimity Dumpty. 329.
Granström. Snap! 221.
Gravett. Orange Pear Apple Bear. 417.
Great Circle. Philip. 89.
Green Glass Sea. Klages. 220.
Green, D. Dream Job Profiles. 124.
Green, J. Abundance of Katherines. 69.
Greene. Sophie Hartley. 291.
Greetings from Planet Earth. Kerley. 425.
Gregory. I’ll Sing You One-O. 70.
Greif. Fighter. 70.
Grey, C. Leonardo’s Shadow. 214.
Grey, M. Adventures of the Dish and the 
Spoon. 15.
Grief Girl. Vincent. 347.
Griffin. My Almost Epic Summer. 15.
Grimes. Road to Paris. 214.
_____. Welcome, Precious. 125.
Grimm. Bremen Town Musicians. 368.
Gross. Lastling. 215.
Grumpy Bird. Tankard. 310. 
Guess What Is Growing inside This Egg. 
Posada. 381.
Gwaltney. Homefront. 71.
H.I.V.E. Walden. 488.
504 • the Bulletin
Haarsma. Softwire. 125.
Haber. Pluto Project. 16.
Hacker. Life as I Knew It. 252.
Haddix. Dexter the Tough. 330.
Hagerup. Markus + Diana. 252.
Hahn. Witch Catcher. 16.
Hale, M. Dark Water Rising. 172.
Hale, S. River Secrets. 126.
Halls. Mysteries of the Mummy Kids. 368.
Hansen. Caring for Cheetahs. 330.
Hantman. I Wanna Make My Own 
Clothes. 72.
_____. I Wanna Re-Do My Room. 72.
Hardinge. Fly by Night. 17.
Harlem Hustle. McDonald. 222.
Harlem Summer. Myers. 340.
Harley. Amazing Flight of Darius Frobisher. 
292.
Harley’s Ninth. Bauer. 403.
Harmless. Reinhardt. 264.
Harmon. Skate. 215.
Harness. Just for You to Know. 72.
_____. Tragic Tale of Narcissa Whitman. 
292.
Harper. Fashion Kitty versus the Fashion 
Queen. 468.
_____. Flush! 293.
_____. Just Grace. 469.
Harriet Tubman, Secret Agent. Allen. 202.
Harrington, Jane. Extreme Pets! 418.
Harrington, Janice. Chicken-Chasing 
Queen of Lamar County. 418.
Harris. It’s NOT the Stork! 73.
Harrison. Princess and the Hound. 418.
Hartnett. Silver Donkey. 216.
Haskins. John Lewis in the Lead. 253.
Haters. Valdes-Rodriguez. 271.
Hatkoff. Owen & Mzee: The Language of 
Friendship. 253.
Hattie Big Sky. Larson. 299.
Haym Salomon. Rubin. 436.
Headlock. Sweeney. 269.
Hearts of Iron. Duble. 249. 
Heide. Promise Is a Promise. 469.
Heights, the Depths, and Everything in 
Between. Nemeth. 87.
Hell Phone. Sleator. 147.
Hellbent. McGowan. 182.
Hello, Groin. Goobie. 124.
Hello, Twins. Voake. 39.
Hemphill, H. Runaround. 419.
Hemphill, S. Your Own, Sylvia. 369.
Henderson. Look at You! 254.
_____. Lugalbanda. 17.
Heneghan. Payback. 469.
Henkes. Good Day. 369.
Henry’s Freedom Box. Levine. 334.
Hepler. Dream Factory. 402.
Here, There Be Dragons. Owen. 224.
Hero of the High Seas. Cooper. 248.
Hero Schliemann. Schlitz. 93.
Herrick. By the River. 18.
_____. Wolf. 370.
Hershey. One Where the Kid Nearly Jumps 
to His Death. 293.
Hest. Remembering Mrs. Rossi. 281.
Hey Batta Batta Swing! Cook. 247.
Hey There, Stink Bug! Bulion. 61.
Hickey. Cassie Was Here. 419. 
Hicks, Barbara. Secret Life of Walter Kitty. 
420.
Hicks, Betty. Get Real. 73.
Higher Geometry. Moranville. 26. 
Higher Power of Lucky. Patron. 224.
Hightman. Samurai. 216.
Hill, K. Do Not Pass Go. 241.
Hill, Susan. Ruby’s Perfect Day. 172.
Hill, Susanna. No Sword Fighting in the 
House. 294.
Himmelman. Chickens to the Rescue. 126.
Hinds. Beowulf. 470.
Hitler’s Canary. Toksvig. 487.
Hobbs. Anything but Ordinary. 370.
Hodges. Dick Whittington and His Cat. 
18.
_____. Moses. 295.
Hoffman, A. Incantation. 217.
Hoffman, M. Falconer’s Knot. 421.
Hoffman, N. Spirits That Walk in Shadow. 
217.
Holbrook. Becker. 243.
Holdup. Fields. 413.
Hollywood Sisters. Wilcox. 45.
Holm. Penny from Heaven. 74.
Holmes, E. Pretty Is. 470.
Holmes, S. Letters from Rapunzel. 371.
Holt. Part of Me. 127.
Homefree. Wright. 102.
Honey Blonde Chica. Serros. 34.
Hopkinson. Into the Firestorm. 127.
July/August 2007 • 505
Horowitz. Five Little Gefiltes. 254.
Horris Grows Down. Becker. 244. 
Houdini. Lutes. 428.
Houndsley and Catina. Howe. 19.
Houndsley and Catina and the Birthday 
Surprise. Howe. 218. 
House of the Red Fish. Salisbury. 33.
House Takes a Vacation. Davies. 327.
How Do You Count a Dozen Ducklings? 
Chae. 117.
How It Happened in Peach Hill. Jocelyn. 
372.
How It’s Done. MacLean. 83.
How to Be a Baby. Lloyd-Jones. 335.
How to Be Popular. Cabot. 62.
How to Get Suspended and Influence 
People. Selzer. 385.
How to Ruin a Summer Vacation. Elkeles. 
167.
How to Steal a Dog. O’Connor. 433.
How to Survive in Antarctica. Bledsoe. 57.
Howe. Houndsley and Catina. 19.
_____. Houndsley and Catina and the 
Birthday Surprise. 218.
Hubert the Pudge. Drescher. 209. 
Hughes, C. Dirty Magic. 173.
Hughes, M. Lemonade Mouth. 421.
Hume. Clancy the Courageous Cow. 295.
Humphreys. Fetch. 75.
Hunt. Twice-Told. 19.
Hurry! Hurry! Bunting. 454.
Hurst. Terrible Storm. 255.
_____. Torchlight. 218.
Hurston. Three Witches. 128.
Huser. Skinnybones and the Wrinkle 
Queen. 173.
Hutchins. Second Is a Hiccup. 471.
Hyde. Year of My Miraculous Reappear-
ance. 471.
I Am a Taxi. Ellis. 167.
I Am the Great Horse. Roberts. 143.
I Believe in Unicorns. Morpurgo. 261.
I Don’t Like Gloria! Umansky. 346.
I Hate Books. Walker. 310.
I Love to Collage! Lipsey. 258.
I Wanna Make My Own Clothes. Hant-
man. 72.
I Wanna Re-Do My Room. Hantman. 72.
I’ll Sing You One-O. Gregory. 70.
I’m Dirty! McMullan. 85.
I’m the Biggest Thing in the Ocean. Sherry. 
437.
Ibbotson. Beasts of Clawstone Castle. 75.
Ichord. Double Cheeseburgers. 296.
In Search of Mockingbird. Ellsworth. 464.
In the Cards. Fredericks. 212.
Incantation. Hoffman. 217.
Ingo. Dunmore. 65.
Innocent’s Story. Singer. 486.
International Spy Museum. Secrets, Lies, 
Gizmos, and Spies. 118.
Into the Firestorm. Hopkinson. 127.
Into the West. McPherson. 303.
Into the Wild. Durst. 463.
Intruders. Richardson. 91.
Invention of Hugo Cabret. Selznick. 321.
Invisible. Wahl. 347.
Is My Dog a Wolf? Bidner. 204.
Isaacs. Pancakes for Supper! 128.
Isadora. Yo, Jo! 472.
Isis & Osiris. Limke. 257.
Island Grows. Schaefer. 33.
Issa. Today and Today. 371. 
It’s NOT the Stork! Harris. 73.
It’s Probably Penny. Leedy. 427.
Jablonski. Silent Echoes. 331.
Jack Plank Tells Tales. Babbitt. 451.
Jacob’s Ladder. Keaney. 333.
Jacobs. Powers. 76.
Jacobson. Winnie at Her Best. 76.
Jade Dragon. Marsden. 259.
Jamestown, 1607. Cooper. 409.
Jane Addams. Fradin. 290.
Jazz. Myers. 262.
Jenkins, A. Repossessed. 421.
Jenkins, E. Daffodil, Crocodile. 422.
_____. Love You When You Whine. 77.
_____. Toys Go Out. 129.
Jenkins, S. Dogs and Cats. 422.
Jennings. Stink City. 174.
Jeremy Fink and the Meaning of Life. 
Mass. 302.
Jim Thorpe. Bruchac. 6.
Jinks. Evil Genius. 423.
Jocelyn. How It Happened in Peach Hill. 
372.
Johansen. Nightwalker. 372.
John Lewis in the Lead. Haskins. 253.
Johnson, A. Wind Flyers. 219.
Johnson, K. Gone. 296.
506 • the Bulletin
Johnson, M. Devilish. 129.
Johnson, P. What Happened. 331.
Johnston, Jeffry. Fragments. 332.
Johnston, Julie. Very Fine Line. 255.
Jones, D. Game. 423.
_____. Pinhoe Egg. 174.
Jones, F. Faerie Path. 297.
Jones, T. Standing against the Wind. 175.
Jonsberg. Am I Right or Am I Right? 472.
Jordan. Time of the Eagle. 473.
Journey into Mohawk Country. Bogaert. 
116.
Jubb. Cock-a-Doodle Quack! Quack! 452.
Jubert. Devil’s Tango. 256.
Julia Morgan Built a Castle. Mannis. 180.
Jumping the Scratch. Weeks. 42.
Jurassic Poop. Berkowitz. 56.
Just for You to Know. Harness. 72.
Just Grace. Harper. 469.
Just in Case. Rosoff. 92.
Just-So Woman. Blackwood. 244. 
Kaaberbol. Serpent Gift. 20.
_____. Shamer’s War. 77.
Kadohata. Cracker! 332.
Kahumbu. Owen & Mzee: The Language 
of Friendship. 253.
Kampung Boy. Lat. 201.
Karas. Today and Today. 371. 
Kaslik. Skinny. 130.
Kat Got Your Tongue. Weatherly. 489.
Kat’s Promise. Shimko. 146.
Kaywell. Dear Author. 424.
Keaney. Jacob’s Ladder. 333.
Kelleher. Dogboy. 297.
Kelly, J. Scoop! 256.
Kelly, T. Finn’s Going. 473.
Kenah. Best Teacher in Second Grade. 78.
Kennen. Beast. 78.
Kent. Kimchi & Calamari. 425.
Kerley. Greetings from Planet Earth. 425.
Keturah and Lord Death. Leavitt. 300.
Key. Alabama Moon. 175.
Kid B. Dalecki. 248.
Kids Cook 1-2-3. Gold. 171.
Kimchi & Calamari. Kent. 425.
Kimmel, E. Frog Princess. 20.
_____. Lady in the Blue Cloak. 219.
_____. Three Cabritos. 373.
Kinney. Diary of a Wimpy Kid. 426.
Kino No Tabi. Sigsawa. 230.
Kirkpatrick. Snow Baby. 257.
Klages. Green Glass Sea. 220.
Klass. Firestorm. 79.
Knights of the Hill Country. Tharp. 97.
Koertge. Strays. 474.
Koja. Going Under. 130.
Koss. Side Effects. 79.
Kostick. Epic. 333.
Kovalski. Omar’s Halloween. 21.
Krensky. Too Many Leprechauns. 298.
Krisher. Fallout. 298.
Kroll. Selvakumar Knew Better. 21.
Krull. Sigmund Freud. 176.
Kumin. Mites to Mastodons. 131.
Kurlansky. Story of Salt. 80.
Lady in the Blue Cloak. Kimmel. 219.
LaFevers. Theodosia and the Serpents of 
Chaos. 373.
Lanagan. White Time. 80.
Landy. Skulduggery Pleasant. 426.
Lange. 1607. 299.
Larbalestier. Magic’s Child. 427.
Larger-than-Life Lara. Mackall. 82.
Larklight. Reeve. 264.
Larry. Dart. 249.
Larson. Hattie Big Sky. 299.
Laskas. Miner’s Daughter. 374.
Lasky. Pirate Bob. 3.
Last Apprentice: Curse of the Bane. Del-
aney. 119.
Last Days. Westerfeld. 44. 
Last Dragon. De Mari. 208.
Lastling. Gross. 215.
Lat. Kampung Boy. 201.
Lauber. What You Never Knew about Beds, 
Bedrooms, & Pajamas. 300.
Lawrence. Gemini Summer. 176.
Laybourn. Missing Magic. 474.
Le Guin. Voices. 131.
Leaving the Nest. Gerstein. 367.
Leavitt. Keturah and Lord Death. 300.
Lee. Anne Frank and the Children of the 
Holocaust. 177.
Lee-Tai. Place Where Sunflowers Grow. 81.
Leedy. It’s Probably Penny. 427.
Leepike Ridge. Wilson. 492.
Legend of Bass Reeves. Paulsen. 89.
Legend of Hong Kil Dong. O’Brien. 87.
Legend of Zoey. Moonshower. 86.
Lehman-Wilzig. Passover around the 
World. 301.
July/August 2007 • 507
Lemonade Mouth. Hughes. 421.
Leonardo’s Shadow. Grey. 214.
Lester. Cupid. 301.
Letters from a Slave Boy. Lyons. 375.
Letters from Rapunzel. Holmes. 371.
Letters from the Corrugated Castle. Blos. 
452.
Letters to My Mother. Cárdenas. 8.
Leuck. Santa Claws. 177.
Levine, E. Henry’s Freedom Box. 334.
Levine, G. Fairest. 132.
_____. Writing Magic. 220.
Levithan. 21 Proms. 454. 
_____. This Is PUSH. 334.
_____. Wide Awake. 132.
Lewis. Blackbeard, the Pirate King. 22.
Liar of Kudzu. Schooley. 384.
Libby. Blood Confession. 133.
Life as I Knew It. Hacker. 252.
Life as It Comes. Bondoux. 324.
Life as We Knew It. Pfeffer. 184.
Lighthouse Land. McKinty. 222. 
Lightship. Floca. 366.
Limke. Isis & Osiris. 257.
Lindop. Cave Sleuths. 258.
Lion Hunter. Wein. 490.
Lipsey. I Love to Collage! 258.
Lipsyte. Raiders Night. 22.
Little Fur. Carmody. 246.
Little Moon Dog. Ward. 439.
Little People and a Lost World. Golden-
berg. 251.
Little Rooster’s Diamond. MacDonald. 
375.
Littlest Grape Stomper. Madison. 376. 
Lloyd-Jones. How to Be a Baby. 335.
Loh. Jade Dragon. 259.
Loizeaux. Wings. 133.
London Calling. Bloor. 115.
Long. Barnstormers. 335.
Long Way Gone. Beah. 359.
Longleaf. Reid. 381.
Look at You! Henderson. 254.
Looking for a Moose. Root. 188.
Looking for Bapu. Banerjee. 163.
Looking Glass Wars. Beddor. 114.
Loomis. Best Father’s Day Present Ever. 
336.
López. Call Me Henri. 23.
Lost It. Tracy. 345.
Loud Silence of Francine Green. Cushman. 
63.
Lourie. Arctic Thaw. 428.
Love. Semiprecious. 81.
Love You When You Whine. Jenkins. 77.
Love, Football, and Other Contact Sports. 
Carter. 8.
Lubar. True Talents. 374.
Lucy Maud Montgomery. Wallner. 148.
Luddy. Spelldown. 428.
Lugalbanda. Henderson. 17.
Lunge-Larsen. Noah’s Mittens. 134.
Lupica. Miracle on 49th Street. 134.
Lush. Friend. 213.
Lutes. Houdini. 428.
Lyga. Astonishing Adventures of Fanboy & 
Goth Girl. 178.
Lynch. Sins of the Fathers. 135.
Lyons. Letters from a Slave Boy. 375.
M. L. K. Bolden. 360.
Mac. Crush. 23.
MacCready. Buried. 82.
MacCullough. Drawing the Ocean. 178.
MacDonald, Margaret. Go to Sleep, Gecko. 
179.
_____. Little Rooster’s Diamond. 375.
_____. Old Woman and Her Pig. 336.
Macdonald, Maryann. Costume Copycat. 
24.
MacDonald, S. Fish, Swish! Splash, Dash! 
475.
Mack. Fall of the Amazing Zalindas. 179.
Mackall. Crazy in Love. 337.
_____. Larger-than-Life Lara. 82.
MacLean. How It’s Done. 83.
_____. Mary Margaret Meets Her Match. 
376.
MacLennan. Chicky Chicky Chook 
Chook. 429.
Madison. Littlest Grape Stomper. 376. 
Magic’s Child. Larbalestier. 427.
Mailbox. Shafer. 191.
Making of Dr. Truelove. Barnes. 242.
Mallory. Diving to a Deep-Sea Volcano. 
180.
Malone. Close to the Wind. 475.
Mama for Owen. Bauer. 284.
Manga Claus. Marunas. 136.
Manning. Snap! 221.
Mannis. Julia Morgan Built a Castle. 180.
508 • the Bulletin
Manushkin. Shivers in the Fridge. 83.
Marcus. Pass It Down. 377.
_____. Wand in the Word. 135.
Marillier. Wildwood Dancing. 302.
Mark II. Farnell. 250. 
Markus + Diana. Hagerup. 252.
Marr. Wicked Lovely. 476.
Marrin. Saving the Buffalo. 221.
Mars Needs Moms! Breathed. 325.
Marsden, C. Jade Dragon. 259.
_____. When Heaven Fell. 429.
Marsden, J. While I Live. 430.
Martin, A. On Christmas Eve. 136.
Martin, D. All for Pie, Pie for All. 84.
Martin, J. Chicken Joy on Redbean Road. 
337.
_____. Banjo Granny. 205.
Martínez. Pedrito’s World. 476.
Marunas. Manga Claus. 136.
Mary Margaret Meets Her Match. Ma-
cLean. 376.
Masquerade. de la Cruz. 411.
Mass. Jeremy Fink and the Meaning of 
Life. 302.
Matas. Whirlwind. 477.
Matthews, L. Dog for Life. 181.
Matthews, T. Out of the Egg. 338.
Max Counts His Chickens. Wells. 311.
Max’s ABC. Wells. 43.
May I Pet Your Dog? Calmenson. 407.
Maybe. Runyon. 189.
McCarthy. Strong Man. 477.
McCaughrean. Father and Son. 137.
_____. Smile! 137.
_____. White Darkness. 259.
McCorkle. Liar of Kudzu. 384.
McCormick. Sold. 181.
McCully. Escape of Oney Judge. 430.
McDonald, J. Harlem Hustle. 222.
McDonald, M. Daisy Jane, Best-Ever 
Flower Girl! 431. 
McEwan. Rufus the Scrub Does Not Wear 
a Tutu. 431.
McGowan. Hellbent. 182.
McKinty. Lighthouse Land. 222. 
McKissack. Friendship for Today. 338.
_____. Porch Lies. 84.
McKy. Pumpkin Town! 85.
McMullan. I’m Dirty! 85.
McNamee. Navigator. 339.
McNaughton. Captain Abdul’s Little 
Treasure. 24.
McNeal. Decoding of Lana Morris. 478.
McPherson. Into the West. 303.
McVeigh. Dead High Yearbook. 390.
Mead. Dawn and Dusk. 377.
Mee-An and the Magic Serpent. Diakité. 
462.
Meehl. Out of Patience. 25.
Megiddo’s Shadow. Slade. 95.
Melting Season. Conway. 207.
Mercy on These Teenage Chimps. Soto. 
344.
Merry Un-Christmas. Reiss. 142.
Meyer. Pirate Curse. 25.
Mia’s Story. Foreman. 122.
Miki Falls Book One: Spring. Crilley. 460.
Milgrim. Another Day in the Milky Way. 
260.
Miller, K. Poems in Black & White. 339.
Miller, L. Mystery of the Lost Colony. 432.
Miller, W. Extraordinary Adventures of 
Ordinary Basil. 260.
Mills. Being Teddy Roosevelt. 378.
Miner’s Daughter. Laskas. 374.
Miracle on 49th Street. Lupica. 134.
Missing Magic. Laybourn. 474.
Mitchard. Now You See Her. 340.
Mitchell. Traitor King. 378.
Mites to Mastodons. Kumin. 131.
Mochizuki. Be Water, My Friend. 261.
Moloney. Book of Lies. 432.
Mommy? Yorinks. 102.
Monster in the Backpack. Moser. 86.
Montgomery. Quest for the Tree Kangaroo. 
138.
Montmorency’s Revenge. Updale. 389.
Moon Riders. Tomlinson. 270.
Moonshower. Legend of Zoey. 86.
Moranville. Higher Geometry. 26. 
More Confessions of a Hollywood Starlet. 
Douglas. 288.
Moriarty. Murder of Bindy Mackenzie. 
223.
Morpurgo. Beowulf. 303.
 _____. I Believe in Unicorns. 261.
Moser. Monster in the Backpack. 86.
Moses. Baptism. 378.
Moses. Hodges. 295.
Moses. Weatherford. 148.
July/August 2007 • 509
Moxy Maxwell Does Not Love Stuart 
Little. Gifford. 467.
Mr. Chickee’s Messy Mission. Curtis. 326.
Murder of Bindy Mackenzie. Moriarty. 
223.
Murdock. Dairy Queen. 26.
Murphy, C. Children of Alcatraz. 138.
Murphy, J. Desperate Journey. 303.
My Almost Epic Summer. Griffin. 15.
My Dad’s a Punk. Bradman. 6. 
My Desperate Love Diary. Rettig. 482.
My Dog Is as Smelly as Dirty Socks. Piven. 
481.
My Friend Is Sad. Willems. 491.
My Haunted House. Sage. 92.
My Lost and Found Life. Bowsher. 58.
My Name Is Sally Little Song. Woods. 152.
My Secret. Warren. 233. 
Myers, A. Confessions from the Principal’s 
Chair. 182.
Myers, W. Harlem Summer. 340.
_____. Jazz. 262.
_____. Street Love. 223.
Mysteries of the Mummy Kids. Halls. 368.
Mysterious Benedict Society. Stewart. 357.
Mystery of the Lost Colony. Miller. 432.
Nance. Daemon Hall. 433.
Nature of Jade. Caletti. 245.
Navigator. McNamee. 339.
Nelson. Paranoid Park. 139.
Nemeth. Heights, the Depths, and Every-
thing in Between. 87.
New Girl . . . and Me. Robbins. 29.
New Policeman. Thompson. 345.
Newbery. At the Firefly Gate. 341.
_____. Set in Stone. 183.
Newton. Runner. 478.
Night Boat to Freedom. Raven. 186.
Night My Sister Went Missing. Plum-Ucci. 
225.
Night of the Burning. Wulf. 194.
Nightwalker. Johansen. 372.
Nimmo. Chestnut Soldier. 379.
_____. Emlyn’s Moon. 379.
_____. Snow Spider. 139.
No Sword Fighting in the House. Hill. 
294.
Noah’s Mittens. Lunge-Larsen. 134.
Nobody Gonna Turn Me ’Round. Rap-
paport. 263.
Nobody’s Princess. Friesner. 466.
Noonan. Plenty Porter. 26.
Not Like You. Davis. 461.
Notes from the Midnight Driver. Son-
nenblick. 231.
Notes on a Near-Life Experience. Birdsall. 
285.
Notorious Izzy Fink. Brown. 116.
Now You See Her. Mitchard. 340.
Noyes. One Kingdom. 183.
_____. When I Met the Wolf Girls. 304.
O’Brien. Legend of Hong Kil Dong. 87.
O’Connell. Penina Levine Is a Hard-Boiled 
Egg. 304.
O’Connor, B. How to Steal a Dog. 433.
O’Connor, J. Snow Globe Family. 161.
O’Dell. Bad Tickets. 434.
Oates. After the Wreck. 88.
Odd Man Out. Ellis. 168.
Offill. 17 Things I’m Not Allowed to Do 
Anymore. 184.
Oh No, Gotta Go #2. Elya. 464.
Old Woman and Her Pig. MacDonald. 
336.
Olivia Forms a Band. Falconer. 12. 
Omar’s Halloween. Kovalski. 21.
On Christmas Eve. Martin. 136.
Once upon a Banana. Armstrong. 162.
One Kingdom. Noyes. 183.
One of Those Days. Rosenthal. 32.
One Potato, Two Potato. DeFelice. 65.
One Where the Kid Nearly Jumps to His 
Death. Hershey. 293.
One Whole and Perfect Day. Clarke. 408.
One-Eye! Two-Eyes! Three-Eyes! Shepard. 
265.
One-Handed Catch. Auch. 283.
Open Court. Clippinger. 458.
Opposite of Music. Young. 349.
Orange Pear Apple Bear. Gravett. 417.
Ordinary Ghosts. Corrigan. 409.
Orenstein. Secret Twin. 341.
Ostow. Emily Goldberg Learns to Salsa. 
305.
Out of Patience. Meehl. 25.
Out of the Egg. Matthews. 338.
Outside Groove. Esckilsen. 12. 
Owen. Here, There Be Dragons. 224.
Owen & Mzee: The Language of Friend-
ship. Hatkoff. 253.
510 • the Bulletin
Pagliarulo. Different Kind of Heat. 27.
Palace of Laughter. Berkeley. 114.
Pancakes for Supper! Isaacs. 128.
Papademetriou. Wizard, the Witch & Two 
Girls from Jersey. 27.
Paper Heart. Arrington. 163.
Paranoid Park. Nelson. 139.
Parent Swap. Blacker. 57.
Parker. Edenville Owls. 479.
Parkinson. Second Fiddle. 434.
Paros. Violet Bing and the Grand House. 
399.
Part of Me. Holt. 127.
Pass It Down. Marcus. 377.
Passover around the World. Lehman-Wil-
zig. 301.
Paterson. Bread and Roses, Too. 305.
Patron. Higher Power of Lucky. 224.
Patterson. Winner’s Walk. 88.
Paul, A. Fiesta Fiasco. 479.
Paul, D. Possibility of Fireflies. 262.
Paulsen. Legend of Bass Reeves. 89.
Payback. Heneghan. 469.
Peak. Smith. 486.
Pearsall. All of the Above. 140.
Pedrito’s World. Martínez. 476.
Peet. Tamar. 380.
Penina Levine Is a Hard-Boiled Egg. 
O’Connell. 304.
Penny from Heaven. Holm. 74.
Pennypacker. Clementine. 140.
Perfect Nest. Friend. 466.
Periodic Table. Dingle. 411.
Perkins, L. Pictures from Our Vacation.  
480.
Perkins, M. Rickshaw. 380.
Pfeffer. Life as We Knew It. 184.
Phantom Isles. Alter. 322.
Philip. Great Circle. 89.
Pictures from Our Vacation. Perkins. 480.
Pierce. Terrier. 225.
Pinhoe Egg. Jones. 174.
Pinkwater. Bad Bear Detectives. 90.
_____. Bad Bears Go Visiting. 435.
Pirate Bob. Lasky. 3.
Pirate Curse. Meyer. 25.
Pitchford. Big One-Oh. 435.
Piven. My Dog Is as Smelly as Dirty Socks. 
481.
Place Where Sunflowers Grow. Lee-Tai. 81.
Playing It Cool. Dorfman. 11.
Please Write in This Book. Amato. 283.
Plenty Porter. Noonan. 26.
Plum-Ucci. Night My Sister Went Missing. 
225.
Pluto Project. Haber. 16.
Poems in Black & White. Miller. 339.
Polcovar. Rosalind Franklin and the Struc-
ture of Life. 226.
Pop! Wallington. 272.
Pop’s Bridge. Bunting. 7.
Porch Lies. McKissack. 84.
Posada. Guess What Is Growing inside This 
Egg. 381.
Possibility of Fireflies. Paul. 262.
Powers. Jacobs. 76.
Pratchett. Wintersmith. 185.
Prelutsky. Behold the Bold Umbrellaphant. 
141.
_____. Good Sports. 306.
Pretty Is. Holmes. 470.
Pretty Little Liars. Shepard. 266.
Pretty Salma. Daly. 460.
Price. Dead Connection. 28.
Primavera. Secret Order of the Gumm 
Street Girls. 306.
Prince and the Snowgirl. Cheshire. 286.
Princess and the Hound. Harrison. 418.
Prizefighter en Mi Casa. Charlton-Trujillo. 
63.
Probably the World’s Best Story. Smith. 96
Problem with Paradise. Dahl. 288.
Probuditi! Van Allsburg. 193.
Professor’s Daughter. Sfar. 449.
Prom Dates from Hell. Clement-Moore. 
457.
Prom Nights from Hell. Cabot. 454.
Promise Is a Promise. Heide. 469.
Prophecy. Bell. 56.
Prosek. Day My Mother Left. 263.
Psyche in a Dress. Block. 115.
Pumpkin Town! McKy. 85.
Pumpkins. Robbins. 30.
Purmell. Christmas Tree Farm. 141.
Quad. Watson. 489.
Quaking. Erskine. 465.
Quantum Prophecy. Carroll. 407.
Quattlebaum. Sparks Fly High. 185. 
Quest for the Tree Kangaroo. Montgomery. 
138.
July/August 2007 • 511
Qwikpick Adventure Society. Riddleburger. 
482.
Rabb. Cures for Heartbreak. 342.
Raiders Night. Lipsyte. 22.
Raining Sardines. Flores-Galbis. 413.
Ransom, C. Finding Day’s Bottom. 186.
Ransom, J. What Do Parents Do. 342.
Rappaport. Freedom Ship. 263.
_____. Nobody Gonna Turn Me ’Round. 
263.
Rat Life. Arnold. 401. 
Raven. Night Boat to Freedom. 186.
Rawlinson. Fletcher and the Falling Leaves. 
90.
Reaching for Sun. Zimmer. 314.
Real Story of Stone Soup. Compestine. 
325.
Reality Leak. Sensel. 485.
Recorvits. Yoon and the Christmas Mitten. 
142.
Red Moon at Sharpsburg. Wells. 491.
Red Red Red. Gorbachev. 416.
Red River Girl. Sommerdorf. 192.
Red Thread. Townley. 389.
Redsand. Viktor Frankl. 307.
Reef. E. E. Cummings. 186.
Reeve.  Darkling Plain. 481.
_____. Larklight. 264.
Reggie. Bunting. 203.
Reid. Longleaf. 381.
Reinhardt. Harmless. 264.
Reiss. Merry Un-Christmas. 142.
Reisz. Tripping to Somewhere. 187.
Remembering Mrs. Rossi. Hest. 281.
Repossessed. Jenkins. 421.
Resau. What the Moon Saw. 265.
Resurrection Men. Welsh. 390.
Rettig. My Desperate Love Diary. 482.
Return of Skeleton Man. Bruchac. 60.
Rex. Frankenstein Makes a Sandwich. 29.
Rex Zero and the End of the World. 
Wynne-Jones. 349.
Richardson, E. Intruders. 91.
Richardson, N. Wrong Hands. 91.
Rickshaw. Perkins. 380.
Ricochet. Gerstein. 367.
Riddle. Croggon. 208.
Riddleburger. Qwikpick Adventure Society. 
482.
Ries. Fix It, Sam. 382.
Rinaldi. Unlikely Friendship. 382.
Ripslinger. Derailed. 143.
Rise of Lubchenko. Simmons. 35.
River Secrets. Hale. 126.
Road to Paris. Grimes. 214.
Robbins, J. New Girl . . . and Me. 29.
Robbins, K. Pumpkins. 30.
Robert Cormier. Campbell. 286. 
Roberts, J. Viking Warrior. 30.
Roberts, K. I Am the Great Horse. 143.
Roberts, T. What Your Mama Never Told 
You. 382.
Robinson. Safe at Home. 226.
Rocco. Wolf! 343.
Roche. Art for Kids. 383.
Rock and Roll Love. Rocks. 482.
Rocks. Biker Girl. 30.
_____. Rock and Roll Love. 482.
Rockwell. Why Are the Ice Caps Melting? 
187.
Rodman. First Grade Stinks! 31.
Rodowsky. Ben and the Sudden Too-Big 
Family. 343.
Room One. Clements. 9.
Root. Looking for a Moose. 188.
Rosa Farm. Wu. 273.
Rosalind Franklin and the Structure of Life. 
Polcovar. 226.
Rosenthal. Cookies. 31.
_____. One of Those Days. 32.
Rosoff. Just in Case. 92.
Roth. Do Re Mi. 227.
Rover. French. 415.
Rubber Houses. Yeoman. 274.
Rubin. Andy Warhol. 188.
_____. Cat with the Yellow Star. 32.
_____. Haym Salomon. 436.
Ruby. Shanghai Shadows. 307.
Ruby Parker Hits the Small Time. Cole-
man. 287.
Ruby’s Perfect Day. Hill. 172.
Rucker Park Setup. Volponi. 488.
Ruddell. Today at the Bluebird Café. 227.
Rufus the Scrub Does Not Wear a Tutu. 
McEwan. 431.
Rules for Hearts. Ryan. 436.
Rules of Survival. Werlin. 43.
Runaround. Hemphill. 419.
Runaway. Van Draanen. 98.
Runaway Dinner. Ahlberg. 112.
512 • the Bulletin
Runaway Princess. Coombs. 63.
Runner. Newton.  478.
Runyon. Maybe. 189.
Russo. Bunnies Are Not in Their Beds. 
228.
Ryan. Rules for Hearts. 436.
Rylant. Annie and Snowball and the Dress-
Up Birthday. 483.
Safe at Home. Robinson. 226.
Sage. My Haunted House. 92.
Saint Iggy. Going. 123.
Saints among the Animals. Zarin. 194.
Sakaki. Scrapped Princess. 228.
Saldaña. Whole Sky Full of Stars. 383.
Salisbury. House of the Red Fish. 33.
Salley. Epossumondas Saves the Day. 229.
Samurai. Hightman. 216.
San Souci. Sister Tricksters. 190.
Sanchez. Getting It. 189.
Santa Claws. Leuck. 177.
Sara’s Face. Burgess. 406.
Saving Grace. Spencer. 147.
Saving the Buffalo. Marrin. 221.
Sayres. Anahita’s Woven Riddle. 308.
Scaredy Squirrel Makes a Friend. Watt. 
440.
Schaefer, C. Dragon Dancing. 309.
Schaefer, L. Island Grows. 33.
Schlitz. Drowned Maiden’s Hair. 144.
_____. Hero Schliemann. 93.
Schneider, H. Wilky the White House 
Cockroach. 229.
Schneider, R. Better Than Yesterday. 384.
Schooley. Liar of Kudzu. 384.
Schorr. Goy Crazy. 144.
Schreck. Dream Journal. 145.
Schumacher. Book of One Hundred 
Truths. 190.
Scoop! Kelly. 256.
Scott, E. Bloom. 484.
Scott, M. Alchemyst. 484.
Scrapped Princess. Sakaki. 228.
Sea Horse. Butterworth. 61.
Second Fiddle. Parkinson. 434.
Second Is a Hiccup. Hutchins. 471.
Secret Life of Walter Kitty. Hicks. 420.
Secret of the Rose. Thomson. 38.
Secret of the Sirens. Golding. 328.
Secret Order of the Gumm Street Girls. 
Primavera. 306.
Secret Twin. Orenstein. 341.
Secret-Keeper. Coombs. 10.
Secrets, Lies, Gizmos, and Spies. Coleman. 
118.
Seed Is Sleepy. Aston. 402. 
Seeger. Black? White! Day? Night! 145.
_____. Dog and Bear. 437.
Seer. Stahler. 387.
Selvakumar Knew Better. Kroll. 21.
Selzer. How to Get Suspended and Influ-
ence People. 385.
Selznick. Invention of Hugo Cabret. 321.
Semiprecious. Love. 81.
Sensel. Reality Leak. 485.
Sentar. Scrapped Princess. 228.
Serpent Gift. Kaaberbol. 20.
Serros. Honey Blonde Chica. 34.
Set in Stone. Newbery. 183.
Sfar. Professor’s Daughter. 449.
Shafer. Mailbox. 191.
Shalant. Society of Super Secret Heroes: 
The Great Cape Rescue. 485.
Shamer’s War. Kaaberbol. 77.
Shanghai Shadows. Ruby. 307.
Shanghaied to the Moon. Daley. 364.
She’ll Be Coming ’Round the Mountain. 
Emmett. 464.
Sheldon. Barnum Brown. 309.
Shelter. Cooley. 207.
Shelter. Whitmore. 234.
Shepard, A. One-Eye! Two-Eyes! Three-
Eyes! 265.
Shepard, S. Pretty Little Liars. 266.
Sherman. Changeling. 34.
Sherry. I’m the Biggest Thing in the Ocean. 
437.
Shield of Stars. Bell. 403.
Shimko. Kat’s Promise. 146.
Shivers in the Fridge. Manushkin. 83.
Shulevitz. So Sleepy Story. 93.
Shusterman. Darkness Creeping. 385.
_____. Everlost. 191.
Side Effects. Koss. 79.
Sidman. Butterfly Eyes. 94.
Siegel. To Dance. 230.
Sieger. Fourth King. 146.
Sigmund Freud. Krull. 176.
Sigsawa. Kino No Tabi. 230.
Silent Echoes. Jablonski. 331.
Silly Billy. Browne. 203.
July/August 2007 • 513
Silver Donkey. Hartnett. 216. 
Silverboy. Browne. 361.
Simmons. Rise of Lubchenko. 35.
Singer. Innocent’s Story. 486.
Sins of the Fathers. Lynch. 135.
Sister Tricksters. San Souci. 190.
Skate. Harmon. 215.
Skelton. Spring. 94.
Skin Hunger. Duey. 462.
Skinny. Kaslik. 130.
Skinnybones and the Wrinkle Queen. 
Huser. 173.
Skulduggery Pleasant. Landy. 426.
Slade. Megiddo’s Shadow. 95.
Sleator. Hell Phone. 147.
Sleepyhead. Wilson. 150.
Sloan. Tale of Two Summers. 35.
Smelcer. Trap. 95.
Smile! McCaughrean. 137.
Smith, C. Tantalize. 386.
Smith, D. Probably the World’s Best Story. 
96.
Smith, G. Forest in the Hallway. 267.
Smith, R. Peak. 486.
Smith, S. Sparrow. 96.
Snadowsky. Anatomy of a Boyfriend. 386.
Snap! Manning. 221.
Snow. Clark. 118.
Snow Baby. Kirkpatrick. 257.
Snow Globe Family. O’Connor. 161.
Snow Is My Favorite and My Best. Child. 
164.
Snow Spider. Nimmo. 139.
Snyder. Treasures of Weatherby. 267.
So Sleepy Story. Shulevitz. 93.
So This Is How It Ends. Sutherland. 269.
So Totally Emily Ebers. Yee. 493.
Soccer Chick Rules. FitzGerald. 210.
Society of Super Secret Heroes: The Great 
Cape Rescue. Shalant. 485.
Sofi Mendoza’s Guide to Getting Lost in 
Mexico. Alegría. 450.
Softwire. Haarsma. 125.
Sold. McCormick. 181.
Solomon Snow and the Stolen Jewel. 
Umansky. 439.
Something Remains. Barth-Grözinger. 203.
Sommerdorf. Red River Girl. 192.
Sonnenblick. Notes from the Midnight 
Driver. 231.
Sophie Hartley. Greene. 291.
Sophisticated Ladies. Gourse. 251.
Soto. Mercy on These Teenage Chimps. 
344.
Sparks Fly High. Quattlebaum. 185. 
Sparrow. Smith. 96.
Spelldown. Luddy. 428.
Spencer. Saving Grace. 147.
Spinelli. Eggs. 438.
Spirits That Walk in Shadow. Hoffman. 
217. 
Spring. Skelton. 94.
Stahler. Doppelganger. 36.
_____. Seer. 387.
Standing against the Wind. Jones. 175.
Stanley. Trouble with Wishes. 388.
Stauffacher. Donutheart. 231.
Stealing Home. Burleigh. 204.
Steele. Taker. 148.
Steer. Dragonology Chronicles Volume 
One. 268.
Stewart, S. Cathy’s Book. 310.
Stewart, T. Mysterious Benedict Society. 
357.
Stine. Goosebumps Graphix #2. 388.
Stink City. Jennings. 174.
Stolarz. Bleed. 192.
Stoneheart. Fletcher. 465. 
Stork. Behind the Eyes. 36.
Story of a Girl. Zarr. 392. 
Story of Salt. Kurlansky. 80.
Straight. Friskative Dog. 268.
Strange Birds. Gilliland. 14.
Stray. Goldblatt. 468.
Strays. Koertge. 474.
Street Love. Myers. 223.
Strong. Stuff. 344.
Strong Man. McCarthy. 477.
Strongest Man in the World. Debon. 365.
Stuff. Strong. 344.
Sullivan. Berenice Abbott, Photographer. 
37.
Sutherland. So This Is How It Ends. 269.
Sweeney. Headlock. 269.
Swift Pure Cry. Dowd. 412. 
Swordbird. Fan. 290.
Take Care, Good Knight. Thomas. 270.
Taker. Steele. 148.
Tale of Pale Male. Winter. 313.
Tale of Two Summers. Sloan. 35.
514 • the Bulletin
Tales Our Abuelitas Told. Ada. 282.
Tall Tales. Day. 461.
Tamar. Peet. 380.
Tanglewreck. Winterson. 101.
Tankard. Grumpy Bird. 310. 
Tantalize. Smith. 386.
Tarshis. Emma-Jean Lazarus Fell Out of a 
Tree. 269.
Tattoo. Barnes. 284.
Taylor. All the Stars in the Sky. 232.
Tchana. Changing Woman and Her Sisters. 
37.
Team Moon. Thimmesh. 38.
Temping Fate. Friesner. 14.
Terrible Storm. Hurst. 255.
Terrier. Pierce. 225.
Tharp. Knights of the Hill Country. 97.
That Girl Lucy Moon. Timberlake. 97.
That Rabbit Belongs to Emily Brown. 
Cowell. 410.
Theft & the Miracle. Wade. 390.
Theodosia and the Serpents of Chaos. 
LaFevers. 373.
Thimmesh. Team Moon. 38.
Thing about Georgie. Graff. 329.
This Is All. Chambers. 164.
This Is PUSH. Levithan. 334.
This Jazz Man. Ehrhardt. 289.
Thomas, Jane. Blind Mountain. 232.
Thomas, Joyce. Three Witches. 128.
Thomas, S. Take Care, Good Knight. 270.
Thompson. New Policeman. 345.
Thomson. Secret of the Rose. 38.
Three Cabritos. Kimmel. 373.
Three Names of Me. Cummings. 165.
Three Witches. Hurston. 128.
Tiger’s Story. Blackford. 404. 
Timberlake. That Girl Lucy Moon. 97.
Time of the Eagle. Jordan. 473.
Tincknell. Scoop! 256.
Tinderbox. Andersen. 400.
Tippy-Tippy-Tippy, Hide! Fleming. 211.
To Dance. Siegel. 230. 
Today and Today. Issa. 371. 
Today at the Bluebird Café. Ruddell. 227.
Today I Will Fly! Willems. 491.
Todd. Whatcha Mean, What’s a Zine? 39.
Toksvig. Hitler’s Canary. 487.
Tomlinson. Moon Riders. 270.
Too Many Leprechauns. Krensky. 298.
Torchlight. Hurst. 218.
Tough Boy Sonatas. Crisler. 326.
Tough Nut to Crack. Birdseye. 285.
Townley. Red Thread. 389.
Toys Go Out. Jenkins. 129.
Tracking Trash. Burns. 362.
Tracy. Lost It. 345.
Tragic Tale of Narcissa Whitman. Harness. 
292.
Traitor King. Mitchell. 378.
Traitors’ Gate. Avi. 451.
Trap. Smelcer. 95.
Trash. Darrow. 64.
Treasures of Weatherby. Snyder. 267.
Trigger. Vaught. 99.
Tripping to Somewhere. Reisz. 187.
Trouble with Wishes. Stanley. 388.
True Talents. Lubar. 374.
Trueman. 7 Days at the Hot Corner. 346.
Turnbull. Forged in the Fire. 438.
Twice-Told. Hunt. 19.
Twilight Child. Warner. 41.
Twisted. Anderson. 323.
Umansky. I Don’t Like Gloria! 346.
_____. Solomon Snow and the Stolen 
Jewel. 439.
Unlikely Friendship. Rinaldi. 382.
Unresolved. Welsh. 100.
Unrivaled Spangles. Wallace. 193. 
Up Close: Robert F. Kennedy. Aronson. 
401. 
Updale. Montmorency’s Revenge. 389.
Valdes-Rodriguez. Haters. 271.
Van Allsburg. Probuditi! 193.
Van Draanen. Runaway. 98.
Van Fleet. Dog. 272.
Vande Velde. All Hallows’ Eve. 98.
Vanishing Act. Feinstein. 66.
Vaught. Trigger. 99.
Velez. Dead High Yearbook. 390.
Verrillo. Elissa’s Quest. 487.
Very Fine Line. Johnston. 255.
Viking Warrior. Roberts. 30.
Viktor Frankl. Redsand. 307.
Vincent. Grief Girl. 347.
Vintage. Berman. 404.
Violet Bing and the Grand House. Paros. 
399.
Virtual Life of Lexie Diamond. Foyt. 414. 
Vive la Paris. Codell. 206.
July/August 2007 • 515
Voake. Hello, Twins. 39.
Voices. Le Guin. 131.
Voigt. Bad Girls, Bad Girls. 40.
Volponi. Rucker Park Setup. 488.
Wade. Theft & the Miracle. 390.
Wahl. Invisible. 347.
Wait. Finest Kind. 232.
Walde. Candy Darlings. 99.
Walden. H.I.V.E. 488.
Walker, K. I Hate Books. 310.
Walker, S. Fossils. 40.
Wallace. Unrivaled Spangles. 193. 
Wallington. Pop! 272.
Wallner. Lucy Maud Montgomery. 148.
Wand in the Word. Marcus. 135.
War, Women, and the News. Gourley. 368.
Ward. Little Moon Dog. 439.
Warner. Twilight Child. 41.
Warren. My Secret. 233.
Water Street. Giff. 213.
Watson, C. Quad. 489.
Watson, E. Whatcha Mean, What’s a Zine? 
39.
Watt. Scaredy Squirrel Makes a Friend. 
440.
Watts. Beautiful City of the Dead. 41.
Waves. Dogar. 412.
Way Down Deep. White. 441. 
Weatherford. Champions on the Bench. 
233.
_____. Dear Mr. Rosenwald. 53.
_____. Moses. 148.
Weatherill. Barkbelly. 100.
Weatherly. Kat Got Your Tongue. 489.
Weeks. Ella, Of Course! 490.
_____. Jumping the Scratch. 42.
Wein. Lion Hunter. 490.
Weinheimer. Converting Kate. 311.
Weinstein. Girl Stories. 42.
Weisman. Cathy’s Book. 310.
Weissberger. Cat with the Yellow Star. 32.
Welcome, Precious. Grimes. 125.
Wells. Max Counts His Chickens. 311.
_____. Max’s ABC. 43.
_____. Red Moon at Sharpsburg. 491.
Welsh. Resurrection Men. 390.
_____. Unresolved. 100.
Wemmlinger. Booth’s Daughter. 440.
Werlin. Rules of Survival. 43.
Westerfeld. Last Days. 44. 
What Are You Afraid Of? Gallo. 68.
What Do Parents Do. Ransom. 342.
What Happened. Johnson. 331.
What Happened This Summer. Yee. 274.
What Happened to Cass McBride? Giles. 
171.
What the Moon Saw. Resau. 265.
What You Never Knew about Beds, Bed-
rooms, & Pajamas. Lauber. 300.
What Your Mama Never Told You. Rob-
erts. 382.
Whatcha Mean, What’s a Zine? Todd. 39.
When Giants Come to Play. Beaty. 113.
When Heaven Fell. Marsden. 429.
When I Met the Wolf Girls. Noyes. 304.
When Santa Fell to Earth. Funke. 122.
While I Live. Marsden. 430.
While You Are Sleeping. Deacon. 119.
Whirlwind. Matas. 477.
White. Way Down Deep. 441.
White Darkness. McCaughrean. 259.
White Elephant. Fleischman. 211.
White Ram. Gerstein. 123.
White Time. Lanagan. 80.
Whitmore. Shelter. 234.
Who Put the B in the Ballyhoo. Beccia. 
360.
Who’s in the Bathroom? Willis. 312.
Who’s Saying What in Jamestown, Thomas 
Savage? Fritz. 415.
Whole Sky Full of Stars. Saldaña. 383.
Why Are the Ice Caps Melting? Rockwell. 
187.
Why Did the Chicken Cross the Road. 
149.
Wicked Lovely. Marr. 476.
Wide Awake. Levithan. 132.
Wiesner. Flotsam. 44.
Wilce. Flora Segunda. 312.
Wilcox. Hollywood Sisters. 45.
Wildwood Dancing. Marillier. 302.
Wilky the White House Cockroach. Sch-
neider. 229. 
Willard. Flying Bed. 391.
Willems. Edwina, the Dinosaur. 101.
_____. My Friend Is Sad. 491.
_____. Today I Will Fly! 491.
Willey. Clever Beatrice Christmas. 149.
Willis. Delilah D. at the Library. 348.
_____. Who’s in the Bathroom? 312.
516 • the Bulletin
Wilson, D. Firehorse. 273.
Wilson, K. Sleepyhead. 150.
Wilson, N. Leepike Ridge. 492.
Wind Flyers. Johnson. 219.
Windows into My World. Cortez. 459.
Wings. Loizeaux. 133.
Winner’s Walk. Patterson. 88.
Winnie at Her Best. Jacobson. 76.
Winter, Jeanette. Tale of Pale Male. 313.
Winter, Jonah. 39 Apartments of Ludwig 
van Beethoven. 150.
_____. Dizzy. 151.
Wintersmith. Pratchett. 185.
Winterson. Tanglewreck. 101.
Witch Catcher. Hahn. 16.
Wizard Heir. Chima. 456.
Wizard, the Witch & Two Girls from 
Jersey. Papademetriou. 27.
Wolf. Herrick. 370.
Wolf! Rocco. 343.
Wolfson. Home, and Other Big, Fat Lies. 
151.
Wong. Dumpster Diver. 391.
Woods. My Name Is Sally Little Song. 152.
Woodson. Feathers. 348.
Would I Ever Lie to You? Buehner. 453.
Wright. Homefree. 102.
Writing Magic. Levine. 220.
Wrong Hands. Richardson. 91.
Wu. Rosa Farm. 273.
Wulf. Night of the Burning. 194.
Wynne-Jones. Rex Zero and the End of the 
World. 349.
X-Indian Chronicles. Yeahpau. 313.
Yancey. Alfred Kropp: The Seal of Solo-
mon. 492.
Yang. American Born Chinese. 152.
Yeahpau. X-Indian Chronicles. 313.
Year of My Miraculous Reappearance. 
Hyde. 471.
Yee, L. So Totally Emily Ebers. 493.
Yee, P. What Happened This Summer. 274.
Yeoman. Rubber Houses. 274.
Yo, Jo! Isadora. 472.
Yoon and the Christmas Mitten. Recorvits. 
142.
Yorinks. Mommy? 102.
You Have to Be Nice to Someone on Their 
Birthday. Bottner. 324.
Young Cornrows Callin Out the Moon. 
Forman. 414.
Young, A. Belinda and the Glass Slipper. 
153.
Young, J. Opposite of Music. 349.
Young, S. 15 Minutes. 46.
Your Own, Sylvia. Hemphill. 369.
Zarin. Saints among the Animals. 194.
Zarr. Story of a Girl. 392. 
Zimmer. Reaching for Sun. 314.
