ILLIN 
0
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
S
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
m-- 
-.
* 
« **. 
"* 
., 
» *' 
* 
*.*; ( 
** 
* 
11' 
. * 
i 
il: 
-,' " 
.
' 
*.„ 
- (.* 
, 
.-
Books make great eifts. but Dick-
ing the perfect books for your
favorite youngsters can be daunt-
ing. Now the expert staff of The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books have created a guide to help
you navigate the bookstore wilderness full of
shiny new children's books.
Offering brief annotations for over 150 of
the best books for giving (and receiving), the
Guide Book to Gift Books is available for only
$3.50 as a downloadable PDF file that you
can print out and use for every holiday, birth-
day, or other gift-giving occasion on your
calendar this year.
Listed books have all been recommended in
full Bulletin reviews from 1999-2002 and are
verified as currently in print. Entries are
divided into age groups and include author,
title, publisher, and the current list price.
To purchase, go to
www.lis.uiuc.edu/giftbooks/
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
January 2003
Vol. 56 No. 5
A LOOK INSIDE
185 THE BIG PICTURE
The Queen ofEverything by Deb Caletti
186 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
190 * Ug: Boy Genius ofthe Stone Age written and illus. by Raymond Briggs
190 * Keeper ofthe Doves by Betsy Byars
193 * Summerland by Michael Chabon
200 * Talkin'about Bessie: The Story ofAviator Elizabeth Coleman by Nikki
Grimes; illus. by E. B. Lewis
211 * Can You Guess My Name?: Traditional Tales around the World ad. by
Judy Sierra; illus. by Stefano Vitale
216 
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 2002
218 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
__ 
__ __
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus
Reprint Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300
North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2003 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Photodisc from The Queen ofEverything ©2002. Reproduced by permission of
Simon & Schuster.
JANUARY 2003 
* 
185
THE BIG PICTURE
The Queen ofEverything
by Deb Caletti
There are a lot of people on the edge in young-adult novels, especially young
people struggling with serious problems, risking life and future. Though adults
too are beset by demons, acute crises are generally the province of the young, even
when it's in response to the troubles of their elders.
Caletti's novel initially looks like it's going to fit that solid and reliable
pattern. High-school-junior Jordan has long been at odds with her bohemian
mother; after one fight too many (during which her mother calls her "the queen of
everything"), Jordan walks out on her mother-and her mother's live-in boyfriend,
their impending baby, and their motley crew of boarders-to live with her staid
and orderly optometrist father. She's somewhat concerned about her grandfather,
who's continually antagonizing his boss at the gas station he formerly owned, and
she's sliding into a halfway romance with Kale, a boy she largely despises but en-
joys physically. Pushing its way out from beneath those worries, however, is some-
thing much darker and more threatening: her father's increasing obsession with
the elegant Gayle D'Angelo, a married neighbor. Jordan watches in dismay as her
mild-mannered dad turns into another person, becoming cocky ("Apparently he'd
had a little taste of being an asshole and found it to his liking") and heedless as the
affair begins, then disturbingly desperate as Gayle plays him against her husband,
until finally he erupts, leaving Mr. D'Angelo dead, himself in jail, and Jordan
trying to pick up the pieces of her life.
Caletti sets up Jordan's narration as the ubiquitous school assignment,
making the climax clear from the beginning, but the inevitability only adds to the
plot's momentum. The book unfolds the drama slowly and suspensefully, creat-
ing an everyday teen world that's perceptive, funny, and nuanced in its own right,
then shadowing that vision with the gathering darkness of the impending tragedy
("'Nothing's going to change,' I said. Which are about the stupidest four words in
the English language"). There's a rawness to the portrait ofJordan's father, unable
and perhaps even unwilling to pull himself out of his Gayle-centered spiral, hardly
seeing his daughter or the consequences of his actions. There's a parallel vulner-
ability to the portrait of Jordan herself, a normal kid who sees that her father may
take her forever out of the realm of the normal (she's frightened by the "sudden
realization that terrible things might not just be for other people"); there's true
pathos in her complete helplessness ("I wondered if I should call someone. I won-
dered who exactly I would call") in the face of creeping disaster and authenticity in
her puny efforts to forestall it (she even tells his parents in the desperate hope that
they can check their son's madness).
This is indeed tasty melodrama, and the book's paperback-original for-
mat and eyecatching cover make it an attractive and appealing package. There's
more than mere voyeurism here, however. While there's a fair amount of litera-
186 
* THE BULLETIN
ture devoted to describing young people's struggle for individual identity during
adolescence, there's less on the recognition that adults, even one's own parents, are
separate agents too; that their lives may also change in stunning ways that have
nothing do with their kids but nonetheless changes their lives as a consequence;
that, as Jordan says, "people you love can be the biggest strangers." Jordan fortu-
nately discovers both kinds of individual identity, managing to differentiate be-
tween her father's irrevocable direction and her own reversible one and thereby to
pull out of her own spiral, surviving "broken but still whole." Ultimately, this is a
story all the more compelling (and all the darker) for its firm grasp on reality and
the utter credibility of its vision. (Imprint information appears on p. 191.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AIKEN, JOAN, ad. 
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs; illus. by Belinda
Downes. 
DK, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-7894-8799-3 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Turning her capable hand to retelling a widely known fairy tale, Aiken offers a
comfortable and colloquial (if lengthy) version, and the story itself follows the
well-loved and predictable pattern of numerous other retellings. Aiken-specific
details include a stolen, ruby-encrusted, magical hand mirror given to petulant
asides; seven dwarf brothers named Sachie, Fred, Ted, Ike, Mike, Sim, and Tim;
and a wicked queen who perishes not by dancing in red-hot iron shoes but by
having her heart pierced by a sliver of magic mirror that she broke in a rage. Downes'
fabric-collage illustrations are enhanced with embroidered details that bring out
the textures of the materials used while further defining the images, and viewers
will enjoy seeing how she puts it all together. The stiffness of the medium some-
what limits the ability to communicate character through subtle facial expressions
(the three basic faces here are smiles, frowns, and mouths-at-rest), and ultimately
the visuals call attention to their own craftsmanship rather than assisting in con-
veying the story. This book doesn't have the sweep of Trina Schart Hyman's
illustrations for Paul Heins' Snow White (BCCB 5/75), but it is a cozy representa-
tion of the popular tale that will surely get some use. JMD
ALEXANDER, LLOYD 
The Rope Trick. Dutton, 2002 
195p
ISBN 0-525-47020-4 $16.99 
R Gr. 4-7
Lidi is a traveling magician seeking to master the perfect trick: the rope trick of
legendary magician Ferramondo, wherein the magician tosses a rope into the air,
climbs up, and disappears. She and her canvasmaster, Jericho, her only compan-
ion since the death of her father, travel from town to town, performance to perfor-
mance. In the course of their journey they pick up a few more companions:
JANUARY 2003 
* 
187
Daniella, the traveling show's "added attraction," a child psychic and mind-reader;
and Julian, a fugitive fleeing the unjust accusations of a padrone, an overseer on
one of the feudal-like estates. Their journey includes encounters with colorful
circus performers, a brief stay in the ghetto of magicians, the occasional romantic
interlude, and a fair amount of close calls and slick escapes. Through it all Lidi
seeks Ferramondo, determined to learn the rope trick that will make her a master
magician, but when an unscrupulous landowner kidnaps Daniella, Lidi needs more
than sleight of hand to save the little girl. Alexander places his picaresque adven-
ture in an Italianate setting with details recalling the Tuscan countryside. The
story contains the components familiar to romantic adventures: secret connec-
tions, shifting loyalties, vengeful betrayals, etc. The plot moves through some
familiar but intriguing rhythms, following easily identified character types (although
even when characterizations are more functional than three-dimensional, they are
pithy and distinct). The suddenness of Lidi's improvisational mastering of the
rope trick in a time of great danger and her transcendence of the rules of stage
magic unfortunately give the conclusion a contrived feeling that doesn't jibe with
the adventurous action of the earlier pages. Still, the carnival atmospherics com-
bined with the chase-and-escape suspense makes this a reasonable choice for ro-
mance and action fans. JMD
BERGMAN, MARA 
Musical Beds; illus. by Marjolein Pottie. 
McElderry,
2002 
33p
ISBN 0-689-84463-8 
$14.95 
R 3-5 yrs
Everyone in the family is supposed to be asleep in their own beds, when Josie sits
up in bed and calls for her father: "Daddy!... Come here, quick! There's a witch
in my room." After assuring Josie there's no witch, Daddy tucks her in, but Josie
can't sleep in her own bed, so she climbs into Mom and Dad's bed instead. Ruby
has the same problem-after a tuck-in by Daddy, off she also goes to sleep in the
parental bed. When Dad tries to sleep in his own bed there isn't any room, so he
sleeps in Ruby's bed, where he is joined by Little Rick-who kicks. Dad climbs
into the top bunk, but that doesn't work because it's "full of cuddlies and books
and pointy puzzle pieces and besides... Dad wanted to sleep in his own bed." It's
hard to say who will see themselves more clearly in this tale of musical beds, the
kids who start it or the grownups who end it (echoing the experience of many
long-suffering parents, Dad finally picks up each child and tucks each one into his
or her very own bed). The plot structure is simple but effective: one child sets off
another like a row of toppling dominoes, until the grownups straighten them all
up again. The art is stylistically similar to Helen Oxenbury's in its big round
shapes and expressive dot-eyed faces, but the opaque colors are more thickly laid
on, giving the figures more intense color and more density and weight. The large
pictures, easily seen by a group, will make this a favorite with the pajama storytime
crowd. The text is straightforward and funny, and the familiar situation will surely
draw snickers from past (and future) musical-bed miscreants. JMD
BERRY, JAMES, comp. 
Around the World in Eighty Poems; illus. by Katherine
Lucas. 
Chronicle, 2002 
96p
ISBN 0-8118-3506-5 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Berry takes a literal as well as literary approach in this volume, traveling across
continents and islands, from the Arctic to England, in this geographical poetic
188 
* THE BULLETIN
journey. Contributions come from old hands at national representation (Federico
Garcia Lorca, Rabindranath Tagore, Jacques Prevert) but also some lesser-known
names, and a goodly proportion of material is traditional to its region. Most po-
ems feature child-appealing topics such as food (John Agard's "Snow-cone"), ani-
mals (Albert Wendt's "Flying Fox"), or family (Ke Yan's "Isn't It . . . "),
demonstrating the global universality of such concerns; some poems aren't par-
ticularly distinctive, but there are plenty of eloquent lyrics, readaloud opportuni-
ties, and vivid views of different parts of the world. Lucas' art is somewhat bland
and occasionally overly young for the concepts in the poems, but the landscapes
are evocative and the spot art festive. The opening map provides an enlightening
as well as appealing geographical guide to the included verses. Each poet's country
is provided in the table of contents as well as with his or her poem, though there is
no further biographical information; an index of poem titles is included. DS
BIBLE 
Noah's Ark; ad. and illus. by Jerry Pinkney. 
SeaStar, 2002 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 1-58717-202-X 
$16.50
Trade ed. ISBN 1-58717-201-1 
$15.95 
R 
4-8 yrs
The story of Noah's ark is a staple of children's literature; artists from Zwerger to
Wildsmith have brought their vision to the Biblical story of the great flood. Here
Pinkney brings his considerable experience to bear on the same tale, and the result
is a powerful picture book that reiterates tradition and emphasizes nature in all its
variety. The short sentences and phrases sometimes lean toward choppiness, but
overall this rhythmic retelling has the cadence of a told story or sermon ("Two by
two they came, all the animals of the earth. They came to the ark where Noah
waited. And Noah welcomed them. They followed him into the ark, and God
closed the door behind them"). The cumulative power of the events is evident in
the storytelling; that power is also evident in the colored pencil and watercolor
illustrations. The figures of Noah and his family, solidly and effectively drafted,
have a Biblical authority that makes them seem slightly larger than life; their mi-
nuscule size in the ark scene therefore offers a dramatic contrast to the ark itself,
which pushes the boundaries of the full spread devoted to it. Ultimately, the natu-
ral world takes center stage here: from huge beasts that consume compositional
space to tiny spiders whose webs delicately span the pages, Pinkney's renderings of
animals great and small bring home the glory of the ark's passengers. The flood
scenes, whether under or above water, are particularly evocative: great whales and
sharks swim through cities drowned in blue water; the ark itself rests on light-
reflecting seas that go on forever. In the end, the divine promise is reiterated, and
Noah and his family come to rest on an enduring Earth. This is sure to become a
favorite version of the familiar tale. JMD
BLACK, HOLLY 
Tithe: A Modern Faerie Tale. Simon, 2002 
310p
ISBN 0-689-84924-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Kaye returns to the home of her youth (her maternal grandmother's
house) with her rock-and-roll musician mother. Once there Kaye seeks out her old
school friend, Janet, and then she seeks out even older friends-the faeries that
used to visit her when she was a girl. Finding them isn't easy; in fact, it isn't until
she saves the life of dark faerie knight Roiben that her faerie friends contact her
with a message: "Do not talk to the black knight anymore, tell no one your name.
everything is danger." Her fascination with the faeries of her youth combined with
JANUARY 2003 
* 
189
her fascination with Roiben proves irresistible, and Kaye finds herself willingly
drawn into the battle between the Seelie and Unseelie courts of Faery, a battle that
will culminate on Samhain with the paying of the Tithe to bind the "solitary fey"
to one court or the other for another seven years. Walking confidently in the
shadow of Charles de Lint and Emma Bull, the author places her fantasy squarely
in the midst of urban decay and development, and her characters-disaffected,
rough-tongued modern youth and ancient, twisted fey-are right out of VH-l's
darker rock moments. Kaye, despite her own emotional confusion, is one tough,
semi-Goth cookie who knows how to use her wits and learns how to use her magic
(it turns out she's a pixie changeling). Her quest for true love, true friendship, and
truth in general, while predictably successful, still makes one wild ride. Hand this
to teens seeking a melding of Annette Curtis Klause and Francesca Lia Block.
JMD
BLACKER, TERENCE 
The Angel Factory. 
Simon, 2002 
216p
ISBN 0-689-85171-5 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-8
It's bad enough that Thomas Wisdom finds out that the encrypted document on
his father's computer is a record of his adoption. It's even worse, though, to learn
that his so, so perfect adopted family isn't even human but a group of angels on a
Project to save humankind from its self-destructive tendencies. The angelic mis-
sion may be well intended, but those in charge at the Seraph organization won't let
meddling mortals stand in the way of planetary improvement. Thomas' math
teacher, who broke the encryption, is "accidentally" snuffed by angels on the local
police force, and Thomas, who has been waffling about whether to support the
Project, may be their next target. Blacker has the pacing of his supernatural spy
thriller nailed, and even Thomas' hokey outbursts ("What madness had led me to
follow Mum and Dad into their own underworld?") can't slow the reader's romp
through the short, cliffhanging chapters. Blacker does, however, miss an opportu-
nity to take his own premise a bit more seriously. There's no sustained examina-
tion of devilish means justifying heavenly ends here, and even the angels themselves
are no more than aliens from another planet, complete with life-support implants
and gizmos to shut down their systems. A derivative ending, in which the righ-
teousness of a single human induces the aliens to call off their troops, could come
right out of Star Trek (or, for that matter, Genesis or Jeremiah). However, readers
who can pardon the theological oversights will be more than content with a light
thriller that moves at the speed of a runaway train. EB
BOLING, KATHARINE 
New Year Be Coming!: A Gullah Year; illus. by Daniel
Minter. 
Whitman, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-5590-8 
$15.95 
R 6-10yrs
The distinctive poetry and flexible pronouns of the dialect still spoken by isolated
communities ofAfrican Americans on islands along the southern coast come through
in brief impressionistic descriptions of each month, from January when "the sky
the color of first dark/ and the trees all nakedy in the wood" to June when "every
gal child take off'e shoes/ when 'e get off the yellow big bus" to December when
"daybreak poke slow" and the new year, when it's time to "stir up the hopping
John." Lively text is enhanced by dynamic figures in varied compositions: the
predominant black of the dramatic linoleum-block prints frames the shadowy
swamp while watercolors in a basic crayon palette (red, purple, blue, orange, green,
190 
* THE BULLETIN
brown) add light and depth. An introductory note provides historical context; a
glossary at the end follows a straightforward recipe for Hopping John. Its varied
curricular uses and aesthetic pleasures make this compact package certain to in-
struct and delight. FK
BRIGGS, RAYMOND 
Ug: Boy Genius ofthe StoneAge; written and illus. by Raymond
Briggs. 
Knopf, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91611-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81611-9 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Ug dwells in the Stone Age, but unlike his stolid and accepting parents, the young
lad isn't content with things as they are. He's got fancy ideas for the usual break-
fast of "bits of dead animals" ("Og says he's had HOT dead animal bits," says Ug
hopefully), he doesn't like living in caves, and, strangest of all, he's dissatisfied with
his trousers made of stone, instead yearning for something soft ("He's always go-
ing on about SOFT!" complains his fed-up mother). Briggs plays fast, loose, and
funny with anthropology and then jokes about the play, footnoting his anachro-
nisms with more wisecracks ("In the Stone Age people could not read or write.
This is why Dug's spelling is so poor"). The relentless silliness of the contrast
between little Ug's contemporarily reasonable hopes and his parents' contempo-
rarily realistic but historically tinged fussing over their young dreamer ("He'll go
mad, that boy. He'll end up painting animals on the wall") will strike young
readers as hilarious, as will Ug's doomed querying of the status quo (he doesn't
even get his non-stone trousers). Briggs' sturdy panel art features sturdy, globular
Stone-Ageoids bare except for their stone trousers (Ug's mother's name of "Dugs"
is apt indeed) and occasionally just plain bare; the panels keep the pace quick and
manage to bring both humor and pathos to Ug's ridiculous prehistoric world.
This is broadly snortworthy, a happy historical aberration perfect for disrupting
the back of the bus on the museum field trip or raucous enjoyment anytime. DS
BYARS, BETSY 
Keeper ofthe Doves. Viking, 2002 
121p
ISBN 0-670-03576-9 
$14.99 
R* Gr. 3-6
Amen McBee, so named by a father exasperated at the birth of his sixth daughter,
has always been aware of Mr. Tominski, the reclusive man who holds a vague
sinecure with her family. She's rarely seen him, though, and most of her knowl-
edge comes from the frightening tales told by her older sisters, particularly the
twins who delight in scaring Amen (and themselves) with dark, dramatic fantasies.
Amen's first real encounter with Mr. Tominski is far from menacing; he evidently
speaks no English, but he does communicate that he would like Amen to take his
photograph with her new camera, and his delight at their meeting subtly amends
her view of him and of her sisters' veracity. The twins' tales continue, however,
and when the family dog is found dead, the older girls' self-inflamed imaginations
lay the blame on Mr. Tominski, and their voiced suspicions drive the man to take
his own life. Byars' story, set in 1899 Kentucky, is far less a dark tale of dangerous
exaggeration and suicide than a tender coming-of-age story, and although an im-
plicit caution against loose accusations lurks immediately beneath the surface, the
focus is on Amen, her discovery of her father's integrity and devotion to Mr.
Tominski, and her realization that she can and should rely on her own judgment.
The tale unfolds in a series of brief chapters, loosely organized with alphabetical
allusions, that segue so smoothly that even readers just embarking on "real" novels
JANUARY 2003 
* 
191
will find themselves drawn effortlessly along. As the McBees rejoice at the birth of
baby Adam, Amen quietly begins to mentor him, as her sisters once mentored her.
Readers can be certain that Adam's education is in gentle, capable hands. EB
CADNUM, MICHAEL 
The Leopard Sword. Viking, 2002 
195p
ISBN 0-670-89908-9 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Hubert, Sir Nigel's squire and protagonist of The Book ofthe Lion (BCCB 2/00),
here returns-literally, in fact, since he, Sir Nigel, and their comrades are return-
ing to England from their bloody crusade in the Holy Land. Men trained and
eager to fight seldom lead a peaceful existence, however: Saracens and a near-fatal
quarrel with a Frankish knight dog their sea journey; after a shipwreck, they find
themselves in Rome, where the comrades-at-arms become involved in a local power
struggle and Hubert wins the favor of a young lady. Worst of all, their return to
England brings the news that Prince John has seized the reins of power and that
Hubert's best friend and fellow squire, Edmund, awaits punishment as a counter-
feiter unless Hubert can win his freedom in combat. Like its predecessor, this title
manages to deal squarely with the brutality of this corer of history ("The knight
knelt over his attacker and, taking a swine butcher's care, cut his throat") while
also conveying the excitement that made young people wish to be a part of it-and
makes them want to read about it. Hubert's adventures are historically credible
and tactfully shaped into narrative without losing their rough and unpolished ap-
peal, and characterization is sufficient to allow for empathy (and, in the case of Sir
Nigel's fellow knight Sir Rannulf, mystery) without ever interfering with pace or
action. Even away from the controversial battles of the Crusade itself, Cadnum
retains a perspective that allows for doubts and ambivalence about the knights,
their mission, and even their king without tipping into a contemporary author's
political preaching about the past. He's also left some loose ends that dangle invit-
ingly, begging for a third book to continue the adventure; readers will certainly
hope for one. DS
CALEIT, 
DEB 
The Queen ofEverything. Simon Pulse, 2002 
372p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7434-3684-9 
$6.99 
R* Gr. 9-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 185, for review.
CANNON, A. E. 
Charlotte's Rose. 
Lamb, 2002 
246p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90057-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72966-9 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Charlotte Edwards and her recently widowed father join their fellow Welsh con-
verts to Mormonism on the long journey to Zion, or Salt Lake City, and while the
party is united in faith, they are also frankly relieved to grab an opportunity to
leave their arduous, perilous lives in the Welsh coal mines behind. Upon reaching
Iowa they form a handcart train and begin to literally push their way across the
plains. A young mother dies on route and her grieving husband refuses to ac-
knowledge his newborn daughter; thirteen-year-old Charlotte impulsively volun-
teers to tend the baby, whom she names Rose, hoping to gain the respect of the
adult women in her group. A widow with her own baby nurses little Rose, but the
rest of the infant's care is in Charlotte's hands, and despite the sporadic assistance
of other overburdened women on the trail, Charlotte quickly learns that child care
192 
* 
THE BULLETIN
undermines every aspect of her life, from getting an uninterrupted night's sleep to
flirting with a prospective beau. The only thing worse than caring for Rose is the
thought of losing her, and Charlotte is plagued by the constant dread that dis-
ease-or Rose's father-will snatch the baby away. Plenty of authors have spurred
fictional pioneers West, but Cannon goes beyond the customary litany of blistered
feet, dust storms, wayside burials, and buffalo stampedes. Her reimagining of the
often-overlooked handcart migration of the 1850s makes covered wagon trains
look like a luxury vacation, and her vision of a young teen snarled in the claims of
adolescence and the demands of adulthood is perceptive and convincing. EB
CARPENTER, ANGELICA SHIRLEY 
Lewis Carroll: Through the Looking Glass. Lerner,
2002 
128p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-0073-6 
$25.26 
R 
Gr. 7-12
The Reverend Mr. Dodgson receives a respectable biographical treatment in this
compact account of his life and influence. Carpenter covers the author/
mathematician's childhood but understandably focuses more on his adulthood,
including not just his writing and his child-friends, but also his engagement in
college politics (often in opposition to the Dean of Christ Church, Alice's father)
and his adult friendships. The book doesn't really break any new ground, but it's
reflective of contemporary research and changing views, and it rises above many
older clich6s: this isn't the hackneyed picture of Lewis Carroll, Wounded Soul,
but rather a more complicated view of a man whose life contained pleasures and
successes as well as disappointments. Controversial matters, whether it be Dodgson's
nude photographic studies or his possibly intimate friendship with Gertrude
Chataway, aren't shirked, but they're addressed in context and without undue
speculation. The text could use a bit more polish in spots: quotes are awkwardly
spliced in, the focus sometimes jumps around, and at least one name (that of
Dante Gabriel Rossetti) is consistently misspelled. Overall, however, this is a ca-
pable and detailed work that offers a useful midpoint between simple biographies
for younger readers and denser adult material. Included are detailed endnotes, a
bibliography of material by Carroll and a list of additional resources about him,
and an index; photographs (many of them Dodgson's) and illustrations from
Carroll's work appear throughout. DS
CARus, MARIANNE, comp. 
Fire and Wings: Dragon Tales from East and West;
illus. by Nilesh Mistry. 
Cricket, 2002 
147p
ISBN 0-8126-2664-8 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
From the fiery orange and gold image on the cover to the black-and-white interior
illustrations, from the generous-sized font to the easy-on-the-eyes white borders,
this is a collection made to order for the older transitional reader. The subject-
dragons-is a popular one, and there is something to please almost everyone in the
varied stories. Geraldine McCaughrean's "Thoughts of a Drought Dragon" com-
bines lyrical language with breakneck pacing to tell the tale of young boy who
(literally) gets inside the mind of a dragon to save his village from destruction; Joan
Lennon's "Skivvy and Cuttle" offers slapstick action and irreverent humor; Julia
Pferdehirt's "Nothing at All" offers a heroine whose nerve is strong enough to
engage in a silent battle of wits with a marauding fire-breather. Although a few of
the entries are retellings of traditional tales, most of the fifteen stories are original,
including E. Nesbit's classic, "The Last of the Dragons"; twelve were previously
JANUARY 2003 
* 193
published in Cricket magazine. Mistry's stylized black-and-white illustrations strike
a balance between stately and humorous. The occasional cartoony characteriza-
tion may jar, but on the whole the images have a soft, controlled sophistication.
The collection sporadically suffers from lack of qualitative consistency, but the
best of the tales meld a sense of humor with a taste for magic; readers, storytellers,
and readers aloud will appreciate the combination. A section of author biogra-
phies concludes the volume. JMD
CHABON, MICHAEL 
Summerland. Miramax/Hyperion, 2002 
500p
ISBN 0-7868-0877-2 
$22.95 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Though most of Clam Island has the foggy, rainy weather expected on a small
island in Puget Sound, the westernmost tip, a place the locals call Summerland, is
an exception-until one summer it rains on Summerland, and the natural order of
the known universes goes awry. That summer, eleven-year-old Ethan Feld, the
worst player on the Roosters baseball team, is recruited by Ringfinger Brown. Brown
is not a baseball scout, he's a hero scout, and Ethan is his choice for preventing
Coyote, a.k.a. the Changer, from destroying the Lodgepole (the great Tree that
holds the universes) and bringing on Ragged Rock, the end of the world. A skepti-
cal Ethan and company (a hodgepodge band consisting of one girl pitcher, one
fairy chieftain, one female Sasquatch, one rebellious fairy princess, one changeling,
one miniature giant, one thieving wererat, and one almost-washed-up Cuban base-
ball star) race across magical boundaries and into parallel worlds to stop the Changer
(here personified as Coyote, but representing cultural tricksters from Loki to Luci-
fer) from poisoning the well that feeds the Tree that holds the universes. Encoun-
ters with giants, fairies, and figures from American tall tales result in battle by
baseball, as the motley crew turns into a team that can beat even Coyote and his
band of demon players. Chabon borrows freely from Native American mythol-
ogy, American tall tales, and Celtic folklore. The lyrical images of summer and
baseball are reminiscent of early Ray Bradbury; the mythic images of good and evil
are straight out of Norse mythology, from Ragged Rock/Ragnarok to the Lodge-
pole/Yggdrasil to Coyote/Loki. The opening meanders, but Chabon's pace picks
up to a decent lope about a quarter of the way through. The trick to this novel is
to enjoy the journey (at nearly 500 pages this no short trip); those readers who
aren't in a hurry will do just that. JMD
CLEMENTS, ANDREW 
A Week in the Woods. 
Simon, 2002 
190p
ISBN 0-689-82596-X 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Mark doesn't want to leave his friends and move to New Hampshire, and he re-
sents his busy-with-business parents for making him switch schools mid-year. His
attitude in his new school is less than stellar: he's already been accepted to a fancy
prep school so he has little interest in doing well in class or in making new friends.
By the time the annual fifth grade "Week in the Woods" comes around, however,
Mark has come around too, and he's willing to make some effort. That effort is
too late for science teacher Mr. Maxwell, who has written Mark off as a spoiled
rich kid who needs to be taught a lesson and who considers himself just the man to
teach it. When Maxwell mistakenly blames Mark for the presence of a knife in his
cabin and orders him to the truck for the obligatory ride home, Mark takes his new
camping gear and sets out up the mountain trail instead. Maxwell, belatedly dis-
covering his error, goes after Mark; boy and teacher reach rapprochement after
194 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Mark rescues an injured Mr. Maxwell. The first half of this novel is a plodding
setup of the personalities of Mark and Maxwell, and the conflict between the two
is poorly rendered, consisting mostly of erroneous, internal assumptions. The
action finally picks up during the fifth-grade trip, however, and then it's a fast,
fairly adventurous hike to the conclusion. Those readers seeking a challenge on
par with Mark's field trip may find themselves feeling at home in these woods, if
they've got the patience to make it to the trailhead. JMD
COOPER, MICHAEL 
Remembering Manzanar: Life in a Japanese Relocation
Camp. 
Clarion, 2002 
[68p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-06778-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Of the more than 112,000 Japanese Americans forced to evacuate their homes in
the aftermath of the Pearl Harbor attack, over 10,000 were sent to Manzanar, a
dust-swept "apple orchard" in eastern California. The book details the hasty camp
construction, the living arrangements for internees, and the gradual evolution of
community-with both its cooperation and deep divisions-amid makeshift con-
ditions. Plenty of black-and-white photos by government-employed photogra-
phers such as Dorothea Lange and Ansel Adams will keep younger readers moving
steadily through the text, and Cooper alerts viewers to the fact that pictures were
examined and possibly censored befort their release; his observations, however, are
not always borne out by the selections (that Lange's work "shows the anxiety in the
faces of men and women," for instance). He spends a fair amount of time in
breathy commentary on the annual Manzanar Pilgrimage and the inherent dan-
gers of repeating the evacuees' tragedy in the wake of the September 11th attacks,
but he leaves the Japanese Americans' tale abruptly with the closing of the camp in
November 1945, never mentioning the uphill task many of the now-homeless
residents faced in returning to American society. For a more complete and bal-
anced examination of the relocation, Jerry Stanley's I Am an American (BCCB
11/94) remains the title of choice. EB
CRAFT, MAHLON F., ad. 
Sleeping Beauty; illus. by Kinuko Y. Craft. 
SeaStar,
2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 1-58717-121-X 
$16.50
Trade ed. ISBN 1-58717-120-1 
$15.95 
R 6-10 yrs
K. Y. Craft has already made a lasting impression on fairy-tale lovers with her
romantic renditions of tales such as Cinderella (BCCB 1/00), and she will not
disappoint fans of her elaborately illustrated volumes with this new work. Full-
page and full-spread oil over watercolor paintings glow with Maxfield Parrish-like
light; the elaborate compositions feature royalty in bejeweled gowns posing in elabo-
rately draped rooms while bits of loose magic glow through the air like fireflies.
The text draws strongly on the ballet, and the tableaux similarly suggest the drama
of stage productions; while the illustrations tend towards the derivative (and they
occasionally offer more intricacy than impact), overall the sheer theatricality of the
scenes is impressive. Illuminated capitals and tendril-like frames set off the text
boxes; unfortunately the font itself is attenuated and thin, making the text difficult
to read. The adaptation of the story is fairly standard, holding to tradition rather
than to any unique reimagining but the retelling is not really the point here: the
point is the lush, rococo illustrations that will delight the romantic at heart, young
and old. JMD
JANUARY 2003 
* 
195
CUMMINGS, PAT, ad. Ananse and the Lizard: A West African Tale; ad. and illus.
by Pat Cummings. 
Holt, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-8050-6476-1 
$16.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
Whoever guesses the name of the Chiefs beautiful daughter wins her as his wife,
and Ananse the spider is determined to be her groom. Once in the Chiefs village,
Ananse brags his way into a place to stay with an easily impressed grasshopper, but
the grasshopper's larder leaves much to be desired, and while Ananse searches for
food he accidentally discovers the name of the Chiefs daughter. The spider's ego
leads to his downfall, however; a wily lizard, playing on Ananse's pride, tricks him
into revealing the girl's name. When Ananse arrives to win his bride, he finds her
already claimed-by the lizard. Cummings' retelling is fluid and smooth, and it's
entertaining to see trickster Ananse get his comeuppance (although it does seem a
bit hard on the chiefs lizard-marrying daughter). The watercolor, gouache, and
colored-pencil illustrations are more detailed than Cummings' usual oversized graph-
ics but still suitable for viewing by groups; the changing perspectives, from Ananse's
point of view to panoramic views from above, make each spread an eyeopener.
The animal and human characterizations are full of expression, and Ananse has a
round-cheeked audacity that especially suits him. Cummings' research into this
story is mentioned in the jacket copy, but no specific source is given. JMD
DOYLE, EUGENIE 
Stray Voltage. 
Front Street, 2002 
133p
ISBN 1-886910-86-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Eleven-year-old lan can't quite find his place on the family's Vermont dairy farm.
He's always been his mother's helper, closer to the house than the barn and carry-
ing out any dairying chores under her supervision, but it's becoming increasingly
clear that Mom's extended visit to relatives is a permanent move. Dad, never
much of a talker, has no time-or use-for lan, and his near-heroic efforts to keep
the farm going are undercut at every turn by the falling price of milk and the freak
electrical shocks that streak through the milking barn floor, debilitating the cows.
A series of sixth-grade news-report assignments gives Ian a broader view of the
world outside his farm, and as his father and older brother struggle to keep a toe-
hold on the business, lan slowly begins to envision the possibility of taking respon-
sibility for his own future. Doyle presents a view of modern farm life reminiscent
ofA ThousandAcres; there's acute and sympathetic realism in the depiction of the
changing life of the farm, where the family livelihood is sapped from underground
and even the most iron-fisted patriarch must bow to the force of the marketplace.
Ian does make his way beyond the bleakness of his mother's abandonment and his
father's estrangement, though, and his hard-won resolve to set his own goals is
satisfying and right. EB
ELLIS, DEBORAH 
A Company ofFools. Fitzhenry & Whiteside, 2002 
191p
ISBN 1-55041-719-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Henri, a choir student at a fourteenth-century French Benedictine monastery,
records his memories of the year in which an orphaned urchin, Micah, was brought
to the school to have his profane but glorious voice redirected to the service of
God. Micah blows into St. Luc's like a hurricane, crowing ribald street songs,
dancing on the refectory tables, wearying his classmates with his endless boasting.
Henri is assigned as his companion, and under Micah's influence, the boy becomes
a gleeful co-conspirator in all manner of antics, from lacing the communion wine
196 
* THE BULLETIN
with a foul-tasting herb, to "serving" a drugged live pig as the main course at the
visiting bishop's dinner. When the plague strikes the surrounding area, the abbot
sends some of the choirboys and monks out among the people as a Company of
Fools, entertaining the tense, depressed populace with comic parodies of monastery
life. A nobleman whose daughter happens to recover from the plague claims that
Micah's angelic voice saved her, and carefree Micah suddenly finds himself a pawn
in an escalating plan to swell St. Luc's coffers with the offerings of desperate people.
Henri's narration begins in the formal tone of a medieval chronicle, then inexplicably
devolves into prose befitting a modern-day school story. Indeed, Ellis seems more
comfortable with schoolboy pranking than taking on the grim business of bubonic
plague, and Henri is unnaturally reticent on the subject of friends and mentors lost
to the epidemic. Still, the sudden, devastating changes wrought by the plague on
orderly monastic life is ably captured, and middle-graders fascinated by matters
medieval will want to add this to their reading list. EB
ERDRICH, LISE 
Bears Make Rock Soup and Other Stories; illus. by Lisa
Fifield. 
Children's Book Press, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-89239-172-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In this collection of animal and animal/human stories, fourteen brief original tales
are partnered with the paintings that inspired them. According to notes, both
author Erdrich (ofOjibway heritage) and illustrator Fifield (Oneida) seek to honor
their cultural traditions in this work, and there is indeed a strong folkloric flavor to
matter-of-factly fabulous tales of bears, moose, Canada geese; there's also the re-
curring figure of Deer Chief, who appears in several episodes, the first the story of
his naming and the last the account of the animals' paying him their last respects.
The text's quiet mysticality suits this intermingled natural world of people and
animals, and a few entries offer satisfyingly condensed drama, such as the story of
the crows' battle assistance ("Crows Cawed a Warning") and the tale of a family's
escape with the birds ("Keepers of the Sky"). Most stories, however, suffer from
the conciseness, abruptly switching focus mid-page and trailing off rather than
ending. Fifield's earthtoned watercolors depict a decoratively stylized but never
fussy landscape, where animal faces are more expressive than those of people and
balanced compositions give animal gatherings a stately if somewhat stolid pag-
eantry. There's no specific commentary on the folkloric or cultural background of
art or text, but a brief note on some of the featured animals is included. DS
FANELLI, SARA 
Mythological Monsters ofAncient Greece; written and illus. by Sara
Fanelli. 
Candlewick, 2002 
27p
ISBN 0-7636-1907-8 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Fanelli has selected fourteen monsters from Greek mythology and given them a
whole new look. Her selection includes individual beasties such as Argus, Medusa,
and Echidna, as well as some less specific entries such as harpies, sirens, and satyrs.
Nearly all the monsters get their own spread (sirens and harpies, centaurs and
satyrs have to share) and a collage portrait that will have readers reaching for maga-
zines, scissors, and glue. The hand-lettered text is kept to a gleeful minimum (an
appended page of notes gives some additional information), just enough to whet
the reader/viewer's appetite for more. While one might argue the inclusion of
centaurs and Pegasus as monsters, the novel artistic approach to these usually clas-
sically restrained icons buys Fanelli a great deal of aesthetic flexibility. Various cut
JANUARY 2003 
* 
197
papers, printed texts, and photographic bits constitute the monsters, with flour-
ishes of ink and paint adding details that imbue the compositions with offbeat
humor. This title definitely needs either informed readers or supplementary ma-
terials (a list of additional reading titles would have been helpful), but there is
enough visual mischief and mayhem happening here to keep even the most impa-
tient browser amused. A brief concluding quiz on images in the collages will take
readers back through the pages for another look. JMD
FEIFFER, JULES 
The House across the Street; written and illus. by Jules
Feiffer. 
di Capua/Hyperion, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-0910-8 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Our narrator lives across from a "big, big house where it's better than here." The
boy in that house leads the life about which the speaker can only dream, with
endless success ("He wins every game, he never comes in second"), wonderful
possessions ("He's got a shark for a pet that he keeps in his swimming pool"),
indulgent parents ("He can eat with his elbows on the table"), and general joy
("Everybody laughs in his house"). There's not much plot beyond the idealized
vision (the book ends with the narrator's imagining of a friendship with his high-
living neighbor), but this taps directly into the common youthful conviction that
somebody's living the dream life you haven't managed to swing, and there's wit
and aptness in the specifics of this particular paradise. Feiffer's wiggly, rumpled
lines imbue the fantasy boy with a heedless insouciance (he's all the more perfect
for being casual about it) while the narrator's window solidly frames his yearning
views of the heaven that lies across the street. You can use this to spark all kinds of
discussions, or just for a comfortingly masochistic confirmation that the grass re-
ally is greener elsewhere. DS
FERREIRA, ANTON 
Zulu Dog. Foster/Farrar, 2002 
193p
ISBN 0-374-39223-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Vusi, a Zulu boy, is smitten with one of the family hunting dog's new puppies,
saving Gillette (named for the pup's razor-sharp teeth) after a leopard kills the rest
of the pup's family and mangles one of Gillette's legs beyond repair. Vusi keeps
Gillette a secret from his family, especially his dog-hating mother, but he's deter-
mined to train the three-legged dog to be a great hunter. He's got another, even
riskier secret: a growing (if sometimes rocky) friendship with Shirley Montgom-
ery, daughter of a racist white farmer; when Shirley disappears, Vusi braves Mr.
Montgomery's wrath to help search for her. There's an old-fashioned flavor to
much of the story, especially Gillette and Vusi's melodramatic rescue of Shirley
(who not only has an injured ankle preventing her from walking, but who is on the
verge of becoming the victim of a hungry leopard); Mr. Montgomery is a flat
character both as a racist and, after Vusi's actions elicit a sentimental reformation,
as a reformed racist. There's still plenty of enjoyment in the classic dog story;
readers will easily understand both Vusi's need to prove himself a man and his
need to ensure Gillette's survival through their value as hunters. Even more com-
pelling is the picture of Vusi's life as South Africa struggles to deal with political
change: Vusi learns English in school but has little chance or reason to master it
until he meets Shirley; his father's taxi business in Pietermaritzburg is threatened
by murderous competitors, forcing him to steal cattle from local ranchers in order
to feed his family. Readers willing to wade through the trappings will find at the
198 
* THE BULETIN
heart a solid boy-and-dog adventure and an interesting view of a life rarely de-
picted in U.S. children's literature. A map and a glossary are included. DS
FIEDLER, LISA 
Dating Hamlet: Ophelia's Story. 
Holt, 2002 
183p
ISBN 0-8050-7054-0 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 7-10
The title isn't a metaphor; this is Ophelia's story, or a version thereof, telling the
truth behind the famous saga of the melancholy Dane and his doomed love. There's
little melancholy in Fiedler's novel, however, which turns the famous pairing's
travails into a jokey period comedy and Ophelia into a knowing witness and ac-
complice from the ghostly get-go. She's a partner in Hamlet's plans to feign mad-
ness and to entrap his murdering stepfather into revealing himself, and she plays
her own role to perfection, going "mad" herself and then using herbal potions (a
legacy of her late mystical mother) to put herself into a deathlike state from which
she's awakened in time to do the same to just about everybody else with the com-
plicity of just about everybody else. There are certainly possibilities for curricular
use here, and the book's conscious motif-crossing may amuse some readers (at the
end, Ophelia suggests that they light out for Verona, where there's an apothecary
who'd be interested in her potion), but ultimately this is too leaden to be silly and
too superficial to be interesting. Fiedler (a talented author of contemporary com-
edy such as Curtis Piperfield's Biggest Fan, BCCB 10/95) jettisons period authen-
ticity without ever creating an effectively cohesive world, comic or serious, for her
characters to inhabit instead. The presumably deliberate contrast between archaic
language and modern colloquialisms (Barnardo is "a few knights short of a Cru-
sade," Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are "several fathoms shallow of a full moat")
wears thin quickly, and the lustings of a multitude of characters after Ophelia veer
uneasily between sinister and humorously bawdy; nor does the book ever reconcile
the darkness of the revenge plot, Claudius' eventual murder, and Ophelia's own
genuinely troubled family story (she discovers that the gravedigger, not Polonius,
is her father) with the forced breeziness of the tangled web of pretense. There's an
interesting idea at the heart of this, but overall kids would be better off with Kiss
Me, Kate or West Side Story. DS
FLIEGER, VERLYN 
Pig Tale. 
Hyperion, 2002 
[33 6 p]
ISBN 0-7868-0792-X 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 9-12
Abandoned in a field as an infant, Mokie (from "mochyn," the Welsh word for
pig) grows up an abused and neglected foster child, working as a pig herder. After
being raped by the village boys, Mokie flees into the woods, and her destiny begins
to unfold. Fairy folk disguised as gypsies take her in; their job is to bring Mokie to
full knowledge of herself so she will be ready to fulfill her role in the inevitable and
unchanging "pattern." In the end, Mokie becomes the perfect sacrifice in the rites
that mark the changing of the seasons, dying in place of her pig and stepping into
the Crystal Land where she is greeted by one of the fairy folk. The atmosphere of
this novel is compelling, but the plot relies too heavily on its unexplained mytho-
logical base. Since Mokie's death is part of a known pattern with a known end,
there is no real tension or suspense, and the fairy folk's asides on Mokie's origins
and destiny slow the plot further. Despite Flieger's convincing creation of her
cold, hard world, the novel ultimately lacks impact and momentum; adventurous
fantasy readers will be better served by Black's Tithe, reviewed above. JMD
JANUARY 2003 
* 
199
GARDEN, NANCY 
MeetingMelanie. Farrar, 2002 
199p
ISBN 0-374-34943-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Allie Ward is eleven going on twelve and unenthused by recent changes: her male
friends no longer include her in their work or play, and her father tells her that she
won't be strong enough to work, like him, as a lobsterman. To make matters
worse, Allie's injured father hasn't been able to work for months; as a result, Allie's
younger siblings must leave the island to stay with their aunt while Allie helps her
folks sell baked goods to summer visitors. When Melanie, an outgoing girl her
own age, comes to the island for the summer, the course of true friendship is
complicated by a parent's class snobbery and, in subtler ways, by the strength of
Allie's possible sexual feelings for Melanie. Though there are no clear signs that
this is an historical novel (or that it is not), the prevailing social attitudes on the
island-and the plot lines inspired by them-are distinctly old-fashioned, in spite
of the author's attention to sexuality and ethnicity, and sometimes melodramatic.
Despite occasional authorial overstatement, Allie's conflict with traditional gender
roles is multifaceted and credible; she responds to the emphasis on women as "weak"
(and the shock of getting her first period) by working out ("She couldn't do much
about the woman part of her, she realized, but she could do plenty about the
strong part"). The relationship of preteens Melanie and Allie never gets beyond
the friends-forever stage (ending with a natural separation in August), but its emo-
tional intensity and suggestion of deeper possibilities should also resonate for many
readers. Stilted plotting aside, the well-defined characters and carefully evoked
setting will appeal to readers beginning to explore their own identities. FK
GREENE, STEPHANIE 
Falling into Place. Clarion, 2002 
124 p
ISBN 0-618-17744-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Eleven-year-old Margaret is sick of change: her beloved grandfather has died, her
grandmother's moved to a retirement community, and her father has remarried
and forced not only a stepmother but three little stepsisters on her. On top of that,
there's a new baby coming, and Margaret's visit with her grandmother, where
she'd hoped to be able to spill her sorrows, isn't at all what she expected: Gran
isn't interested in doing much of anything but, uncharacteristically, carping about
the neighbors, and Margaret is stuck with her younger cousin Roy. There's some
convenient contrivance in the resolution (Margaret softens towards her half- and
step-sibs and Gran towards her neighbors) and the book's shift from Margaret's
displacement anxiety to her concerns about her grandmother is a bit dizzying, but
the latter is actually a more interesting and unusual focus. Margaret is a sympa-
thetic and strong-willed character ("The thing about bossing is," she informs a
plaintively protesting Roy, "you're not supposed to ask the person whether they
like it or not") whose righteous displeasure is legitimate and understandable. There's
therefore a lot of emotional satisfaction here, and this will also have resonance for
the many kids dealing with grandparental transitions. DS
GREGORY, 
VALISKA 
Shirley's Wonderful 
Baby; illus. 
by 
Bruce
Degen. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028574-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028132-4 
$14.99 
R 4-7 yrs
Pink sneakers (no bows, thank goodness) subtly indicate the gender of the grumpy
young hippo whose "perfect" baby brother is effortlessly hogging the limelight.
200 
* THE BULLETIN
Fortunately for Shirley, the new babysitter, Ms. Mump, seems to agree with her
that babies-who are "notorious for waking up ... being hungry ... burping"-
are definitely a bother and often "revolting." Over the course of the evening,
Shirley finds herself taking more and more responsibility for baby Stanley, chang-
ing him, feeding him, and eventually defending him ("I happen to know that for a
baby it was a very good burp"). By the time Shirley's folks get home, Ms. Mump
can tell them that "as a sister, your Shirley is wonderful." Gouache applied over
stencils and mesh and then finished with pen and ink outlining creates subtle
textures and well-defined patches of richly saturated color in dynamic but clearly
focused illustrations; however, it's Shirley's body language as she watches her clue-
less parents dote on little Stanley that really sells the story. Viewers will also enjoy
the few quiet jokes tucked into the pictures (the "thick book" Ms. Mump reads
while Shirley amuses the baby is entitled "Thick Book," while the books Shirley
reads to Stanley have titles like "Pat the Hippo"). Solid storytelling and unassum-
ing craftsmanship make this familiar familial drama a good bet to engage jaded
siblings and their elders. FK
GRIFFIN, PENI R. 
The Music Thief. Holt, 2002 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8050-7055-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Alma is frustrated by family tensions: her mother is always working, her older
brother is turning into a troublemaker with an interest in gang life, and her sister
leaves her baby to Alma's care most of the time. Already saddened by the death of
her beloved grandmother, Alma finds a new grief when Jovita, the local girl turned
famous and inspirational singer, is gunned down by gang-bangers. Desperate for
contact with Jovita's music but lacking any way to play her tapes, Alma sneaks into
the house of her neighbor, a music teacher; the incursion leads to repetition, with
Alma finding respite from her stressful life and an introduction into the broader
world of music in the teacher's empty house. There's a fair amount of contrivance
here, especially in Alma's expanding musical horizons, but the easy and confiding
storytelling makes this a compelling tale. Characterizations are perfunctory but
not flat, so that Alma's strained family is realistic in its troubles and in its family
dynamic. As she has before (in books such as A Dig in Time, BCCB 10/91),
Griffin capably depicts the South Texas world of Spanglish and mixed Anglo/
Latino neighborhoods; here she adds poignancy with the figure of Jovita (obvi-
ously modeled on Selena) and the impact of her death on the community as well as
on Alma. Young music lovers will particularly relate to this thoughtful yet acces-
sible novel. DS
GRIMES, NIKKI 
Talkin'about Bessie: The Story ofAviator Elizabeth Coleman; il-
lus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Orchard, 2002 
48p
ISBN 0-439-35243-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-6
In the family parlor on Chicago's South Side, relatives and friends of the early
twentieth-century African-American aviatrix mourn her passing in a 1926 crash.
Their voices, vividly imagined and individuated, offer deeply personal glimpses
into Coleman's life and steely character. Teachers and siblings, flight-school class-
mates, mentors, and promoters remember her drive to learn, her determination to
make a mark in the aviation field, her resilience in facing discrimination and in-
jury. Grimes' vision is informative and challenging for intermediate-grade read-
JANUARY 2003 
* 201
ers, providing a subtler portrait than Borden's Flying High (BCCB 2/01). Several
speakers provide an edgy counterpoint to the predictably laudatory views of the
"mourners." A white customer from Bessie's days as a laundress remarks, "There
was somethin' disturbin' about her. I think/ it was her eyes. She'd never look
down, you know?" Bessie's sister-in-law decries her boastful ways: "But them
dressed up tales she told!/ They hurt more than they helped, if you ask me./ Made
it harder for folks to believe the plain truth/ of what she really did do-which was
plenty." Each double-page-spread memoir includes a monochrome thumbnail
portrait of the speaker and a luminous full-page watercolor scene from Bessie's
life-lagging sullenly behind the other workers in the cotton fields, charting her
future over a customer's nails in a Chicago manicure salon, staring pensively from
her French flight school window with biplanes reflected in the glass overhead.
Author's notes fill in details of Bessie's career and legacy, and source notes guide
the way to further biographical and historical information. Readers who shy away
from standard biographies may find this nontraditional rendering much to their
liking. EB
HANLEY, VICTORIA 
The Healer's Keep. 
Holiday House, 2002 
36 4 p
ISBN 0-8234-1760-3 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
When the evil Lord Morlen buys seventeen-year-old Maeve, the slave girl flees,
escaping with a disguise created by her dying mother and with the help of the
Dreamwen Stone, a magical talisman. Her flight is also aided by freeman Jasper,
who finds himself drawn to the beautiful girl. The story of the escaping Maeve is
entwined with that of Princess Saravelda (known as Sara) and Dorjan, two young
people of recently identified magical abilities, who have been sent to the Healer's
Keep to learn the ways of power and who quickly discover that the Keep is under
magical siege from Lord Morlen. Morlen is in league with the Shadow King, an
evil entity attempting to regain his mortal shape and plunge the mortal world into
darkness, and the heroes battle betrayal, subterfuge, illusion, and dark dreams to
overcome the threat to the kingdom, defeat Morlen, and banish the Shadow King.
Hanley began this saga in The Seer and the Sword (BCCB 2/01) with the introduc-
tion of Torina and Landen, now queen and king; this title picks up when Sara, the
daughter of Torina and Landen, is grown to near-womanhood. The fantasy world
is full of intriguing details; unfortunately, much of the magic lacks nuance, and it
is often more convenient than logical, with the characterizations of the supernatu-
rally gifted players relying more on magic than personality. The pace sometimes
stalls, and the conclusion (in which Maeve uses her heretofore unrevealed power
to defeat Morlen and then vows to use it to convince her country's ruler to end
slavery forever) is a bit wishful. Still, the setting is interesting, the main characters
are engaging, and fantasy readers untroubled by whimsical plotting will enjoy the
scenery. JMD
HARTFIELD, CLAIRE 
Me and Uncle Romie: A Story Inspired by the Life andArt of
Romare Bearden; illus. by Jerome Lagarrigue. 
Dial, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-8037-2520-5 
$16.99 
R 
6-9 yrs
James is uncertain about leaving his parents behind in North Carolina for a sum-
mer in New York City with his aunt and uncle (he's especially worried about
spending his birthday away from home). Aunt Nanette's affection soon allows
him to feel comfortable in his relatives' apartment, but when she's called away
202 
* THE BULLETIN
unexpectedly, he's left only with Uncle Romie. Initially intimidated by his impos-
ing artist uncle, James soon discovers he's a congenial companion and becomes
intrigued by Romie's collage art, some of which depicts James'-and Romie's-
North Carolina home. Uncle Romie is based on artist Romare Bearden, and some
of the memories Uncle Romie shares with James are based on Bearden's art, but
ultimately Bearden's connection to the book is fairly tenuous; fortunately, the
fictional story stands on its own, offering a quiet and sympathetic account of a
boy's discovery of his loving uncle and the powers of art. Lagarrigue wisely avoids
imitating Bearden's style, instead offering subtle underlays of collage, mostly news-
paper, that add richness and delicate patterning to the spreads. The striations of
his orderly brushstrokes enhance the texture further, provide a feeling of three-
dimensionality and order, and, in combination with his twilight palette and smeary
acrylic hues, vividly recall the work of Degas. While this could serve as an intro-
duction to a discussion about Bearden, it also offers an invitation to the world of
art that would complement Brian Karas' The Class Artist (BCCB 9/01). A guide to
making collage is included, as is a brief note about the life of Romare Bearden. DS
HERSHENHORN, 
ESTHER 
Chicken Soup by Heart; illus. by Rosanne
Litzinger. 
Simon, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82665-6 
$16.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Rudie Dinkins, "a nice boychik," is distressed to find that his babysitter (Mrs. Gittel,
"the Chicken Soup Queen") is down with the flu: "Who will snug-a-bug her like
she snug-a-bugged me? Who will cook her chicken soup and make her good as
new?" Determined to aid in Mrs. Gittel's recovery, Rudie (with his mother's help)
makes a batch of chicken soup from Mrs. Gittel's own recipe. Lucky for Mrs.
Gittel, Rudie knows her secret ingredient: she stirs in stories about her soon-to-be
soup eaters to make her chicken soup "a little sweet." Rudie stirs in a candy kiss in
memory of the day "they practiced counting like accountants," some jelly beans in
memory of a day they played cards, and a peppermint in memory of the day the
two of them took pictures in a photo booth. Each sweet memory of Mrs. Gittel
must improve the soup because sure enough, not long after Mrs. Gittel eats Rudie's
soup, she's as good as new-just in time to make Rudie chicken soup for his
tummyache. Hershenhorn's story is both sweet and funny; the stories within the
story run a smooth course, and the affectionate relationship between Rudie and
neighbor Mrs. Gittel is clear from their obvious concern for one another. Litzinger's
cartoony mixed-media illustrations (gouache, watercolor, and colored pencil) are a
bit generic, but despite their lack of specificity they are cheery, splashy bits of color
that liven up the pages. The Yiddish words and rhythms of the text make this a
natural for reading aloud or even readers' theater. Both Rudie Dinkins' and Mrs.
Gittel's chicken soup recipes are included at the end. Enjoy! JMD
JACKSON, ALISON 
The Ballad of Valentine; illus. by Tricia Tusa. 
Dutton,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46720-3 
$16.99 
R 5-8 yrs
Ever noticed that "Valentine" rhymes with "Clementine"? Jackson has, and she's
developed a playfully mournful Valentine ballad around the fact. "In a cabin, in a
canyon" lives the narrator's sweetheart, Valentine, whom he'd dearly like to make
his very own Valentine. Unfortunately, his attempts to communicate this desire
to her are fraught with obstacles: the mailman can't find her address, the homing
JANUARY 2003 
* 
203
pigeon flies off to Madagascar, the wind blows away his skywriting, etc. The verse
makes good use of the familiar drone and the repeated (if very slightly varied)
rhyme ("But it rolled down into quicksand./ Now your valentine is slime"), and
the catalogue of hapless disaster takes the embarrassment out of the hearts-and-
flowers holiday. Tusa's line-and-watercolor illustrations bring the premise to life
in sketchy scribbles and solid, frizzly lines that recall the work of David Small and
in rugged dapples of color that suggest a slightly old-timey and more than slightly
fantastical western reality, where carts may be drawn by massive and perky pigs.
They also provide a reassuring counternarrative: the cheerful and industrious Val-
entine, oblivious to her suitor's trials, proceeds to whip up a tasty pie and bring it
to the poor defeated narrator. You can get them in a classroom/ Singing with a
wailing whine,/ They'll adore the glorious ruckus/ Never mind the valentine. DS
JOHNSON, KELLY 
Look at the Baby; written and illus. with photographs by Kelly
Johnson. 
Holt, 2002 
24p
ISBN 0-8050-6522-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
6-18 mos.
It's baby bits on display in this brief baby book: "Look at the baby./ Look at the
baby's nose./ Look at the baby's fingers/ Look at the baby's toes." That's about as
complicated as the text gets, so the result is rather a catalogue and a skimpy one at
that; enterprising adults will nonetheless be able to turn it into a giggly sharing
experience with kisses or tickles, especially on the "yum, yum, yummy!" exclama-
tion (a phrase rather awkwardly shoehorned into the examination of the baby's
legs). It's the crisp and vivid photographs that are the real draw here: up-close
looks at fingers and toeses are interesting in their own right, and there's an attrac-
tive multiracial cast of expressive, extremely photogenic kids (some, though, rather
old to be called babies) peering out from the pages. This doesn't have the imagina-
tive excellence of Helen Oxenbury's work for the youngest audiences, but it still
offers an opportunity for some rollicking baby play. DS
KING-SMITH, DICK 
Chewing the Cud; illus. by Harry Horse and with
photographs. 
Knopf, 2002 
197p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91459-5 
$18.00
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81459-0 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-10
The prolific author now turns his pen to his own life, describing his childhood, his
work adventures, his family life, and most importantly, his animals, from pigs
(especially the noble boar, Monty) to guinea pigs, dogs (especially the maternal
dachshund, Anna, and Sally the indestructible terrier) to Ben-the-bull. The narra-
tive is shaped largely by the species of its subjects, meandering beneficently like the
reminiscences of a kindly old uncle. There's an accompanying amiability that
makes it hard to resist, however, and this offers a lot of the pleasures of James
Herriot's country tales. There are wryly amusing observations of people ("Mr.
Hamper was distinguishable from his larger pigs by virtue of wearing clothes and
standing on his hind legs"), disarming honesty ("I wasn't a particularly good sol-
dier or farmer or salesman or factory worker or teacher, but at last I've found
something I can do reasonably well"), and an appreciation of the earthy side of
animal husbandry (his three children dance solemnly in a circle around the mating
Muscovy ducks). Throughout it all is the typical farmer's blend of affection and
practicality, with animals appreciated both for their interesting personalities and
their flavor when cooked in a savory sauce. Pleasantly homey line drawings appear
throughout, and an inset of photographs is provided. DS
204 
* THE BULLETIN
LYNCH, CHRIS 
Who the Man. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623939-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623938-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Junior-high-schooler Earl Pryor is sensitive, to say the least, about his prodigious
height and stubbly chin, and that sensitivity, coupled with iron fists and a frozen
moral compass (there is right; there is wrong; beat up the wrong) lands him in
continual trouble. School grounds are fairly mined with defiant jabs about his
size, and the most innocent trip to the local convenience store has its perils, as
older teens and his insecure friend Bobby manipulate him into buying liquor for
their back-alley party. Earl's in perpetual search of refuge, but school has him on
probation, his loving parents-who no longer love each other-have fractured his
home life, and even his hideaway is discovered and eventually trashed by other
kids. Earl tries to steer along the straight and narrow, but when the weight of his
world sends him into a drunken binge and a rage against his father, he and his
parents are jolted into setting their lives into some kind of reasonable order. Al-
though many readers may wish that the balance between events and Earl's subse-
quent rumination tipped a bit more toward action, they will appreciate Lynch's
acute insights into the junior-high disparity between physical and social develop-
ment, and the indistinct line between self-defense and self-control. For middle-
schoolers familiar with the Elvin books (Slot Machine and Extreme Elvin, BCCB
10/95 and 2/99), this is an ideal segue into Lynch's darker offerings. EB
MAITLAND, 
BARBARA 
The 
Bookstore 
Valentine; illus. 
by 
David
LaRochelle. 
Dutton, 2002 
48p 
(Dutton Easy Readers)
ISBN 0-525-46913-3 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Mr. Brown of the Black Cat Bookstore (devoted to ghost books) is overwhelmed
with customers in the days before Valentine's Day, so he hires the estimable Miss
Button, who loves ghost books, adores the resident cat, and enjoys the shop's ghost.
She and Mr. Brown are clearly kindred spirits, but their shyness may keep them
apart; fortunately, Cobweb the cat and his friends the mice are on hand to ensure
the well-matched pair get together for Valentine's Day. Neat, straightforward text
in tidy little chapters avoids making the romance too goopy, instead sticking to the
lovely particulars of the ghostly bookstore avec cat. LaRochelle's line-and-water-
color illustrations are also neat and tidy, with amusing details such as the titles of
the ghostly books (sure to entice youngsters into reading more than they'd planned)
and the gambols of the frolicking mice in just about every spread. Even the anti-
romantics will relish this accessible holiday tale. DS
MARRIN, ALBERT 
Dr. Jenner and the Speckled Monster: The Search for the Small-
pox Vaccine. 
Dutton, 2002 
120p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-46922-2 
$17.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Biological weaponry having moved out of the realm of the theoretical, smallpox is
very much back in the news, so Marrin's examination of the virus' history, histori-
cal defeat, and contemporary significance is timely indeed. After an overview of
the early ragings of smallpox, the book then focuses on the introduction of inocu-
lation-mild infections of the virus that, often enough, left the subject immune-
and then Dr. Jenner's successful work on a vaccine made from cowpox, which
would confer immunity without endangering the vaccinee or his/her acquaintan-
JANUARY 2003 
* 205
ces. Examinations of the extirpation of the virus and contemporary threats con-
clude the narrative. This is a somewhat stolid account, and Marrin's emotionality
when discussing contemporary issues seems at odds with his more objective his-
torical reporting. Nonetheless, this is a well-considered investigation that provides
both historic and scientific enlightenment. Photographs and reproductions of
period art appear throughout; a detailed list of titles for further reading, a list of
websites, and an index are included. DS
MCCLURE, 
GILLIAN 
Tom Finger; written and illus. 
by Gillian
McClure. 
Bloomsbury, 2002 
32p
ISBN 1-58234-782-4 
$16.95 
R 5-8 yrs
Young Queenie, in mourning for her "dear Tabby cat," can't quite give him up:
"Every day Queenie called her Tabby, sadly she called her dear old Tabby. But
Queenie's brother Ben said 'Stop calling your Tabby, he won't come back!"' Though
Queenie's dear dead Tabby doesn't come back, another cat does: "He was young,
he was bold, and his eyes were bright blue. 'You're not my Tabby, my dear old
Tabby. Who are you?' Queenie said. 'Tom Finger,' this bold young Tabby
replied." Bearing odd gifts for Queenie, Tom appears and disappears with a spooky
regularity, until finally, despite the warnings of her suspicious younger brother,
Queenie sets off in search of the mysterious Tom. She travels through a snowy
winter landscape, hindered by an observing, feather-decorated, witch-like creature
perched in the trees. Whether the witchy-creature is real or imaginary, when
Queenie calls on Tom for help, she receives it; eventually she arrives safely at Tom
Finger's home and meets his mistress, a kindly old woman who gives her a gift-a
Tabby kitten with bright blue eyes. McClure's watercolors effectively employ
their subdued palette, the blue and gray shadows touched by sparks of red ribbons
and berries. The elongated, elegant Tom Finger has a rakish Puss-in-Boots air,
and the rounded human figures charmingly recall Hummel figurines. The story
itself remains a slightly spooky mystery up until the very end: "But Tom Finger
had gone. In a blinking he'd gone. Not even his footprints were left in the snow."
JMD
MCDONALD, JANET 
Chill Wind. 
Foster/Farrar, 2002 
134 p
ISBN 0-374-39958-1 
$16.00 
Ad Gr. 7-12
Aisha Ingram previously appeared in McDonald's Spell Bound (BCCB 10/01), as
the friend of Raven, the ambitious protagonist; now it's her turn in the spotlight.
She's been contentedly stagnant, living with her two young children in her mother's
apartment in the projects, but with her five years on welfare coming to an end she's
got to find some other financial support or enroll in a workfare program. She tries
everything to get out of her workfare obligation, but help isn't forthcoming from
her relatives or her children's father, so she's stuck working on the subway patrol.
The narration often seems unsure of its direction, with viewpoint, voice, and opin-
ions changing quixotically; there's enough commitment to reality that the book's
eventual shift into fairy tale (Aisha is discovered as a plus-size model, and she
instantly makes it big with a commercial) fails to convince. Aisha's own character
and dialogue remain strong and vibrant, however, and she's a seriously unusual
heroine; the scene-setting is evocative and straightforward ("They felt like every-
body looked down on project people, so wherever they went, they made sure to
represent, and get respect: By always getting a seat on a packed train, even if it
206 
* THE BULLETIN
meant snatching someone out of theirs"). The fame-and-riches ending may not be
believable, but there's plenty of satisfaction in the Cinderella story, and readers
sure that their big break is just around the corner will relish seeing Aisha get her
chance. DS
MORANVILLE, SHAREE BYARS 
Over the River. Holt, 2002 
[240p]
ISBN 0-8050-7049-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Willa Mae has only dim memories of her mother, who died when
Willa Mae was small, and even less recollection of her father, who joined the Navy
to fight World War II and, two years after the end of the war, still hasn't returned.
Though she wishes her grandparents and her young aunt, Rose, would tell her
more about her parents, she's happy with life on their Illinois farm-until one day
her father returns. Soon she's spirited off to Oklahoma, where her father hopes to
find work as an electrician. She's terrifically homesick, but she's also enjoying
being her loving father's daughter, learning to be his helper as he works and mak-
ing a home with him. While the story's climax and the revelation of the family
secret have a melodramatic contrivance at odds with the narrative's tone, Willa
Mae's intimate and wondering narration retains its power, credibly evoking a girl
confused and conflicted in the face of competing demands and huge changes to a
quiet and consistent life ("I told myself nobody ever died of sleeping in a strange
bed"). The family drama pleasingly avoids falling into predictable patterns: Willa
Mae's father can offer her things that the rest of her family can't and genuinely
loves his daughter, which is why the pair finally return to Illinois. This is a gentle
yet compelling family drama effectively set against the backdrop of a changing
rural America. DS
MORRISON, TONI 
The Book ofMean People; by Toni and Slade Morrison; illus.
by Pascal Lemaitre. 
Hyperion, 2002 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2471-9 
$17.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0540-4 
$16.99 
M 
3-5 yrs
This catalogue of mean people covers all kinds of unpleasantness, ranging from
mean faces ("Mostly, mean people frown") to mean voices ("Shouting is a favorite
thing of mean people") to dictatorial siblings ("My brother is mean. When we
play chess, he says, 'The knight can't go there'") to strict adults ("My teacher ...
says my letters are not on the lines"). There's an authentic voice of youthful frus-
tration here, but the book is muddy on its notion of meanness, sometimes seem-
ingly wanting to make an adult point about the destructiveness of genuine meanness
("Big people are little when they are mean"), sometimes conflating meanness and
anger, and sometimes considering "meanness" to be anything that thwarts the
young speaker's will. The poetic justifications of the youngster's bafflement are
somewhat confusing in their own right ("He knows the night goes every day" may
perplex young listeners more than the brother's mean chess restrictions on the
knight's movements). Lemaitre's spirited line-and-wash tactfully plays out the
scenarios with humanoid bunnies rather than people, and the little longears is
appealingly vulnerable; some of the portrayals are a bit odd (particularly the strangely
breasted mother bunny), though, and some of the confusion about meanness oc-
curs visually as well (are parents really mean for feeding kids peas?). The final
determination to carry on in the face of such dampening folks ("I WILL SMILE
JANUARY 2003 
* 207
ANYWAY! How about that!") is bolstering, but ultimately this lacks the clear
point that would make it useful. DS
MUNSCH, ROBERT More Pies!; illus. by Michael Martchenko. 
Cartwheel/Scho-
lastic, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-439-18773-7 
$13.95 
R 4-8 yrs
Samuel is hungry, hungry, hungry, and though his mother tries her best to fill him
up ("You are a growing boy, and you need to eat"), even cereal, two milkshakes,
three stacks of pancakes, and a fried chicken isn't enough to sate the boy. After
being sent out to play, he hies himself off to the pie-eating contest, where his
fellow competitors-a fireman, a lumberjack, and a construction worker-fall by
the wayside with tummyaches and Samuel finally eats his fill. Between the food
theme, the folkloric repetitions ("Samuel ate it all really fast"), and the delightful
eating noises ("Chuka-chuka-chuka-chuka-chuka-chuka-CHOMP!"), 
this festi-
val of orality is squarely on target for young listeners, and careful craftsmanship
keeps the spirits high to the very end (when an overstuffed Sammy gives his trophy
pie to his younger brother for chomping). Martchenko's watercolor illustrations
are robustly entertaining rather than deep, and they're all the better for that: kids
will roar with laughter at Samuel's devastated bedroom and the green, purple, and
blue faces of his nauseated and fallen competitors. Sharper-eyed audience mem-
bers may notice, amid the happily multicultural Northwest-Coast world, bizarre
and amusing details such as the household parrot's commandeering of the remote
in order to watch parrot television and the pterodactyl (or perhaps a pteranodon)
viewing the pie-eating contest from a safe distance. This is the kind of family
favorite that bigger siblings get a kick out of sharing with littler ones; this would
also be a lively readaloud for a picnic, so long as you're prepared for chaos a la
mode. DS
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Blizzard's Wake. 
Atheneum, 2002 
212p
ISBN 0-689-85220-7 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-9
It's March of 1941, and the weather is about to take a sudden turn and spin into a
treacherous blizzard. It's also the day that Zeke Dexter is released from jail, where
he has served a term for negligent homicide in a drunk-driving incident. As Zeke
makes his way toward his brother's burned-out home, Kate Sterling, fifteen-year-
old daughter of the woman Zeke killed, is home alone while her father and younger
brother, Jesse, are in town on Doctor Sterling's rounds. When the storm hits with
white-out force, Jesse and the doctor are stranded at the edge of their own property
in their unheated car, Zeke is approaching on the open road, and Kate is indoors,
frantic to find a way to bring her family indoors to safety. The blizzard can barely
match Kate's own fury when she finally rigs a guideline out to the car, only to find
her father sheltering Zeke, the very man she wishes dead. After the full force of
the storm-meteorological and emotional-has passed, Zeke and the Sterlings are
snowed in at the family's home; the doctor purposefully extends Zeke's stay, real-
izing that unless his daughter has an opportunity to forgive Zeke, she'll never
move on with her own life. Naylor ably teases readers along toward the conver-
gence of events that will inevitably lock criminal and survivors in a wrenching
confrontation, and it is much to her credit that she choreographs her characters'
moves through convincingly mundane opportunities and decisions. What could
208 
* 
THE BULLETIN
have been little more than a movie-of-the-week melodrama instead becomes an
insightful tale of reconciliation. EB
OKIMOTO, JEAN DAVIES 
The White Swan Express: A Story aboutAdoption; by Jean
Davies Okimoto and Elaine M. Aoki; illus. by Meilo So. 
Clarion, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-618-16453-7 
$16.00 
R 
5-10 yrs
Four families-two traditional couples (Beth and Lewis Maynard, Howard and
Jessica Suzuki), one nontraditional couple (Andrea Lee and Charlotte Appleford),
and one single woman (Rebecca Mandel)-wake in great expectation to the day
they leave for China to meet their adopted daughters. The text describes the inti-
mate details of the soon-to-be parents' mornings: "In Miami, Beth Maynard soaked
in the tub and in the kitchen Lewis Maynard burned the toast"; "In Minnetonka,
Rebecca Mandel ate a grapefruit and fed Ralph [the cat]." Packing lists are checked
and double-checked ("There were burp cloths, cans of formula, and little panda
bears. There were baby wipes and medicine and bottles and spoons. And there
were papers-lots of important papers-and baby pictures as tiny as a stamp")
until finally the prospective parents are on their way. The story follows the paren-
tal hopefuls through their journey, including their sojourn together at the White
Swan Hotel (hence the title) and their meeting with their adopted daughters, ex-
plaining that the members of the group kept in touch even after their return to
North America. The text itself hews close to the emotional grain, never drifting
far from the trepidation and joy of this experience. So's watercolors splash across
the pages, their vibrant fluidity enhanced by flowing black lines and dollops of red.
The art focuses on memorable and telling details from the child-oriented descrip-
tions. An afterword explains that the story is based on co-author Aoki's own expe-
rience in adopting a daughter from China and gives some additional explanatory
details. This is a purposeful, successful picture book specific to its intended audi-
ence yet emotionally involving enough for any group interested in understanding
the different ways families grow. JMD
ORDAL, STINA LANGLO 
Princess Aasta; written and illus. by Stina Langlo
Ordal. 
Bloomsbury, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 1-58234-783-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
When Princess Aasta longs for "a bear to love," she does what any sensible princess
would do: she advertises for one in the newspaper. There is a mountain of re-
sponse, but one nice polar bear, Kvitebjorn, stands out, and when the two meet,
"Princess Aasta and Kvitebjorn wanted to be together always." The king is rather
worried about his daughter's large and frightening-looking companion, especially
when Kvitebjorn wants to take Aasta back to his own land for a day trip, but
eventually he too is won over by the affectionate bruin. The absence of tension
and climax make the story (which flap copy states is based on a Norwegian folk-
tale) somewhat unshaped, but this is such an enticing vision that most youngsters
won't care. The simple text makes Kvitebjorn a mixture of toy, pet, and ideal
father ("And Princess Aasta would never be cold, because Kvitebjorn's fur kept her
warm"), and there's a touch of Briggs' The Snowman to the unassuming magic of
the snowy world (and Browne's Gorilla to the fantasy partnership). Ordal's inven-
tive artwork has its own individual style, with long, trickly lines conveying both a
childlike tremulousness and confidence; joyous and approximate smears of color
JANUARY 2003 
* 
209
(mostly in Aasta's clothes and her pink cheeks) enrich the snowy spreads and soften
the stark contrast of black on white. Kvitebjorn's such a massive support that most
spreads can't even get all of him in, focusing instead on his huge, loving paws, his
smiling ursine face, and even, in one particularly effective spread, his broad and
solid back, on which Aasta trustingly sleeps. This is an alluring depiction of a
friendship that many youngsters will envy. DS
PORTER, TRACEY 
A Dance of Sisters. Cotler/HarperCollins, 2002 
276p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029239-3 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028182-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
At thirteen, serious-minded Delia has finally found the niche she's longed for as a
promising ballet student in Madame Elanova's school: no longer a "motherless
girl with a busy father and an unhappy sister, a girl who did her homework and
danced in recitals," she now "belonged to something old and grand, something
fragile, beautiful, but vivid." The "unhappy sister," Pearl, has been shipped off to
boarding school after repeated expulsions; as Delia's absorption in ballet begins to
take over her life, changing her personality and sending her into anorexia, it begins
to look like Pearl's raging against the world holds some lessons for Delia. Porter
creates a believable picture of Delia, who finds a new meaning in the strictures of
ballet, who lives hungrily on the approval of the queenly Madame, and who com-
pletely loses her equilibrium when that approval is withdrawn, and the book's
depiction of the febrile world of the ballet studio is detailed and convincing. The
familial treatment is less effective: Pearl's coming into herself is sentimental and
implausible, lacking the force of the ballet story, and her effect on Delia (and the
girls' father) is more expedient than credible. This is therefore likeliest to be a
successful read for young balletomanes drawn by the world of pointe shoes and
barre work, such as those who enjoyed Southgate's Another Way to Dance (BCCB
1/97). DS
REEF, CATHERINE 
This Our Dark Country: The American Settlers of
Liberia. Clarion, 2002 
[13 6p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-14785-3 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
While much has been written about American abolitionism, less attention has
been paid to its strange counterpart, the relocation of free blacks to a colony in
West Africa. Implemented as a novel but largely unsuccessful experiment through-
out much of the nineteenth century, it drew together such disparate proponents as
politicians eager to be quit of "contraband" seized from ships after the importation
of slaves was outlawed, plantation owners fearful of freemen inciting slave riots,
and African Americans hopeful of establishing their own land of opportunity. The
organization of the relocation, the challenging living conditions and haphazard
support for the Liberian colonists, and the ebbs and surges of migration that closely
paralleled the expansion and retraction of African-American opportunities within
the United States are thoroughly considered. Reef is particularly skillful at exam-
ining the condescending attitudes of the American settlers toward their native neigh-
bors (whom they, ironically, regarded as backward or even savage, much as they
themselves were regarded back home), attitudes that would pave the way for the
volatile uprisings that plague Liberia up to the present time. A well-selected gal-
lery of maps, period lithographs, and captioned photos (many of which, as Reef
210 
* THE BULLETIN
explains, date from the late 1800s) enhance the presentation; quotation sources, a
bibliography, and an index are also included. EB
RUBIN, SUSAN GOLDMAN 
Degas and the Dance: The Painter and the Petits Rats,
Perfecting TheirArt. Abrams, 2002 
32p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8109-0567-1 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
The best-known artist of the ballet, Degas depicted the young girls of the Paris
Opera corps over and over again in painting and sculpture from 1855 to 1905.
This book traces that artistic involvement, discussing the hard life of the "little
rats" of the ballet and Degas' interest in various aspects of that life; it also addresses
Degas' technique ("He loved using the colored chalks because he could combine
areas of color with line") and changing approach as his sight dimmed ("On days
when Degas could not see well enough to draw or paint, he modeled figures in wax
as he had done early in his career"). The art history is skillfully blended with the
ballet interest, as there's as much evocation of the lush hothouse world of thepetits
rats as of Degas' studio, and Rubin's fluid text provides a measured and elegant
entree to both. It's too bad additional visuals weren't provided (historical photo-
graphs would have made a useful counterpoint), but Degas' green-lit landscapes of
tulle and toe shoe is inarguably evocative. This would make an interesting prepa-
ration for a museum visit or a tasty glimpse of history for young balletomanes.
Appended is a brief biography of Degas' life and career in general, as well as a
minuscule-print bibliography. DS
SAYRE, APRIL PULLEY 
Secrets of Sounds: Studying the Calls and Songs of Whales,
Elephants, 
and 
Birds. Houghton, 
2002 
6 4 p 
illus. 
with
photographs 
(Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 0-618-01514-0 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-7
This excellent science series now turns to the specialized and fascinating field of
bioacoustics, examining the work of scientists who listen to underwater sounds,
infrasound (sounds below the human-audible spectrum), and sounds in the sky.
Sayre offers good descriptions of work with the various species and its import, such
as the discovery of hippopotami's underwater communications and the uncover-
ing of the vocal warnings of night-migrating birds, and she even provides some
discussion of the main bioacoustical computer program. There's a strong empha-
sis on conservation throughout, with the various biologists finding evidence of
environmental impact through their studies and taking stands small and large as a
consequence; there's also an emphasis on the breadth and possibilities of science
and the benefits of thinking creatively. Though not all the photographs are as
evocative as one would like, it's understandably difficult to translate sound into
image, and the pictures offer visual appeal in addition to a moderate amount of
additional information. End matter includes a list of recordings as well as print
materials for further exploration, plus contact information for the research projects
mentioned, a glossary, and an index. DS
SCHERTLE, AUCE All You Needfor a Snowman; illus. by Barbara Lavallee. 
Silver
Whistle/Harcourt, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200789-X 
$16.00 
R 
3-6 yrs
A snowman's a pretty simple guy, isn't he? He just requires "billions of snow-
flakes, piled into a mound" and rolled into "one/ big cold/ well-rolled/ snowflake
JANUARY 2003 
* 211
ball," doesn't he? Well, not if you want to make him right. There's the little
matter of a hat and bottlecap eyes. And of course the carrot nose. And let's not
forget "walnut buttons,/ five in a row,/ belt in the middle,/ boots below,/ big wool
scarf,/ broom to hold,/ mittens (in case his hands get cold)." And, while you're at
it, you might as well take advantage of the fresh snowfall "floating down every-
where,/ piling up high..." to make a snow friend to keep him company. Schertle's
joyous paean to winter is realized in verse that rolls as briskly as a downhill snow-
ball and in watercolor pictures that hyperbolize the activities of exuberant young-
sters as they scale their bulky buddy (now several times their size) and attire him
for anyone's Best Dressed list. Lavallee's snowman emerges from his pristine world,
contoured in dappled icy blues and enlivened by the riot-bright snowsuits, mit-
tens, caps, and scarves that scamper over and around him. When the packing
snow is just right, turn to this title for inspiration. Then hustle outside and get
going on the real thing. EB
SIERRA, JUDY 
Can You Guess My Name?: Traditional Tales around the World;
illus. by Stefano Vitale. 
Clarion, 2002 
110p
ISBN 0-618-13328-3 
$20.00 
R* Gr. 4-8
A tried-and-true storyteller who consistently delivers on her retellings of tradi-
tional tales, Sierra partners once again with illustrator Stefano Vitale, following the
model successfully used for Nursery Tales around the World (BCCB 2/96). The
collection is divided into five sections, each based on a familiar traditional tale:
"I'll Blow Your House In!" offers three variants of "The Three Little Pigs"; "Just
the Right Friends" contains three variants of "The Bremen Town Musicians";
"Can You Guess My Name?" includes three variants of "Rumpelstiltskin"; "I
Married a Frog" has three versions of "The Frog Prince"; and "The Scary House in
the Big Woods" contains three tales similar to "Hansel and Gretel." Culturally,
the stories range from Anglo-American to Xhosa, from Argentina to Swaziland,
and each is retold in a style eminently suited for reading aloud and storytelling.
Sierra's introduction explains her approach to retelling; appended notes provide
detailed information about the stories, and a list of works consulted cites the col-
lections from which Sierra drew as well as some secondary sources. Vitale's illus-
trations (oil paint on mixed surfaces and collage, according to a note) have a textural
solidity that gives them weight and presence. Decorative borders and full-page
illustrations reflect the cultural backgrounds of the included tales; a saturated pal-
ette adds tonal richness and provides a visual link from story to story. The style of
the paintings and included ornamental details shifts from tale to tale, from textile-
inspired floral patterns to the primitive iconography (red eyes, sharp teeth, etc.) of
ravaging wolves. The original audience for the slightly younger Nursery Tales will
appreciate this step up to more exciting fare, while those who have not yet encoun-
tered Sierra's superior storytelling are in for a treat. JMD
SMITH, LINDA 
Mrs. Biddlebox; illus. byMarla Frazee. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029782-4 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028690-3 
$15.99 
R 5-9 yrs
Mrs. Biddlebox gets up on the wrong side of the bed ("The birds gave her a head-
ache./ There were creakies in her chair./ A breeze blew dank and dreary/ And
mussied up her hair"), and woe betide the morning. She makes a momentous
decision born of her discontent: "I will cook this rotten morning!/I will turn it into
212 
* 
THE BULLETIN
cake!/I willfire up my oven/I will set the day to bake!" The disgruntled protagonist
does just that, gathering up the morning's gloom, shadows, fog, etc. into a huge
iron pot. She whips her ingredients into dough and bakes a cake chock-full of the
"DESPICABLE bad day," which she proceeds to eat with great relish: "Now with
her belly full of crumblies/ And her nighty cap pulled tight,/ She threw the door
wide open/ And welcomed in the night!" Smith's darkly humorous text rolls in-
exorably over its sometimes jingly verse to a satisfactorily filling conclusion. Frazee's
illustrations cheerfully embrace the gloomy worldview of Mrs. Biddlebox, per-
sonifying the morning in sweeps of smoky curling line and employing a nearly
monochromatic palette leavened by the occasional touch of color. This is a funny
and ultimately uplifting commentary on dealing with the vicissitudes of life, and
Mrs. Biddlebox's adamant refusal to look on the sunny side will cheer the most
recalcitrant listener. JMD
STANLEY, DIANE 
Saladin: Noble Prince of Islam; written and illus. by Diane
Stanley. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17136-2 
$18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17135-4 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
This offering is perhaps less a formal biography than a military history spotlighting
the warrior prince who zealously defended Islamic-held territory in the "Holy Land"
from equally zealous invasion by Christian Crusaders. Stanley emphasizes the
relatively benign treatment of vanquished soldiers under Saladin's orders, compar-
ing his methods of warfare favorably with the Christians' rapaciousness and double
dealing. Tone varies from broad adulation of Saladin, to arid stretches of histori-
cal background, to gossipy barbs ("Now the king of France decided to leave after
only two months. Apparently that was all the time in Richard's company that
Philip could stand"). Formally composed, stiff-figured acrylics, upon which many
readers will depend as they wade through textual details of Islamic and Christian
political maneuverings, are ill-suited to battle scenes. Rigid soldiers storm the
battlements with all the passion of molded plastic figures attacking Lego castles,
and even the neatly bandaged wounded seem to lounge around their spacious tent
(rainy outside, bone-dry inside) like malingering scouts on a camp out. Library
shelves are hardly sagging under the weight of nonfiction materials on the Cru-
sades, however, and this clearly focused account (with nice touches such as a glos-
sary and postscript on the fates of the Frankish players) may be welcome in the
collection. EB
TAYLOR, THEODORE Lord ofthe Kill. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2002 
246p
ISBN 0-439-33725-9 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
In this belated sequel to The Sniper (BCCB 12/89), sixteen-year-old Ben Jepson is
left to oversee the family's Orange County wild cat refuge while his animal-rights-
activist parents globe trot for their cause. As if supervising the adult staff and
tending the daily needs of the big cats isn't challenge enough, finding the body of
a murdered Asian woman in the jaguar enclosure pushes Ben to his limit, and he
tries desperately to call his parents home. They're completely out of reach, though,
and Ben must work with the local authorities to try to sort through a long list of
suspects-from a skittish retirement community that would like to have the ref-
uge shut down, to canned-hunt (quasi-legal "ranches" where caged animals are
killed by unsportsmanlike sportsmen) operators who want the muckraking Jepsons
JANUARY 2003 
* 213
pressured out of business, to a Chinese secret society brokering tiger parts for tra-
ditional medicine, who seem to be sending Dr. Jepson a death threat. There's
nothing like the prompt introduction of a half-devoured human carcass to set a
story rolling, and even the somewhat loose plotting cannot stall the urgent, page-
flipping pace. Taylor has his YA audience pegged, and even reluctant readers will
be hot on Ben's tracks as he risks limb, life, and the family business to haul the bad
guys to justice. EB
TCHANA, KATRIN, ad. 
Sense Pass King: A Story from Cameroon; illus. by Trina
Schart Hyman. 
Holiday House, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1577-5 
$16.95 
R 6-10 yrs
Ma'antah, born "in the land of seven villages," manifests her cleverness early in
life: "By the time she was two she could speak the languages of all seven villages
and communicate with animals. When she was three, she could prepare dinner for
her parents." The villagers begin to call her Sense Pass King, "because she had
more sense than even the king." When the king hears of Ma'antah's reputation, he
is not amused, and he eventually brings her to court where he can keep an eye on
her. She becomes his advisor and even accompanies him on a voyage to secure the
young daughter of a rich emperor as his wife. On the way home Ma'antah saves
crew and passengers from a terrible sea serpent, securing the loyalty of the soldiers
and the people, who then drive the king away and make Ma'antah queen. In an
author's note, Tchana states that she heard this tale from her Cameroon husband,
who heard it from his mother. In the traditional tale, Sense Pass King is a boy, but
Tchana "decided to make Sense Pass King a girl, because we already know many
stories about brave and clever little boys but not so many about brave and clever
little girls." Although this change may raise a question about authentic representa-
tion of gender within the culture, Tchana (adapter of The Serpent Slayer and Other
Stories ofStrong Women, BCCB 11/00) has a firm grasp offolkloric structure; the
pace of the tale is quick, and the rise and fall of the action is satisfyingly conclusive.
Hyman's acrylic paintings distinctively articulate the characters (Ma'antah herself
is an arrestingly beautiful child); decorated textiles, carved thrones, and other sce-
nic details additionally define the folkloric world. This is an adventurous tale
similar to Lloyd Alexander's The Fortune Tellers (BCCB 9/92) in tone and images,
and those seeking a well-paced, handsomely illustrated story will be happy to share
this one. JMD
THORNHILL, JAN, ad. 
The Rumor: AJataka Tale from India; ad. and illus. by Jan
Thornhill. 
Firefly/Maple Tree, 2002 
32p
ISBN 1-894379-39-X 
$17.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
A worrywart hare wakes with a start when a ripe mango crashes down "on a crunchy
old palm frond behind the hare. It made such a loud sound she thought it was an
explosion." Convinced the world is breaking up, the hare flees as fast as her legs
will carry her. She panics the other hares with the rumor of the world's destruc-
tion; the hares in turn panic the boars, who panic the deer, who panic the tigers,
who panic the rhinos, until "the huge stampede of animals ran from the brushland
into the open plain, home of the lions." A wise young lion stops the stampede
with a huge roar and the question "Who saw the world breaking up?" Lion and
worrywart hare go back to the grove and discover the fallen mango, whereupon the
lion chides the animals: "Didn't any of you check to see whether or not the world
214 
* THE BULLETIN
was really breaking up?" Thornhill's adaptation of this teaching tale has a fine
cumulative bounce that lends itself nicely to reading or telling aloud. Detailed and
precise, the full-spread and full-page illustrations are faintly reminiscent of the
intricacies of Kashmiri embroidery, the images of flora and fauna surrounded by
decorative frames. The book closes with a specific source note and an explanation
of the contemporary ecological threat to the pictured animals. JMD
WEEKS, SARAH 
Guy Wire. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2002 
138p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029493-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029492-2 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Guy (hero of Regular Guy, BCCB, 7/99; Guy Time, 5/00, and My Guy, 6/01)
returns in this tale of friendship found and almost lost. Middle-schoolers Guy and
his best friend, Buzz, are out riding bikes when Buzz's dart around a blind corner
leads to a collision with a car. During a tense night in the hospital Guy remembers
how, years ago, he blew out his birthday candles, wished for a best friend, and got
Buzz. Not that becoming best friends was easy-second-graders Guy and Buzz
first had to overcome nasty nicknames, buzz cuts, and shrub costumes (designed
by Guy's overly creative mother for a class production of "The Princess and the
Pea"). The flashback setting-in the boys' second-grade past, dealing with sec-
ond-grade problems-makes this title difficult to place within the otherwise chro-
nological series. The humor is less pungent here than in previous tides, and
sometimes the author's adult voice is too evident. Still, the trials of building a
friendship are successfully limned, and Guy's anxiety at his friend's danger is poi-
gnant, even if the frame is contrived. Fans will enjoy seeing the beginnings of the
terrible twosome's buddyhood. JMD
WEISS, M. JERRY, comp. 
Big City Cool: Short Stories about Urban Youth; comp.
by M. Jerry Weiss and Helen S. Weiss. 
Braziller/Persea, 2002 
181p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-89255-278-6 
$8.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
A somewhat programmatic introduction precedes fourteen short stories (over half
published in previous anthologies or collections) spotlighting youthful life in the
big (or small) city. Stories include "Block Party-145th Street Style," by Walter
Dean Myers, "Rules of the Game" by Amy Tan, "Alone and All Together" by
Joseph Geha, "Dead Man Running" by Eugenia Colfer, and others. Each story is
tagged with its location (Boston, San Francisco, Las Vegas, Cleveland, etc.), and
each story is a slice of city life specific to its locale. The stories are varied in terms
of subject matter but they are tonally similar: they tend to be shadowy, dark, or
nihilistic, with the emphasis on endurance rather than epiphany. Although there
are moments of hope, city dwelling is nearly universally seen as problematic and
difficult, a matter of desperate survival rather than living fully. The quality of the
stories themselves is uneven, but the cultural diversity of the characters and au-
thors provides a variety that may make this a useful addition to short-story collec-
tions. JMD
WISNIEWSKI, 
DAVID 
Sumo Mouse; written and illus. by David
Wisniewski. 
Chronicle, 2002 
26p
ISBN 0-8118-3492-1 
$16.95 
R 6-9 yrs
The feline underworld of Tokyo is kidnapping mice to provide the noisy innards
for squeaky toys. Is there no one who can save them? "Above the streets of Tokyo,
JANUARY 2003 
* 215
a bulky shadow leaps . .. Is this some lawless lump in leotards? Or a chubby
champion ofjustice?" Never fear. It's Sumo Mouse, protector of the weak, avenger
of injustice, scourge of feline gangsters everywhere. The lone Sumo Mouse is
triumphant over numerous miscreants, who "fall to his superior technique." Fran-
tic to discover the true identity of the secret Sumo Mouse, the organized-crime
cats decide he must be the champion sumo wrestler Gachinko and plan for the
wrestler's downfall. What they don't know is that it's actually Yama, Gachinko's
wise, mild-mannered barber, who has this secret life. Wisniewski has combined
elements of Mighty Mouse, manga, and Batman comics, and the result is Sumo
Mouse, a "hefty hero" of honorable intentions. The layered cut-paper illustrations
have a controlled vigor (previously hinted at in Shepard's Master Man, BCCB 2/
01) that belies this potentially static medium. A saturated palette of reds, purples,
and golds adds visual intensity to riotous compositions already bursting from their
borders. Endpapers featuring marching band mice chanting a laudatory verse ("If
the earth begins to shake,/ If the sea makes buildings break,/ Don't be filled with
great dismay!/ Sumo Mouse will save the day!") reinforce the Mighty Mouse feel
of the entire enterprise. The combination of cartoon melodrama and technical
virtuosity results in a seriocomic rendering of the age-old battle between good and
evil that will surely touch the good of heart everywhere. A jacket note briefly
mentions the author's research into sumo, "the national sport of Japan." JMD
ZEISES, LARA M. 
Bringing Up the Bones. 
Delacorte, 2002 
213p
ISBN 0-385-73001-2 
$12.95 
R Gr. 9-12
Eighteen-year-old Bridget "stopped believing in happy endings years ago, when
my parents divorced and my mom went psycho and my dad abandoned me and
my boyfriend died." That's somewhat of an overstatement, since the death of the
boyfriend was only months ago, but the subsequent change in her life is monu-
mental. Benji had been her best friend for over seven years, and without him
Bridget struggles to find self-definition, fighting-or, sometimes, not fighting-
to get past the morass of grief and doubt in which Benji's death has left her. At the
heart of this agony is her genuine uncertainty about Benji's feelings for her, since
he had, unbeknownst to his family, broken up with Bridget a short time before his
death. The writing is somewhat overenamored of concrete details of brand and
street names, and there seems to be more announcement of changes in Bridget
than actual change, but this is still an intense and affecting portrait of a young
woman who has completely lost her emotional balance. The book is sympathetic
but authentic in its depiction of Bridget's fragility and defensiveness, and her stern
judgmentality of others is a logical outgrowth of her own self-punishment: even
when she's embarked on what seems to be a successful relationship with another
young man, she feels as if she's betraying Benji. Zeises is particularly good at
conveying Bridget's confusion, her desperate hopefulness to understand more about
her and Benji's relationship, and her failure to realize that such additional under-
standing won't actually make his death easier to bear. This is a nuanced explora-
tion of a complicated character uncertain about her direction, and readers will
breathe a sigh of relief when Bridget finally starts seeing the light at the end of the
tunnel. DS
216 
* THE BULLETIN
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 2002
Ah, the Blue Ribbons process: always familiar, yet always filled with surprises.
This year's proceedings can probably best be summed up in one word: diversity.
Not just in the books, though there's a fair amount there as well, but in the opin-
ions. Through a combination of finesse and argument, we've boiled down those
diverse opinions to this list of books; they've withstood the rigors of the process
and still retained enough magic, humor, general excellence, or all of the above to
remind us hard-bitten souls of the power of this literature. We hope you and your
patrons find these powerful, too.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
PICTURE BOOKS:
Ahlberg, Allan. A BitMore Bert; illus. by Raymond Briggs. Farrar. 2-4 yrs (No-
vember)
Deacon, Alexis. Slow Loris; written and illus. by Alexis Deacon. Kane/Miller. 4-
7 yrs (May)
Kalman, Maira. Fireboat: The Heroic Adventures oftheJohnJ Harvey; written and
illus. by Maira Kalman. Putnam. 5-8 yrs (October)
Karas, G. Brian. Atlantic; written and illus. by G. Brian Karas. Putnam. 6-9 yrs
(April)
Lindgren, Barbro Benny and the Binky; tr. by Elisabeth Kallick Dyssegaard; illus.
by Olof Landstrom. Farrar. 4-7 yrs (May)
McMullan, Kate. I Stink!; illus. by Jim McMullan. Cotler/HarperCollins. 3-7
yrs (June)
Paye, Won-Ldy, ad. Head, Body, Legs: A Storyfrom Liberia; ad. by Won-Ldy Paye
and Margaret H. Lippert; illus. by Julie Paschkis. Holt. 4-8 yrs (May)
Raschka, Chris. John Coltrane's Giant Steps; written and illus. by Chris Raschka.
Jackson/Atheneum. 6-10 yrs (September)
Vyner, Tim. World Team; written and illus. by Tim Vyner. Roaring Brook. 5-8
yrs (May)
JANUARY 2003 
* 217
FICTION:
Anderson, M. T. Feed. Candlewick. Gr. 7-12 (November)
Bang-Campbell, Monika. Little Rat Sets Sail; illus. by Molly Bang. Harcourt.
Gr. 2-3 (May)
Cohn, Rachel. Gingerbread. Simon. Gr. 9-12 (April)
Couloumbis, Audrey. Say Yes. Putnam. Gr. 5-8 (July/August)
Gaiman, Neil. Coraline; illus. by Dave McKean. HarperCollins. Gr. 4-7 (No-
vember)
Gantos, Jack. What WouldJoey Do? Farrar. Gr. 5-7 (November)
Koertge, Ron. Stoner and Spaz. Candlewick. Gr. 9-12 (March)
McKay, Hilary. Saffy'sAngel. McElderry. Gr. 5-8 (May)
Meyer, L. A. Bloody Jack: Being an Account of Curious Adventures ofMary "Jacky"
Faber, Ship's Boy. Harcourt. Gr. 7-10 (December)
Mills, Claudia. 7x 9= Trouble!; illus. by G. Brian Karas. Farrar. Gr. 2-4 (April)
Myers, Walter Dean. Patrol An American Soldier in Vietnam; illus. by Ann
Grifalconi. HarperCollins. Gr. 3-8 (May)
Watts, Julia. FindingH. F. Alyson, 2001. Gr. 7-12 (January)
Wells, Rosemary. Timothy's Tales from Hilltop School; written and illus. by Rose-
mary Wells. Viking. 5-8 yrs (October)
NONFICTION:
Burg, Brad. Outside the Lines: Poetry at Play; illus. by Rebecca Gibbon. Putnam.
Gr. 2-5 (April)
Fleischman, John. Phineas Gage: A Gruesome but True Story about Brain Science.
Houghton. Gr. 4-9 (May)
Gantos, Jack. Hole in My Life. Farrar. Gr. 9 up (May)
Greenberg, Jan. Action Jackson; written by Jan Greenberg and Sandra Jordan;
illus. by Robert Andrew Parker. Roaring Brook. Gr. 3-6 (November)
Harris, Robie H. Hello Benny!: What It's Like to Be a Baby; illus. by Michael
Emberley. McElderry. 4-7 yrs (November)
Jacobsen, Ruth. Rescued Images; written and illus. by Ruth Jacobsen. Mikaya,
2001. Gr. 6 up (February)
Kerley, Barbara. A CoolDrink of Water. National Geographic. 4-10 yrs (Septem-
ber)
Old, Wendie. To Fly: The Story of the Wright Brothers; illus. by Robert Andrew
Parker. Clarion. Gr. 3-5 (November)
Partridge, Elizabeth. This Land Was Made for You and Me: The Life r Songs of
Woody Guthrie. Viking. Gr. 7 up (July/August)
Philbrick, Nathaniel. Revenge of the Whale: The True Story of the Whaleship Essex.
Putnam. Gr. 8-12 (November)
Walker, Sally M. Fossil Fish Found Alive: Discovering the Coelacanth; illus. by
Laura Westlund and with photographs. Carolrhoda. Gr. 4-9 (April)
218 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Accidents-fiction: Weeks
Adoption-stories: Okimoto
ADVENTURE: Alexander; Blacker;
Cadnum; Chabon; Taylor
Africa: Reef
African Americans: Boling; Grimes;
Reef
African Americans-fiction:
McDonald
African Americans-stories: Hartfield
Aliens-fiction: Blacker
Angels-fiction: Blacker
Anger-fiction: Lynch
Animals: Fanelli; King-Smith; Sayre
Animals-stories: Erdrich; Thornhill
Anthropology: Flieger
Art appreciation: Aiken
Art history: Rubin
Artists-stories: Hartfield
Aviation: Grimes
Babies-stories: Gregory
BABY BOOKS: Johnson
Babysitters and babysitting-stories:
Gregory; Hershenhorn
Baseball-fiction: Chabon
Bears-stories: Ordal
BEDTIME STORIES: Bergman;
Ordal
BIOGRAPHIES: Carpenter;
Grimes; Rubin; Stanley
Biology: Sayre
Brothers-fiction: Griffin
Cameroon-stories: Tchana
Camps and camping-fiction:
Clements
Cats-stories: McClure
Child care-fiction: Cannon
Clothing-fiction: Briggs
Contests-stories: Munsch
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Alexander; Caletti; Griffin;
Naylor; Taylor
Crusades: Stanley
Dancers and dancing: Rubin
Dancers and dancing-fiction: Porter
Death-fiction: Griffin; Zeises
Disasters-fiction: Naylor
Dogs-fiction: Ferreira
Dragons-fiction: Carus
Emotions: Morrison
Emotions-stories: Smith
Ethics and values: Cooper; Doyle;
Ferreira; Lynch; Naylor; Taylor
Fairies-fiction: Flieger
Families-fiction: Griffin
Families-stories: Okimoto
FANTASY: Black; Blacker; Carus;
Chabon; Feiffer; Fiedler; Flieger;
Hanley
Farms and farming: King-Smith
Farms and farming-fiction: Doyle
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Caletti; Moranville; Naylor;
Porter
Fathers and sons-fiction: Doyle;
Lynch
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Aiken; Bible; Craft; Cummings;
Erdrich; Sierra; Tchana;
Thornhill
Food and eating-stories:
Hershenhorn; Munsch; Smith
Friends and friendship-fiction:
Ferreira; Garden; Weeks; Zeises
JANUARY 2003 
* 
219
Friends and friendship-stories:
Ordal
Gangs-fiction: Griffin
Gender roles-fiction: Garden
Geography: Berry
Grandmothers-fiction: Greene
Health: Marrin
Heroes-stories: Wisniewski
HISTORICAL FICTION: Byars;
Cadnum; Cannon; Ellis; Fiedler;
Moranville
History, U.S.: Cooper; Reef
History, world: Marrin; Reef;
Stanley
Holidays: Boling
HUMOR: Briggs; Cummings;
Munsch; Weeks; Wisniewski
Hunters and hunting-fiction: Taylor
Illness: Marrin
Illness-fiction: Ellis
Illness-stories: Hershenhorn
Immigration: Reef
Japanese Americans: Cooper
Kidnapping-fiction: Alexander
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Cadnum
Language arts: Boling
Literature, children's: Carpenter;
King-Smith
Literature, English: Fiedler
Love-fiction: Zeises
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Alexander; Hanley
Medieval life-fiction: Cadnum
Mice-stories: Wisniewski
Middle East: Stanley
Monsters: Fanelli
Murder-fiction: Caletti
Music and musicians-fiction: Ellis;
Griffin
Mythology, classical: Fanelli
Native Americans-folklore: Erdrich
Nature study: Sayre
Neighbors-stories: Feiffer;
Hershenhorn
Pigs-fiction: Flieger
POETRY: Berry; Grimes
Prejudice-fiction: Ferreira
Princesses-stories: Craft; 0rdal
Racism-fiction: Ferreira
Reading aloud: Berry; Carus; Sierra
Reading, easy: Byars; Greene;
Maitland
Reading, family: Bible
Reading, reluctant: Briggs; Craft;
Fanelli; Grimes; Taylor
Religious education: Bible; Cannon
Religious life-fiction: Ellis
RHYMING STORIES: Jackson;
Smith
Ritual-fiction: Flieger
Romance-fiction: Black; Jackson;
Maitland; Zeises
Rural life-fiction: Moranville
School-fiction: Clements
Science: Marrin; Sayre
Seasons: Boling
Sexuality-fiction: Garden
SHORT STORIES: Carus; Weiss
Sisters-fiction: Byars; Porter
Sisters-stories: Gregory
Slaves-fiction: Hanley
Snow-stories: Schertle
Sound: Sayre
South Africa-fiction: Ferreira
Stepfamilies-fiction: Greene
Stepmothers-stories: Aiken
Storytelling: Sierra; Thornhill
Storytime: Bergman; Bible; Gregory;
McClure; Munsch; Schertle;
Thornhill; Wisniewski
SUSPENSE: Alexander
Teachers-fiction: Clements
Tricksters-stories: Cummings
Uncles-stories: Hartfield
Urban life-fiction: Black; Weiss
Urban life-stories: Hartfield
Valentine's Day: Jackson; Maitland
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Alexander; Moranville
Voyages and travel-stories: Bible;
Okimoto
Weather-fiction: Naylor
Weather-stories: Schertle
Women's studies: Grimes
Work-fiction: McDonald
World cultures: Berry
World War II: Cooper
Writers and writing: Carpenter;
King-Smith
Writers and writing-fiction: Byars
"-* "In this laugh out-loud novel, a young
teen on the fast track to the juvenile detention
center suddenly finds himself living in
rural North Carolina with the outrageously
eccentric Applewhite clan.... This has terrific
booktalk and read-aloud potential, and will
help fill the need for humorous contemporary
fiction." -Starred review / School Library Journal
"
s- "Clever, clever. Tolan has pulled off
something special here. She takes a rather
predictable plot (tough kid is tamed by
exposure to a good family), and twists it into
a screwball comedy that pushes the story to a
whole new place." -Starred review / ALA Booklist
Ages 10 up. $15.99 Tr (0-06-623602-9);
-
$17.89 Lb (0-06-623603-7)
Keep Up
with the
Latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas
and activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Children's Books * Teaching in the Library * Plus...
The Parent Connection * Interviews with Children's Book Authors
and Illustrators * Science * Technology and MORE!
If you decide to subscribe,
you'll get one full year
(7 more issues) for just
$12.50. That's 47% off the
regular rate of $23.97 per
year. If you decide not to
subscribe, just return the
Invoice marked "cancel"
and owe nothing.
Don't miss this valuable resource for your library!
I
Ils~
IP11 
IPl 
p% 
Iba 
I1II 
IDI 
· IL 
II1I 
11 
111 
11
FC!,EEI Tria s
call800678879
m 
mentIo^fficode 5
'" 
"Five years after a
catastrophic virus has apparently
killed all the adults, seven children
live as a family in a small Florida
town; none of them remembers
much about the Before Time....
[Set in 2007, this] exciting survival
tale will mesmerize readers."
( 
-Starred 
review I ALA Booklist
Ages 12 up. $15.95 Tr (0-06-008048-5)
$15.89 Lb (0-06-029411-6)
I/ 
"Maintains and even
intensifies the unrelenting
momentum of The Kindling. As
the intrepid young survivors travel
toward Washington, D.C., they
encounter their first grown-ups....
Guaranteed to leave readers anxious
for the final volume.'"
-Starred 
review / ALA Booklist
Ages 12 up. $15.99 Tr (0-06-008049-3)
$17.89 Lb (0-06-029412-4)
FiFiwe-,ie .The 
Kiln
will be published in April 2003.
I
Harpcr olhiisCbIldreiisBooks
L 
K VOILIC Of thC,\111C6CXS, 'NCNN )ork, N) I::],) - \% \N \\,11,11-1)cl-cllll(ll-clis.collI
1
ISBN 0-87845-105-6;
Number 39; 143 pages;
paper; $21.95*
STORY FROM FmELACE TO CYBERSPACE
Connecting Children and Narrative
EDITED BY BETSY HEARNE,JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINEJENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget
that children are not simply passive receptacles for
whatever treasure or trash the adult world throws at
them but are lively agents who are continually inter-
acting with their environment. Children actively cre-
ate meaning as readers, viewers, and listeners. The
39 th Allerton Park Institute papers emphasize the criti-
cal need to connect children and narrative as a way to
affect their development as listeners, readers, view-
ers, and evaluators of literature-and information in
all forms.
The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSOr
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin Storytelling Review con-
tains:
* 162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
* Price, distributor, and grade level information for
each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use
ISBN 
0-87845-106-4; 
99
pages; paper; $14.95*
Fý 
Availablefrom the 
-I
Graduate Scbool qfLibraty & Information Science
Publications Office 
I
sclldordcr"to: GSITI, Puhk(ýitionsothcc, Poom 2,L ý01 L [),triicl Stieet.(:han1f);1ign, [1,
01820,
(p"]\ abic to tile 1:11iNvrým ()fl11it1oiS),1Lk cpled,
111101-tilation 1 cgýlr(ling ollicr pllhlicmiolls cml he oht'lilwd hý ýý rilim, to tile .1hove
ýIddtvss orcan hk, 
At Otit' Wd) ýiW: 11t1l):
I w tii-ýt N)ok. ',I I oi (,j( I i ýtdd it i ()[),I I hook ]I I I I )c ýýl I I w onlcl-. ( )tj I ýidc ol t lit ý t:tlil ed slatc'.
I]w 
(("ýt i, ýý, fol 111c 1*irýl 
hoýik. ', 1,ý() i0i eadi ýOdjiionýfl N)()k ii) Hic 
ordcl.
(\Xc 'llip F()t11111 Claý, hhlý11\ k.11c')
Universi
1325 Sol
Champa
U.S.A.
ADDRESS
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2002 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. 
Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccb/
2. When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and pass-
word. This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit
number but may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only
individual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
"
Universin
1325 Sou
Champail
U.S.A.
ADDRESS S
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street 
PERIODICALS
Champaign, IL 61820 
POSTAGE
U.S.A. 
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
·1~ ~ I "i;·
C
ALS
;NIL
~~ · i"-·
III0008-9036
0008-9036(200301)56:5; 1-1
&| 
4 
ay 
^*.·-
1
III IlllllmBIIWliBU
0008-9036(200301)56:5;1-1
~ii~ 
i~--
~dr 
~as"*
;·; 
r··
$~:-
