ILLINOIS
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
ibrary and Infomation Science
- eg
A__.;. 
__
Books 
make 
great
gifts, 
but 
pick-
ing the perfect books for your
favorite youngsters can be daunt-
ing. Let the expert staff of The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books help you navigate the book-
store wilderness full of shiny new children's
books.
Updated and expanded from last year's edi-
tion, the Guide Book to Gift Books contains
annotations of the best books for giving (and
receiving) and is available as a downloadable
PDF file that you can print out and use for
every holiday, birthday, or other gift-giving
occasion on your calendar this year.
Listed books have all been recommended in
full Bulletin reviews from the last three years
and are verified as currently in print. Entries
are divided into age groups and include
author, title, publisher, and the current list
price.
To purchase, go to:
www.lis.uiuc.edu/giftbooks/
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
March 2005
Vol. 58 No. 7
A LOOK INSIDE
279 THE BIG PICTURE
That New Animal by Emily Jenkins; illus. by Pierre Pratt
280 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
282 * Girls in Pants: The Third Summer of the Sisterhood by Ann Brashares
290 * First Crossing: Stories about Teen Immigrants ed. by Donald R. Gallo
292 * At Jerusalem's Gate: Poems ofEaster by Nikki Grimes; illus. by David
Frampton
303 * The Secret Seder by Doreen Rappaport; illus. by Emily Arnold McCully
310 * Far Traveler by Rebecca Tingle
316 
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 2005
318 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Hope Morrison, Assistant Editor (HM)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Timnah Card, Reviewer (TC)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Krista Hutley
Maggie Hommel
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $75.00; multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each
additional; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $7.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box
1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2005 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Pierre Pratt from That New Animal ©2005. Used by permission of Frances
Foster/Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
MARCH 2005 
* 279
THE BIG PICTURE
That New Animal
by Emily Jenkins; illustrated by Pierre Pratt
Publishing is a mysterious thing, especially in its tendency to produce several books
on a similar and apparently random theme in a short period of time. One recent
example is the picture-book plot wherein a household's animals respond to the
arrival of a new baby, seen in Rosen's Howler (BCCB 5/04) and MacLachlan's
Bittle (9/04), and which appears now in its most witty and yet sympathetic form
in Jenkins and Pratt's That New Animal.
The popularity of the concept is understandable, since it's a way of speak-
ing straightforwardly yet with tactful obliqueness about the dethronement anxiety
of a kid faced with a new sibling, and the pet's-eye view of the world provides
additional charm. These classic appeals receive sparkling, sure-handed treatment
from Jenkins, who is quietly making a career, with books such as Five Creatures
(BCCB 2/01) and Daffodil (7/04), as one of the freshest, most evocative, and most
accessible picture-book writers of family life. Her text here is a deceptively simple
present-tense narrative sculpted down into plainspoken essentials familiar to any-
body who's ever seen their family life altered by a new arrival.
In this case, the main victims of upheaval are Marshmallow, a plump
white pooch, and FudgeFudge, a slightly trimmer brown mutt, and they know the
new animal is trouble right from the start. Despite the fact that it doesn't smell
like a proper dog, it's given FudgeFudge's place on the sofa, and Marshmallow's
pleas for a tummy rub are ignored in favor of its coos. Fairness has gone out the
window: when the dogs make noise, they're disciplined, but everybody comes
running at the new animal's cries. Marshmallow does his best to curb the resentful
FudgeFudge (refusing even to let her "bite it a LITTLE bit"), but even he finally
loses his cool and pees all over the carpet, only to receive the stern reproof "You're
a big dog.... What's the matter with you?" It's another matter, however, when a
strange Grandpa arrives and tries to pick up the new animal; FudgeFudge and
Marshmallow fend him off, declaring, "It's not his new animal to go picking up
whenever he feels like it. It's our animal."
Pratt's paintings are suffused with warm tones and furry-textured brush-
strokes that comfort evenduring the dogs' anxious moments. Not only do baby
and dogs tend to operate on the same visual plane while the adults have their heads
in the clouds, there's a stealthy statement in the characters' drafting-the big,
bulbous baby (with a classic little-old-man facies) is shaped more like the rotund
dogs than his angularly linear parents-that emphasizes the close connection be-
tween baby and pups. The compositions are wisely pared down, ensuring they
don't overpowerJenkins' text, and the canines are comic in their cheerful blockiness
but not visually anthropomorphized: their routing of a dejected Grandpa with
280 
* THE BULLETIN
their stiff-tailed barking is authentically doggy even as it dovetails neatly with the
plot.
The book's unerring identification of the sore spots of dethronement-
changing standards, attention drought, physical displacement-will definitely strike
chords of recognition in young audiences, and the naturalness of the canine im-
pulse for bad behavior in response makes it a superb correlative for sibling resent-
ment. Even the dogs' eventual acceptance of the new kid is couched in realistically
primal terms that put possession ("It is our new animal to hate as much as we want
to") before affection ("And to like, just a little bit"). Yet there's nothing in the
rueful and understanding humor that prevents this from being a generally funny
story about dogs, even as there's everything in it that allows it to be a reassuring
story about family change. (Imprint information appears on p. 295.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANDERSEN, HANS CHRISTIAN 
The Pea Blossom; ad. and illus. by Amy Lowry
Poole. 
Holiday House, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1864-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
As the sun shines down and the summer rains fall, life starts to get mighty crowded
for five peas growing together in a pod in a Chinese garden. Four of the five dream
of something better (one wishes to fly to the sun, one to the moon, and two long to
dine with the emperor), but the smallest pea "was content to wait" and let destiny
play its course. Inevitably, destiny arrives, disguised as a young boy with a peashooter
who sends the first four peas to most unglamorous ends (they all get eaten-though
the third and fourth do get eaten by the emperor) while the fifth pea lands on the
windowsill of a sick young girl "who could neither live nor die." After a long
winter, the fifth pea, warmed by moss, blooms into a climbing vine of leaves and
pods; the girl joyfully watches as the plant grows taller and taller, and, inspired by
its growth, she experiences a simultaneous improvement in her own health. This
Hans Christian Andersen retelling is set near Beijing, a nod to the adapter/
illustrator's experience studying with artists in China's capital. Mottled planes of
green and brown contrast with the delicate tracery of lines, even as the lines them-
selves evince an informal, hand-hewn effect; the textured rice paper lends organic
earthiness to the story. The highly caricatured faces of the peas and insects sprinkled
throughout the pages are cartoonlike in their composition, an element that, while
somewhat at odds with the otherwise naturalistic images, furthers the story's gentle
humor. Pair this with Andersen's "The Princess and the Pea" for alternative takes
on the tiniest of peas making all the difference. A note offering biographical infor-
MARCH 2005 
* 281
mation on Andersen and linking Poole's interest in China to her adaptation is
included. HM
BANERJEE, ANJALI 
Maya Running. Lamb, 2005 
209p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90893-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74656-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Middle-schooler Maya Mukherjee is the daughter of an Indian father and a half-
Indian, half-British mother, and in 1970s Canada this makes her an outsider with
a feeling of enormous vacancy: "For rent, for lease, room inside Maya." When her
glamorous cousin Pinky comes over from the subcontinent for a visit, Maya bor-
rows Pinky's statue of Ganesh, the Hindu elephant god, and slowly begins to re-
veal her insecurities and deepest longings to the "Remover of Obstacles"; to her
complete shock, the statue comes to life and grants every one of her wishes. This
eloquently composed "Be careful what you wish for" tale provides a winning bal-
ance of identity fiction and fantasy. Maya's internal monologue is insightfully
written, and the poignancy of her pubescent longings gone awry (her parents com-
pletely lose their identity as they robotically do whatever Maya wants them to do,
and her dream boy becomes stalker-like in his devotions) speaks silent volumes to
readers. Banerjee's is a promising new voice on the middle-grades literature scene,
and this is a compelling and imaginative examination of being caught between
worlds and of learning to accept the beauty of life's flaws and challenges. HM
BASKIN, NORA RALEIGH 
Basketball (Or Something Like It). 
HarperCollins,
2005 
166p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-059611-2 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-059610-4 
$15.99 
R Gr. 4-7
Irate fans, a revolving door of dissatisfied and underperforming coaches, charges of
nepotism, pressure for superhuman feats from players. NBA? College hoops?
No, it's the sixth-grade basketball travel team, and for a handful of featured players
on the North Bridge team, much of the fun of the game has long been under-
mined by their parents. Michael and Hank have fathers who live vicariously through
their sons' sports achievements; Nathan's father wants his black son to find success
in an arena other than sports. Truly talented Jeremy has been abandoned by his
father, and the grandmother who took him in is supportive but pretty ignorant of
the game's importance to the troubled kid; Anabel, Michael's sister, is a skillful
shooter who is totally overlooked by her son-centered parents. Cynicism runs
deep, and Baskin takes on everything from overequipped, overtrained grade school-
ers ("It was a typical, suburban, elitist sports rivalry. Let the better team buy the
win") to parent coaches who promote their own kids while benching the talent.
She ends on a hopeful note as the kids rally to support one other and a couple of
parents actually open their eyes to their sons' integrity, but the adult drama in the
bleachers, parking lot, and parent meetings leaves a bitter, authentic taste that
lingers past the sweetened conclusion. EB
BLACKER, TERENCE 
Boy2Girl. Farrar, 2005 
[29 6 p]
ISBN 0-374-30926-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-10
The quiet English household of the Burtons is disrupted when Mrs. Burton's sister
dies and her American son, Sam Lopez, comes to stay. The Burtons' son, Mat-
282 
* 
THE BULLETIN
thew, finds his tough-talking yet diminutive cousin a disruptive annoyance, and he
and his friends come up with a dare to humble Sam: he must pass his first week at
Matthew's school as a girl. Sam uses his female status to slyly befriend the girls
who consider Matthew's group of friends their sworn enemies, and then when
Sam's criminal father comes looking for Sam (and a share of Sam's inheritance),
Sam's female guise becomes essential. The gender-bending plot may echo stan-
dards such as Tootsie or Victor/Victoria, but it unfortunately doesn't go anywhere
interesting or comedic: suggestions that it's changing Sam's outlook are never
really explored, and his transgendered dealings with boys and girls are largely pre-
dictable. The multiple narrative voices are either bland or broadly caricatured, and
the events and Sam's effect on people have little believability in their own right. In
a farce, those drawbacks might be overlooked, but the book never establishes the
necessary pace for farce, and injections of earnestness (Sam's out-of-nowhere set
pieces of self-understanding and familial advice, for instance) further muddy the
point of the book. Ultimately, the wacky hijinks, heavy-handed touches, and ab-
sence of internal logic or believable characterization recall superficial kid-aimed
TV movies; diehard fans of such antics may therefore pursue this to the bitter end,
but they'd be better off renting Some Like It Hot. DS
BOLDEN, TONYA 
Maritcha: A Nineteenth-Century American Girl. Abrams,
2005 
48p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8109-5045-6 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Although the subtitle may conjure visions of Pleasant Company dolls-and surely
one can expect overlap between American Girls fans and Bolden's readers-this
title is based on the memoirs of Maritcha Lyons, the daughter of free African-
American parents. Maritcha witnessed events that regularly find their way into
fiction: her parents' New York boarding house was an active station on the Under-
ground Railroad and her home was attacked during the Draft Riots of 1863.
Maritcha, however, made waves of her own, arguing before the Rhode Island leg-
islature for admission to segregated Providence High and graduating, by her own
account, as "one of the foremost of the [class] leaders." Bolden does her best to
plug the gaps in Lyons' adult recollections with musings on games she might have
played, chores she might have done, pastimes she might have pursued with parents
and siblings, and her gallery of documents, realia, and period artwork is well cho-
sen to visually reconstruct the milieu in which Maritcha grew up. What Bolden
does not quite overcome, though, is the detached, formal tone of an adult subject
who offers her memories as object lessons in achieving a successful life, and readers
carry away a clearer picture of events than character. Information books on the
experiences of the free black population of the antebellum United States are not
easy to come by, and Bolden's well-documented offering therefore makes a valu-
able contribution. EB
BRASHARES, ANN 
Girls in Pants: The Third Summer ofthe Sisterhood. Delacorte,
2005 
338p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90919-5 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72935-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Unwashed, uncuffed, and unbelted according to "the rules," the mystical jeans are
back in summer circulation, ready to inspire and document milestones in the lives
of their collective owners. Tibby, Carmen, Bridget (Bee), and Lena have blustered
MARCH 2005 
* 283
their way through high-school commencement and stand at the threshold of col-
lege with duffels full of second thoughts and mixed emotions. Lena's father is
outraged at his little girl's figure drawing (nude figure drawing, that is) summer
class and pulls the plug on her finances for Rhode Island School of Design, so now
it's up to her to win scholarship money on her own. Carmen's mother and stepfa-
ther are expecting a baby, and Carmen is reluctant to leave home for school in
Massachusetts, fearful of losing her place in her tenuous new family. Bee is off to
soccer camp and an unsought reunion with the counselor she rashly seduced at
sixteen (see The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants, BCCB 12/01). Tibby, who
trembles the most at impending change, learns some life lessons from her three-
year-old sister and finds romance with an old-friend-turned-hunk. With the focus
returned squarely to daughters rather than mothers, the signature cascade of story
fragments flowing into a unified whole, and the heightened aura of raw emotion
endemic to the "last summer" theme, the Pants set will bruise their fingertips on
this page-turner. Whether the pants ritual has come to an end at the final sob-
inducing scene at Rehoboth Beach is, of course, for the friends and their creator
(and her publisher?) to decide, but fans who share the girls' separation anxiety had
better keep a box of tissues close at hand. EB
BRYANT, JEN 
Georgia's Bones; illus. by Bethanne Andersen. 
Eerdmans,
2005 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-8028-5217-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
The Georgia of the title is artist Georgia O'Keeffe (though her last name is never
given in the text), and this spare narrative follows her creative growth from her
childhood to her vision-changing encounter with the New Mexico landscape. The
quietly lyrical text focuses especially on O'Keeffe's fascination with shape, from
the roundness of doughnut holes to square city windows, from the spiral of sea-
shells to the organic irregularity of animal bones. The text isn't as deft as Winter's
Georgia (BCCB 11/98) at tucking in broader details of an artistic life, and it ends
abruptly, lacking a tangible finish point. The simple and accessible prose is none-
theless effective in evoking a particular way of looking at the world, and there's an
implicit encouragement for audiences to reexamine their own daily milieux.
Andersen makes every image a full-bleed double-page spread, giving a landscape
flavor even to still-life subjects. The O'Keeffe-style realism doesn't always blend
well with the interpretative textures that dominate the art, but the illustrations
manage to convey the drama of O'Keeffe's subjects as well as the vistas that sur-
rounded her. Useful for introducing youngsters to the notion of artistic vision,
this could also make a readalone companion to Winter's biography. DS
BUSTARD, 
ANNE 
Buddy: 
The Story of Buddy Holly; illus. by Kurt
Cyrus. 
Wiseman/Simon, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-689-86667-4 
$16.95 
Ad 
6-8 yrs
Growing up in a house filled with music in the Great Depression, Charles Hardin
(Buddy) Holley loved to play, loved to sing, but loved a lot of other kid activities
just as well. It wasn't until sixth grade that a guitar riveted his ambitions and
country singers, bluesmen, and nascent rockers influenced his musical direction.
By high school he was on local radio, after graduation he hit Nashville, at twenty-
one he topped the Billboard chart, and, of course, a year later he was gone. Bus-
284 
* THE BULLETIN
tard rolls the story along with a litany of folksy ejaculations of "Whoo-de-doo,"
"Hot-diggity," and "Yeehaw," but she doesn't do much to explain how a poor
family equipped their talented son, how he hooked up with the Crickets, or how
he captured the attention of promoters. An endnote fills in some blanks, particu-
larly the altered spelling of his last name, the names of band members, and a list of
hit titles; websites for further information are included along with a brief bibliog-
raphy. Cyrus' watercolors are imaginative and energetic, with musical clefs sway-
ing in the grass, a six-string bursting literally into his life, background textures that
comprise writhing rock 'n' rollers, and a winning caricature of the broad-jawed,
black-spectacled man himself. None of this will mean much to the picture-book
set without the soundtrack, though, so dig out the forty-fives, roll down your
socks ... Never mind. Just download. EB
BUTCHER, NANCY 
Beauty. 
Simon Pulse, 2005 
[17 6p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-86235-0 
$6.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
As the only child of a murderously vain and envious queen, sixteen-year-old Ana
has safeguarded her own life by becoming as fat and filthy as possible. Still, her
mother, Veda, decides to take no chances; when she organizes a special school for
promising young ladies (i.e., any young woman with the potential to outshine
her), she sends Ana along. While Ana is at school, her long-buried desire to look
her best begins to surface, and she cleans herself up just as the school's headmaster,
Andreas, starts to administer the highly addictive poison that Queen Veda has
prepared to take out her rivals. Modern vocabulary mixes easily with Renaissance
culture and technology in this modern fairy tale, and themes of revenge, lust, and
betrayal will appeal to fans of reality television. Salient details suggest a sensation-
filled world that celebrates beauty as well as demonstrates its dangers. However,
Ana's motivation for finally taking a bath is rather weak, and the heroic tone of the
tale thereafter strains the reader's belief: Ana treks on foot to her mother's castle
(several miles away), where she (still beautiful after the journey) confronts her
mother, who conveniently dies in a fit of fury. This rapid tying-up of loose ends,
reminiscent of many a teen magazine article, may still suit to perfection readers
caught up in the pleasures and hazards of their own self-beautification. TC
CHWAST, SEYMOUR, ad. 
Had Gadya: A Passover Song; ad. and illus. by Seymour
Chwast. 
Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 1-59643-033-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
"Had Gadya," a folk song often sung at the end of the Passover Seder, tells a
cumulative story that begins with a man's purchase of a goat. In the tradition of
chain folk stories, the cat eats the goat, the dog chases the cat, the stick beats the
dog, and so on. The story turns dark when the Angel of Death appears, but then
God comes and destroys the Angel of Death. In this illustrated version of the
song, Chwast chooses style and imagery that honor the folk origins of the song and
help curious children see the symbolism of God's deliverance, as the goat and the
unfortunate butcher, both casualties of the chain of events, appear at the feast after
God has destroyed the Angel of Death. Using a naive folk technique and a spring-
time palette of pinks, greens, yellows, and blues, he sets the tale in a traditional
European village where people are preparing for the Seder. He adds touches of
MARCH 2005 
* 285
mnemonic humor by collecting the players on the top of the scene after they have
done their bit, having the goat, the cat, and the dog continue to eye each other a
bit warily. Music is provided, as is an English transliteration of the Aramaic origi-
nal, with suggestions for embellishing the song. The note from Rabbi Michael
Strassfeld explains the song's origin and symbolism and includes critiques from
contemporary Jews. Because the song is meant to arouse the curiosity of children,
the simple yet thorough explanations and interpretations will provide a boon for
parents seeking to help their children understand the relevance of the simple folk
song to the greater mysteries of this important Jewish holy day. KC
CODELL, ESMt RAJI 
Sing a Song of Tuna Fish: Hard-to-Swallow Stories from Fifth
Grade; illus. by LeUyen Pham. 
Hyperion, 2005 
133p
ISBN 0-7868-5509-6 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
In this homespun collection of vignettes and stories, Codell demonstrates how to
turn the events and places of an ordinary childhood into slightly fictionalized mem-
oirs. Each chapter begins with the cozy finger-wagging tag line, "Let me tell you
something about ... " and proceeds with either a story or a set of impressions of
her neighborhood as it was in 1979. She tells of her mother's encouraging her to
egg a car that is illegally parked in their neighborhood, of an alternative school
where there were no rules, of forced piano lessons, of a boy who dies playing a
dangerous street game. She writes like a not-so-old aunt, beginning by warning
her audience that, despite what they might think, they are likely to forget more
than they remember about what it's like to be a kid. Like most "when I was a kid"
yarns, these aren't generally compelling to a readership unfamiliar with the teller
or the events; the stories are, however, somewhat gently interesting, if for no other
reason than that they generate a desire to hold onto and share one's own childhood
stories. This, it seems, is the most likely use for the book-the chapters can serve
as models for students to craft their own creative nonfiction essays, preserving and
shaping the ordinary events of their lives into memories they can dust off in years
to come. KC
COHEN, MIRIAM 
My Big Brother; illus. by Ronald Himler. 
Star Bright,
2005 
[4 0p]
ISBN 1-59572-007-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
A young boy looks up to his admirable big brother, who plays basketball like a star,
reads voraciously, fixes old cars, and dresses up for church on Sunday. There's no
money for college, though, so big brother must leave for the army, taking the
hearts of his little brothers and his mama with him. Older brother has ably filled
the role of father in this single-parent family, including both playing with and
reading to his little brothers, and making sure Mama's wardrobe and culinary
efforts are complimented and appreciated. He expects his little brother to step up
in his absence, becoming for the next brother down what big brother has been for
him, and little brother tries to do just that. Wispy, gray-hazed watercolors add to
the feeling of warm homeyness and affection conveyed by the text; the pictures
evoke both the pride little brother feels at his big brother's side and his aching
sense of loss in his absence. The availability and patience of this older brother
sound an overly idolized and idealized note, however, and Mama seldom escapes
her woman-of-toil-and-sorrows persona, making this a rather cloyingly sentimen-
286 
* THE BULLETIN
tal treatment for contemporary sensibilities. The family tradition of a Sunday
dinner, with the mom clad in a Norman Rockwell-esque apron, knocks the setting
into an ambiguous frame of nostalgic times gone by, whereas other markers, such
as the brother's muscle car being described as "an old car," make the story seem
more modern. The issue, however, is very timely, and this poignant treatment
may help younger siblings of those in harm's way articulate their feelings of sad-
ness and loss. KC
CURLEE, LYNN 
Ballpark: The Story ofAmerica's Baseball Fields; written and illus.
by Lynn Curlee. 
Atheneum, 2005 
48p
ISBN 0-689-86742-5 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Fenway Park and the Astrodome. How could such disparate arenas come to exist
in the same baseball universe? Where did the grass go? Which parks "work" and
which ones don't? How can a club pack 'em through the gates while maintaining
intimacy between fans and field? Curlee reviews the development of ballparks
from the game's inception, through the golden age of urban stadiums, through the
concrete behemoths of the expansion years, and on to such architectural efforts as
Camden Yards to recapture the nineteenth-century mystique in a big business age.
Curlee does not explore individual parks in depth but discusses changes in the
game wrought by war, broadcasting, and population shifts that directly influenced
stadium design. While the text has an easy flow, pictures are disappointing. Curlee's
sleek, static style and chilly palette, which work well with subjects such as air bal-
loons and monumental architecture, are directly at odds with the action-filled,
verdant arenas of summer sport. Other than the helpful inclusion of two diagrams
(one of Fenway and the other of a generic park layout), there's little opportunity
for comparing park details. Scenes of game play are morbidly stiff, with big-name
players barely recognizable and fans behind home plate (inexplicably garbed in
turtlenecks) eerily frozen in the stands. The text will be prime reading for kids
who spend their holidays touring the stadiums, but consult a selection from Curlee's
bibliography-or better still www.ballparks.com-for the pictures. EB
CURRY, JANE LOUISE 
The Black Canary. McElderry, 2005 
[288p]
ISBN 0-689-86478-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old James always feels a bit excluded from his parents' musically pas-
sionate life, and he himself has determinedly suppressed his musical inclinations.
He's annoyed when he's dragged to London for the summer in service of his mother's
European tour, but he's intrigued when he finds a strange shimmery aperture in
the basement of his London residence and discovers it takes him to a very different
landscape. As he undergoes adventures through the supernatural opening, he real-
izes that it's taking him back to Elizabethan London, where his African-American
features draw considerable attention, where he's seized into service for the per-
forming Children of the Chapel Royal, and where, if he can't figure out how to
return through time to his own day, he'll have to stay. There's a perennial allure to
the genre of time-travel fantasy, and Curry's detailed evocation of Elizabethan
London will appeal to history buffs even as her picture of the contemporary city
will draw armchair travelers. The book's plotting, however, is less effective, with
James' problem of aiming his return date inexplicably resolved and the timeslip
itself never really conceptually justified; James' family story is cursory and periph-
MARCH 2005 
* 287
eral compared to the more compelling account ofJames' theatrical apprenticeship
and relationship with his fellow performers. Elizabethan drama fans will therefore
prefer Blackwood's Shakespeare's Scribe (BCCB 10/00) or Anthony Horowitz's
The Devil and His Boy (BCCB 3/00), but timeslip aficionados who enjoyed
Cooper's similarly themed King ofShadows (BCCB 12/99) may nonetheless enjoy
seeing James come to terms with his future as he explores the past. DS
CUTLER, JANE 
Rose andRiley; illus. by Thomas F. Yezerski. 
Farrar, 2005 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-374-36340-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-3
Rose (the fussbudget vole) and Riley (the tranquil groundhog) spend their first
short chapter discovering that there is more than one good way to experience an
afternoon walk in the rain (with umbrella and without). In the following two
chapters, they decide that daily un-birthday parties would become a bore, and they
explore the luxurious possibilities of allowing homemade worry dolls to do all the
worrying. Cutler's narrative is concise and smooth, her descriptions inducing sight,
taste, and touch sensations without taking over for the illustrations. Yezerski's
line-and-watercolor art displays a delicate clouding of earthy colors that gives the
images a gentle, pensive air, and Rose's and Riley's wide faces and tiny eyes topped
with wisps of eyebrows contribute to the innocent appeal. The distinction be-
tween Rose's sticklike arms and tiny, round body and Riley's burly frame and
bulky stomach lends a poignancy to their friendship, within which both partici-
pants are accepted and appreciated (though strong-minded Rose is most definitely
in the driver's seat). Though the last two stories end with a wink rather than a
punchline, the warmth of the relationship makes rereading worthwhile. TC
DEMI Mother Teresa; written and illus. by Demi. 
McElderry, 2005 
40p
ISBN 0-689-86407-8 
$19.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Demi continues her line of biographies of religious figures, turning to the Roman
Catholic nun who, when called to ministry in India, expanded her personal mis-
sion into congregations of religious and lay workers in international service to
rejected and neglected populations. She covers Agnes Bojaxhu's early entry into
the convent as Sister Mary Teresa of the Child Jesus, her "call within a call" to
serve India's outcasts, her founding of the Missionaries of Charity, and, of course,
details of her multitudinous ministries. Demi's ornate illustration style, replete
with filigreed borders and gold accent, might have left the plain-living sister be-
mused, but the contrast between bright street colors and austere interiors are often
effective. This outline of an eventful life omits both foot-dragging within the
Church and resistance by some of the non-Christian population among whom
Mother Teresa worked, thereby ignoring the possibility that the miraculousness of
her achievement sprang as much from her ability to loosen tight pursestrings and
muster broad support from creaky bureaucracies as from personal accomplish-
ments. Demi performs her own great service, however, by evaluating Mother
Teresa's ministry in Teresa's own terms, suggesting that by caring for the poor,
one directly cares for Jesus himself, a nuance that more secular biographies often
downplay as simple philanthropy. A list of Mother Teresa's international awards
is included, as is an account of current efforts to promote her cause for canoniza-
tion. EB
288 
* THE BULLETIN
DHAMI, NARINDER 
BollywoodBabes. Delacorte, 2005 
[17 6 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90215-8 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73178-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
British teen Amber Dhillon is known for her crazy ideas-every time she gets that
look in her eye, her sisters Geena and Jazz know that trouble is ahead. Then
Amber invites former Bollywood superstar Molly Mahal, now living in dire pov-
erty after a washed-up career, to stay with her family until she can get on her feet.
Amber's motive? To convince Molly to attend her school's Bollywood fundraising
gala, an event being organized by her aunt. Predictably, Molly turns the sisters'
lives upside-down, overtaking their apartment and flirting with both their recently
widowed father and Amber's teacher who, until Molly's arrival, had been sweet on
the girls' aunt. While the premise of the tale is wildly unbelievable, there's plea-
sure in the madcap plotting and episodic movement of the story. The details
unravel with cinematic timing, and key comedic elements (overheard conversa-
tions, miscommunication) work to great effect in developing the humor of the
tale. Unfortunately, the characterizations do not live up to the plot: Amber is the
most believably portrayed while the others simply fill the requisite roles (starstruck
teacher, neighborhood gossip, adoring young girl) to make the story move along.
A weak ending assumes intimacies where none have been developed and provides
a tidy conclusion that returns everyone's lives to normal. Still, the idea of a movie
star living under your roof has lots oftween appeal, and the hilarity of the episodes
surrounding Molly's chaotic stay make for a giddy if fluffy read. HM
DUNCAN, ALICE FAYE 
Honey Baby Sugar Child; illus. by Susan Keeter. 
Simon,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84678-9 
$15.95 
R 
1-3 yrs
In this simple prose poem, a mom tells her little boy in conventional and timeless
images how much she loves him and how he brings happiness to her life. Al-
though there's not much narrative thrust beyond the parental cooing, the flowing
black English and repeated stanzas create a natural, easygoing rhythm that is picked
up and amplified in the joyful illustrations. Keeter's warm, rumpled textures cap-
ture the intoxicating sensuality of the mother/child dance; the modeling of the
face is sometimes stiff, and the proportions awkward, but the postures of loving
play, from neck nuzzles to patty-cake to shoulder rides to baby's exploration of his
mom's face with outstretched chubby fingers, are rendered with realistic detail.
The gentle rhythm and saturated palette of rich caramels, turquoise, and purply
blues make this a likely choice for baby-bedtime reading, but this yummy little
offering will no doubt become a lap-cuddling, nose-rubbing, tummy-tickling fa-
vorite for parents and their tots anytime. KC
FEINSTEIN, JOHN 
Last Shot: A Final Four Mystery. 
Knopf, 2005 
251p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93168-6 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83168-1 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Stevie Thomas and Susan Carol Anderson, eighth graders with their sights set on
careers in journalism, have landed awards from the U.S. Basketball Writers Asso-
ciation and a trip to the college Final Four playoffs in New Orleans. Being squired
around by professional sports reporters, garnering intros to broadcasters and coaches,
and reporting under their own bylines should be enough excitement, but an over-
MARCH 2005 
* 
289
heard conversation between a dark-suited man and the University of Minnesota's
star player, Chip Graber, launches them into an investigation of blackmail and
game-fixing. The mystery plot, which involves doctored transcripts that would
negate Chip's (and hence, his team's) eligibility, is convincing, and Stevie and
Susan Carol make a well-balanced, likable team, alternately wielding their legiti-
mate press passes and laying on the dumb-kid act to elbow their way into heavily
guarded hotels and crack open caches of private information. The real fun, though,
is sports journalist Feinstein's thorough knowledge of the backstory to the play-
offs, as he takes readers on a tour of the commercial side of college basketball
where there's big money to be made on the moves of "student athletes." There's
name dropping aplenty as fictional characters rub shoulders with real-life coaches,
journalists, and pundits galore, and college game fans, who are generally underserved
by children's authors, should find this the next best thing to an all-access pass. EB
FISHER, CATHERINE 
The Sphere ofSecrets. 
Greenwillow, 2005 
[38 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-057162-4 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-057161-6 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Bearer-of-the-god Mirany (from The Oracle Betrayed, BCCB 6/04) still feels trapped
in the web of conspiracy that surrounds the Oracle she serves in her ancient Medi-
terranean-style city. Having established his human counterpart, the boy Alexos, as
the Archon who will save his people, Mirany has spent the last three months wait-
ing in vain for some further prompting from the deity. Since then, the corrupt
Speaker-to-the-god and a military general have been conspiring to leak away the
power garnered by the new Archon and retake possession of the Oracle for them-
selves. A petition to the Oracle from a rich nation across the sea for permission to
mine the Mountains of the Moon threatens to upset the plotters' plans, and war is
imminent. The Archon vows to reestablish his people's peace and prosperity through
a ritual journey to the Mountains to find the Well of Souls and return three objects
which were stolen from his mother figure, the Rain Queen, long ago. The Archon's
journey, directed by a map drawn on the silver Sphere of Secrets and fraught with
jealousy among his companions-including Seth, an ambitious assistant archi-
vist-marches in time with Mirany's struggle to maintain her influence (and her
life) among the eight other priestesses who serve the Oracle while the would-be
miners lay siege to the city and chaos reigns within the city walls. The alternation
of perspectives between Mirany and Seth serves the story well, as it not only em-
phasizes the numerous subtle symbols and personal choices that thematically unify
the double tale, but it also makes use of the god's repeated appearances in each
company to develop his often juvenile, sometimes worldly-wise character without
diminishing his uncanniness. Characters and setting in this second installment in
The Oracle Prophecies series are gradually revealed in sophisticated yet unobtru-
sive prose, creating a world and a tale that invite total reader immersion. TC
FLEMING, CANDACE 
LowjiDiscoversAmerica. Schwartz/Atheneum, 2005 
152p
ISBN 0-689-86299-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Nine-year-old Lowji isn't too excited about his family's move from Bombay, In-
dia, to suburban Illinois, but he's doing his best to look for the silver lining. At the
forefront of Lowji's hopes is the possibility of having pets in his new apartment, a
privilege that had been denied him in his urban high-rise. Unfortunately for Lowji,
290 
* THE BULLETIN
the new landlady, Ada Crisp, similarly refuses animals in her three-flat building.
Over the course of this short novel, Lowji convinces "Landlady Crisp" that pets
can help her solve all her problems: a cat can stop the mice problem, a dog can
protect the home from the recent influx of robberies, and goats work well in place
of the broken lawnmower. Predictable chaos ensues as the landlady agrees to Lowji's
menagerie. The first-person narration keeps the youthful perspective firmly in the
forefront, and Lowji's observations on Hamlet, Illinois, are consistent with a kid
point of view. A few eccentric side characters (the bulging man in the Ironman t-
shirt who works at the bowling alley and keeps a pet pig, for one) add color to the
tale; unfortunately, the oversimplified language is choppy at best, and the narrative
flow tends to falter. Events are hinted at in early chapters then abandoned until
much later, a technique that, rather than building intrigue, creates disjunction in
the story. Lowji is, however, an extremely well-meaning and likable kid, and the
upper elementary set willing to forgive the uninspiring storytelling will find friendly
literary company here. HM
GALLO, 
DONALD 
R., 
ed. 
First Crossing: 
Stories about Teen
Immigrants. Candlewick, 2004 
224p
ISBN 0-7636-2249-4 
$16.99 
R Gr. 7-10
The identity issues, first loves, power struggles, and misunderstandings endemic to
being a teen are difficult enough, but some kids have to negotiate an entirely new
homeland on top of them. These stories bring this experience to readers in chal-
lenging and powerful ways. A Palestinian boy wants to play quarterback on a
mostly white team with post-9/11 prejudices, a Venezuelan girl is forced to leave
home and boyfriend due to political unrest, and a Romanian boy is welcomed into
the Goth culture of his high school on the belief that he just may be a vampire. In
such stories, typical teen concerns of peer acceptance and negotiating the identity
nexus are heightened and magnified by the problems of living in a second culture.
The authors in this collection (mostly well-known names, such as Pam Muiioz
Ryan and Lensey Namioka) offer up a complex array of custom and attitudinal
adjustments that crossing cultures entails while they maintain an authentic teen
vision-mostly highlighting the exasperation of having limited power over image
management. They don't shy away from more difficult issues-the bitterness, for
instance, of a Korean adoptee's discovery that her birth family is only interested in
her American parents' wealth, the brutality of high-school boys taking out the
aggressions of their corporately employed fathers on the son of one of their new
Swedish managers, and the terrors of border crossing for a Mexican boy trying to
help his family financially. Each story shows a teen finding the sort of power he or
she needs, whether it be internal mettle, patience, or wry acceptance. The short-
story format and multinational focus make this a boon for second-culture class-
rooms; the frank and edgy honesty makes for a timely read for others directly
familiar with such experiences, and for those welcoming (or not) second-culture
peers into their lives. KC
GEISERT, BONNIE 
Lessons. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2005 
[192p]
ISBN 0-618-47899-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Rachel is excited about her move into fifth grade and about her new baby brother,
but there's a cloud over her family: her father has been sad and distracted ever
MARCH 2005 
* 291
since Matthew's birth. Rachel's mother reveals that he's mourning the family's
first child, a son who died in infancy; a harsh winter meant the baby never made it
to church for baptism before his death, and a hard-line minister consequently
refused to bury the child in consecrated ground. Geisert, who has relied on her
own family experience for this story, draws her picture of 1950s midwestern farm
life with clarity and evocative recall, bringing to life the habits and practices of her
protagonist's close farm family and her schoolmates in their small rural school.
Rachel's father's grief over his late son's spiritual condemnation is an unusual theme,
which will certainly enlighten some young readers. The book is so focused on the
portrayal of Rachel's world, however, that it loses pace, with events passing by in
an unformed blur of detail that rarely elicits sympathy with Rachel's quotidian
dilemmas, and even the information about Rachel's family secret is handed out
briskly and completely, leaving little tension left in the plot. Fans of the Little
House books and similar detail-oriented historical fictions may nonetheless find
the specifics of mid-century farm life absorbing, and the notion of untold past
events may prompt some kids to explore their own family histories. DS
GLEITZMAN, MORRIS 
Toad Heaven. 
Random House, 2005 
193p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92764-6 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82764-1 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Limpy (from ToadRage, BCCB 6/04) is back, and he's on a new mission to "im-
prove the lives of cane toads everywhere." This time his objective is to relocate his
family to the safety of one of Australia's National Parks, a place where all animals,
even cane toads, are protected-or so he thinks. After a somewhat long setup
highlighting the tribe-like tendencies of the community of cane toads and the
suspicious new leadership of the power-mongering Malcolm, Limpy, who is later
joined by his cousin Goliath and sister Charm, sets off to the east. The guiding
details of a virus designed to wipe out cane toads, the questionable motives of
environmentalists in four-wheelers, and the emergence of fire ants as the new hated
species all figure into a plot that escalates to a satisfying ending. Gleitzman has
once again compiled a series of hilarious comedic episodes, some gross (the flota-
tion device powered by flatulence, for one), others more classically comedic (like
when Goliath eats the dragonfly serving on the committee to determine whether
the cane toads can stay in the park-in the middle of the hearing), into a riveting
odyssey tale. As in the previous book, the toad point of view gives the reader a
highly unusual perspective, and Limpy's innocence and determination in the face
of adversity make him wholeheartedly likable. As no reference to Limpy's previ-
ous adventures is made, this is not so much a sequel as an independent story fea-
turing the same cast of characters. Young readers and listeners alike are certain to
welcome this latest delivery from Down Under. HM
GRAFF, SERENA 
Blackwell's Island. Delacorte, 2005 
[19 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90901-2 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74670-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
In New York City in 1914, crooked law enforcers load the workhouse on Blackwell's
Island with juvenile vagrants and anyone else who seems a likely target. Brought
in for the odd monkey-shaped key he's been given by a kindly old man, eleven-
year-old Alex faces down posturing bullies and terrifying ghouls to discover the
292 
* 
THE BULLETIN
secrets of the infamous island and secure the safety of his family. The story builds
up a head of steam within the first few pages and never slows until the epilogue, a
feat that gives readers nearly 200 pages of a rocking, shocking ride complete with
mystery, treasure, lunatics, gangs, the undead, and a phrenology-obsessed, mega-
lomaniacal murderer/kidnapper who will stop at nothing to reclaim the key to his
drowned box of treasure. Those devil-may-care plot twists (accompanied by con-
vincingly gory details) and the hell-for-leather pacing sweep readers through the
body of the book and compensate for the breezy convenience of the ending. Fans
of high-spirited period adventures such as Updale's Montmorency (BCCB 4/04)
and Karr's Skullduggery (4/00) and Bone Dry (10/02) will be drawn in by the sheer
gutsiness of this audacious race for sunken treasure. TC
GRIFFIN, ADELE 
Where I Want to Be. 
Putnam, 2005 
[160p]
ISBN 0-399-23783-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Lily's family has been locked in silent grieving since the death of Lily's older sister,
Jane, in the spring, while Lily herself finds solace in the loving support of her
boyfriend, Caleb. Her narration in present tense, recalling the difficulty of life
with troubled Jane and describing the family's first summer without her, alternates
with a third-person past-tense account that provides Jane's point of view on the
challenge she found daily life and the respite she found with her accepting grand-
parents. The different tenses and viewpoints aren't merely convenient differentia-
tion, they're revealing of the girls' different states: Jane is actually lingering after
her death, clinging to the past and her grandparents (who predeceased her and
who hope to urge her along her way), while Lily remains behind. Lily's narration
in particular is quiet, moving, and personal, evoking the pained combination of
sorrow and anger that occurs when a difficult relationship ends in sudden death
(she's also tortured by the possibility that Jane deliberately walked into the path of
an oncoming car). Jane's tale is effectively complementary rather than contrast-
ing, justifying Lily's frustration with her troubled sister while making Jane sympa-
thetic in her limitations. A tale about complicated sibling relationships as well as
the hard work of moving on after bereavement, this is a tender and nuanced explo-
ration of sisterhood and self. DS
GRIMES, NIKKI 
At Jerusalem's Gate: Poems of Easter; illus. by David
Frampton. 
Eerdmans, 2005 
48p
ISBN 0-8028-5183-5 
$20.00 
R Gr. 5-8
Twenty-two poems trace the events celebrated by Christians as Easter Week, from
Jesus' entry into Jerusalem through his appearance to disciples after the Resurrec-
tion. Each poem is written from the point of view of a participant or witness, and
although Grimes occasionally places a thought-provoking theological insight on
the lips of her characters (Mary, at the foot of the cross, upbraids God, "I'd have
gladly laid him/ unblemished, unbroken/ on the altar, had you asked./ You gave
me some sway/ in his beginning./ Why not his end?"), she never strays far from
orthodoxy. There's a Mel Gibson-esque brutality to her depiction of the Passion,
which tends to direct the collection to a middle-grade audience, although some of
the entries may be accessible to younger readers and listeners. Brief introductions
that head the verses tip Grimes' hand as to personal belief (e.g., in transubstantia-
tion), and there's no trace of revisionism here to mitigate the involvement of
MARCH 2005 
* 293
Caiaphas or Pilate. Frampton supplies a full-page woodcut and spot art for each
poem and tints them in strong earthy tones with touches of layered texturing. The
verse may stumble on a forced rhyme from time to time, but this handsomely
presented collection should win a following among readers seeking deeply reverent
materials for Holy Week. EB
GROSS, PHILIP 
Turn to Stone. 
Dial, 2005 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-8037-3005-5 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Rather than stay with his mother-who refuses to stand up for him-and her
vicious boyfriend, Nick runs away to the nearest city, where he begins to earn his
living in street performance as a living statue. Untrained though he is, Nick catches
the attention ofAntonin, a brilliant human-statue trainer, and he is whisked away
to a secret training academy on a private estate. The best statues are chosen by the
estate owner, a slick and possibly shady businessman called Dom who collects rare
art and artifacts to be sold under the table to immensely rich anonymous buyers.
Suicide, physical abuse, and drug dependency provide the tension in this finely
written, introspective mystery novel, whose bizarre events challenge even the
narrator's belief in reality, while themes of ambition, romantic love, sacrifice, and
cultish fanaticism deepen the plot and round out the characters. Nick's good
intentions and idealism give his teenaged perspective a freshness that contrasts
sharply with the other trainees' singleminded adoration of Antonin and Dom.
The dreaminess of the narrative is heightened at the conclusion, where Nick as
storyteller calls into question the reality of his own escape from the academy, a
narrative strategy that increases the reader's revulsion from and fascination with
the drug-dependent life of slavery Nick has (probably) avoided. Whether attracted
by the unassuming honesty of Nick's voice or by the promise of a satisfying mys-
tery, readers will surrender eagerly to the shadowy, dangerous atmosphere that
permeates this torch-lit world of deception and delusion. TC
HARTINGER, BRENT 
The Order of the Poison Oak. HarperTempest,
2005 
[2 4 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-056731-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-056730-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Moving on from The Geography Club (BCCB 2/03), Russ has decided to escape
his local reputation as "the gay kid" by joining his friends Min and Gunnar in
becoming a camp counselor. He's intrigued by his fellow counselors, including
the handsome and desirable Web and the funny and thoughtful Otto, but he's
overwhelmed by his first-session campers, a group of ten-year-old burn survivors
who run roughshod over the inexperienced Russ. This novel isn't as cohesive as its
predecessor, and some heavy-handed plot points (such as Russ' saving a young boy
from a forest fire) and message conveyance (his creation of the titular order, where
he draws on folklore to make a survivor story to empower his campers) mar the
smooth flow of the narrative. This has the same easygoing accessibility as the
previous title, however, and the cheerful ordinariness of the camp-counselor story,
with its traditional elements of a misplaced crush, sexual dabbling, and the discov-
ery of serious romance, is a nice change from more angst-ridden stories of young
gay relationships. Between the adventures away from home and the embarkation
294 
* THE BULLETIN
on new love, this has "summer read" all over it, for fans of The Geography Club or
anybody looking for some likable lakeside literary love. DS
HARTNETrr, SONYA 
Stripes of the Sidestep Wolf. Candlewick, 2005 
200p
ISBN 0-7636-2644-9 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Satchel O'Rye has seen out his boyhood in his small depressed Australian town,
and it looks like he'll be staying on there, despite the absence of any real future,
while his friends move away. At home he can offer some help to his hard-working
mother, the sole wage-earner since Satchel's father developed a religious mania
focused on the notion that God, not payment for work, will provide. When Satchel
sees a strange doglike animal in the bush by the local mountain, he offhandedly
mentions it to another local outsider, Chelsea Piper, the disregarded sister of his
best friend; Chelsea discovers that the animal must be a thylacine, thought extinct
for decades, and becomes fired with the notion that its discovery will redeem the
town, as well as Satchel and herself. As always, Hartnett shows herself to be a
gifted writer, honing her characters into believable three-dimensionality with well-
crafted phrasing and quietly solid plotting even as she sends her cast down original
literary roads. Satchel's off-kilter father is wrought with particular skill, madden-
ing in his glib abdication but also pitiable in his weakness, and readers will share
Satchel's anger toward him even as they join Satchel in his eventual understand-
ing. The book's depiction of Satchel's backwater existence is vivid and saddening,
and it cleverly avoids heavy-handed narrative symbolism in the thylacine by mak-
ing its meaning to Satchel and Chelsea an overt topic of contemplation and discus-
sion. The sophisticated readers drawn to Hartnett's alluringly unfurling prose and
penetrating point of view won't mind the apparent open-endedness of the finish,
and they'll respond to Satchel's transformed view of survival for the thylacine and
himself. DS
HOGAN, MARY 
The Serious Kiss. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
240p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-072207-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-072206-1 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Libby and her best friend, Nadine, have set a goal for themselves: before they turn
fifteen, they want to have experienced a soulful, life-changing, serious kiss. Both
nature and nurture conspire against Libby, however, since between her father's
drinking and her mother's overeating, she is mortified by the idea that her crush
will find out about her home life. When her father's alcoholism forces them to
move-into a trailer park for retirees, of all places!-she almost gives up entirely.
With the help of a new friend and newfound grandmother, however, Libby begins
to turn things around and take life as it comes, and, sure enough, it comes with a
kissable boy after all. Libby's breezy narration masks the seriousness of the inci-
dents that unfold-what careful readers will recognize as anxiety attacks, serious
depression, and a nascent eating disorder are rendered in tragicomic teenspeak.
Libby is infected with the same symptoms of avoidance and pretense of which she
accuses her family; every time her father does something that might push her over
the edge into genuine confrontation, she catches a glimpse of a potentially kissable
boy, and the moment passes. In fact, Libby's easily deflected attention and side-
ways anger cum humor give the novel its authenticity and momentum; while the
characters and situations seem overdrawn and occasionally even caricatured, it's
clear that we are seeing them through Libby's rolling teen eyes. From the scream-
MARCH 2005 
* 295
ing awfulness of one's family to the absolute perfection of first love, the peaks and
valleys of this teen melodrama will resonate with many readers. KC
ISADRA, RACHEL 
Luke Goes to Bat; written and illus. by Rachel Isadora. 
Putnam,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23604-X 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Luke is the pipsqueak on his block, the "squirt" left out of the big kids' stickball
games. He practices diligently on the sidelines, but when his big break comes
("Franky had to go to his aunt's"), Luke meets the team's low expectations with
two consecutive strikeouts. His grandmother cheers him up with a trip to Ebbets
Field to watch his hero, Jackie Robinson, meet the Phillies, and when Robinson
cracks one out of the park for the tiebreaker in the fourteenth inning, Luke leaves
convinced that this game does indeed require a lot of perseverance. Back home on
the roof of his apartment, Luke discovers a baseball that his brother insists came
from a kids' game. But Robinson comes to Luke in a fantasy, assures him that's
the evening's winning ball, and encourages him, "You can't give up." No refer-
ence is made to Robinson's place in civil-rights history, and although African-
American Luke has certainly found himself a worthy role model, young listeners
may miss just how much determination the Dodgers hero mustered in order to
compete. Isadora also fudges a bit on the actual fourteenth-inning homer in 1951,
setting it up on a full count while her opening note admits to a less dramatic one-
and-one. Though there's plenty of street action and night-game romance to cap-
tivate fans, Luke is the real star here, with mouth and chubby cheeks as expressive
as the eyes that are often shaded from view beneath his blue cap. Kids may toss
away the heavy-handed message, but they'll still envy Luke's trip to the park. EB
JENKINS, EMILY 
That New Animal; illus. by Pierre Pratt. 
Foster/Farrar,
2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-374-37443-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
4-7 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 279, for review.
JENNINGS, PATRICK 
Out Standing in My Field. Scholastic, 2005 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-439-46581-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 4-6
Ty Cutter, named by his father after legend Ty Cobb, has absolutely nothing
going for him in the athletic department, a fact of which his teammates on the
Brewers are painfully, disdainfully aware and to which his coach father is resolutely
oblivious. Ty's difficulty in "staying vertical" makes him the laughingstock of the
PeeWee League, but his father's will for him to stay in the game is greater than his
own will to bail, so Ty hauls himself through each game hoping the ball will seek
another target or the ten-point "mercy" rule will end the game and put him out of
his misery. Certainly the theme of a reluctant kid with an overbearing parent (an
alcoholic, failed ex-pro, no less) is well worn, to say the least, but Jennings re-
freshes it by cleverly confining the action within a single game and allowing read-
ers to suffer-and ultimately grow-along with Ty in his near real-time experience.
Ty's blundering is at once hilarious and agonizing, as is his sardonic view of his
own limitations. Yes, there's ultimately triumph on the diamond, but not of the
goat-makes-good, miracle game-saving variety. The Brewers lose big time, but Ty
296 
* THE BULLETIN
finally comes to term with his own desires, and it's clear the fifth grader is well on
his way to becoming his own man. EB
KEEHN, SALLY M. 
Gnat Stokes and the Foggy Bottom Swamp Queen. 
Philomel,
2005 
[160p]
ISBN 0-399-24287-2 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Gnat Stokes, aged "twelve and running amok," tells her post-Civil War Tennessee
version of the Tam Lin story with verve and panache. When an opportunity arises
to save local nice guy Goodlow Pryce from a wily bog fairy known as Zelda the
Swamp Queen, it is Gnat-not Goodlow's sweetheart, Penelope Drinkwater-
who tracks Goodlow down and releases him from the transmutation spell that has
made him a monster for the past seven years. Narrated in a sidesplitting back-
woods drawl, Gnat's witness that "Amor Vincit Omnia" ("love conquers all") is
crammed with folk magic and supernatural beings as well as home-brewed moon-
shine and handmade quilts. Gnat herself is a heroine in every sense of the word;
her scheming and self-reliant nature bring her to a critical point at which she must
sacrifice her own dreams to redeem Goodlow's future. The story leading to that
point winds like a swamp path, with detours for baths and premonitions, but the
pelting pace and laugh-out-loud commentary make this scenic tour a treat. TC
KERLEY, BARBARA 
You and Me Together: Moms, Dads, and Kids around the
World. National Geographic, 2005 
32p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-7922-8298-1 
$25.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7922-8297-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
Kerley follows her global photoessay A Cool Drink of Water (BCCB 9/02) with a
similarly formatted look at parent/child relationships. Viewers meet families in
candid (presumably) interaction-riding horses in Iceland or a bus in Germany,
playing a trumpet in Beijing or a guitar in Thailand, adorning their bodies with
colored powder for the Holi festival in India or with mud for a "sing-sing" in
Papua New Guinea. Not every picture is as easy to interpret as one might hope,
and the readers who check the endnotes will find that the mother and daughter
wrapped in lengths of golden fabric are actually giggling away on Staten Island,
and the mother who joins her kids for a ball game outside their mud-brick home
in Uganda is suffering from AIDS. Photographs are uneven, ranging from the
elegant composition of father and son carrying rakes along the edge of a rice paddy
and the deep chiaroscuro and saturated blues of the father-son parley outside a
Guatemalan restaurant, to the off-focus fishermen in Brazil and the grainy repro-
duction of the Ugandan ball players. Whereas Water portrayed relationships be-
tween commodity (often difficult to come by) and user that are defined or at least
influenced by geography, You and Me takes a more facile approach, simply snap-
ping happy families in exotic settings. A closing note by the president of the
Children's Defense Fund touches on the plight of endangered children world-
wide, but viewers never get a glimpse into those shadows. This is a pretty iteration
of baby-and-me style books, but it lacks the integrity of its predecessor. EB
KHAN, RUKHSANA 
Silly Chicken; illus. by Yunmee Kyong. 
Viking, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-670-05912-9 
$15.99 
R 5-7yrs
In a twist on the recent run of picture books offering pet perceptions of new family
MARCH 2005 
* 297
members (see this month's Big Picture), Khan offers this original tale of a young
Pakistani girl who grows jealous of her mother's affection for the family chicken
("Ami loves her hen better than me. She calls her Bibi. I call her Silly"). It takes
this silly chicken awhile to figure out the business of egg laying (she was standing
up for her first effort, which "landed with a crack"), but she eventually catches on
and lays a perfect egg, which Ami shows off to all the neighbors. Life is hard for
chickens in this village, however, and a few days later all that is left of Bibi is a
clump of feathers surrounded by dog prints. When, weeks later, the forgotten egg
hatches into a newborn chick, it is the narrator who is overcome with affection, as
depicted in the final illustration of a grinning girl being chased by the growing
chick. Khan (author of Ruler ofthe Courtyard, BCCB 5/03) has perfectly captured
the homey domesticity of the rural Pakistani setting in this fresh take on family
rivalry. Kyong's bold, thick paintings fill most spreads to the edges with broad
planes of marigold, aqua, and green, and the vivid palette endows the courtyard
setting with a homespun energy. The quiet humor of the young narrator's jealous
narration (versus the obvious humor of her cross-armed cover image) gives the tale
enormous storytime appeal. HM
KOJA, KATHE 
Talk. 
Foster/Farrar, 2005 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-374-37382-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
At first even Kit is surprised by his own acting ability-how easily he wins the lead
in the high school performance of Talk, and how sturdily he holds his own with
star Lindsay Walsh ("the bitch of the school, the bitch of the world but man, can
she act"). On second thought, it's not so strange, because Kit acts every day of his
life, playing the straight guy while keeping his homosexuality under lock and key
to all except his good buddy, Carma. While conservative parents and nervous
school administrators angle to shut down the violent, politically charged play, cast
and classmates spin their own dramas. Lindsay crushes on Kit while her boorish ex
plans revenge. Kit crushes on Pablo (sorry, already taken), while Carma tries to
steer him toward Jef (panting in the wings). Lockers are trashed, emails fly, com-
munity meetings erupt into chaos. In contrast to the angst that looms heavily
throughout Kit and Lindsay's alternating musings, Koja's overwritten outbursts
("I'm not just Lindsay's crush of the moment, not just another face in the hall. I'm
me, I'm Kit and I can act") and the all-too-fortuitous shift of venue from school
auditorium to community playhouse seem comically worthy of a Bing Crosby
musical. Moreover, parallels between the onstage story of identity and betrayal
and the offstage plot are heavily forced. Teens who revel in the backstage machi-
nations may not be overly concerned, though, as they hiss the self-absorbed drama
queen, cheer her triumphant leading man, and sigh over the perfect love story
ending: "two guys smiling, in the sun, their arms around each other." EB
KURTZ, JANE 
In the Small, SmallNight; illus. by Rachel Isadora. 
Amistad/Green-
willow, 2005 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623813-7 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623814-5 
$16.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
America is a long way from Ghana, especially in the middle of the night. When
Abena wakes up to find little brother Kofi in bed with her, she tells him stories that
will help him remember their faraway home and the loved ones they have left
298 
* THE BULLETIN
behind in their move to America. The familiar Anansi tale and a trickster animal
fable put the siblings' fears to sleep and help prepare them for their new life. Mix-
ing the elegant rhythms of traditional African storytelling with the authentic voices
of two children talking in the night, Kurtz seamlessly encases the stories within a
story through a connection between characters and themes, layering the two to-
gether as the children interpret their worries in light of the stories' wisdom. Isadora's
illustrations help solidify the connections by taking the children in and out of the
stories; it is as if Kofi becomes Anansi's wise little son, and all of the animals of her
native Ghana live in Abena's dreams. Though the color contrasts tip toward the
garish and the draftsmanship of the figures is sometimes stodgy, the strong, vi-
brant colors bring luminescence to both the night scenes and the story images.
Dots and stars in strong diagonal lines give the impression of the constant move-
ment of a spinning world, emphasizing Abena's sleepy thought that the stars tra-
versing the sky will soon be seen by her family in Ghana, making it a small, small
night indeed. A wise and comforting tale for second-culture children adjusting to
their new lives, this book also shows the universal power of stories to quell fears
and provide strength for daily challenges. KC
LANAGAN, MARGO 
Black Juice. Eos/HarperCollins, 2005 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-074391-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-074390-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
The ten stories in this Australian collection create varied yet compelling portraits
of ordinary, even peripheral, characters touched by strange and disturbing events.
In "Earthly Uses," a boy searches for an angel for his sick grandmother, but when
he finds one, the grotesque and terrifying creature gives him such searing insight
into the world that he is finally able to leave his abusive household; no such escape
exists for the girl in "Yowlinin," who saves a boy from the evil yowlinins, the same
ones that killed her parents and reduced her to an unwanted in society, only to
have him betray her kindness and bravery. All of these unique characters-a boy
bearing witness to his sister's public execution, a day-long descent into a tar pit; a
pair of snipers living in a clown-obsessed world, whose clown assassinations back-
fire on one of them; a girl who embraces the old way of kings and queens to
become an eternal Bride-take physical and/or emotional journeys and return
changed, for better or worse. Lanagan's writing is simple and moving, evoking a
sense ofwildness, mystery, and loss; the characters and settings suggest a rich life of
their own existing, unexpressed, just beyond the words on the page, requiring
mindful reading to adapt to each new place and learn the importance of what
hasn't been said. This technique occasionally backfires, leaving behind readers
who like more clarity and making the collection slightly uneven in quality, but
more often it adds resonance and interest. Overall, this is an intense and meaning-
ful collection that lovers of strange worlds and people will enjoy. KH
LARBALESTIER, JUSTINE 
Magic or Madness. 
Razorbill/Penguin, 2005 
[288p]
ISBN 1-59514-022-0 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Taught all her life by her mother, Sarafina, to protect herself from her grandmother's
evil magic, fifteen-year-old Reason finds herself jerked by the state from Sarafina's
protective care and dumped in her grandmother's house in Sydney-the very place
MARCH 2005 
* 299
Sarafina ran away from eighteen years before. Reason's planned escape from her
grandmother's house is disrupted by a detour through the enchanted back door-
into New York City, sixteen hours and two full seasons off. Prostrated by the
transition, Reason is at the mercy of a magic-wielding teen, Jay-Tee, until she
recovers, by which time both Reason's grandmother, Esmeralda, and Jay-Tee's
malevolent handler/teacher, Jason, are lurking nearby. Even more challenging is
the emergence of Reason's own magical power, which must be controlled before it
kills her or drives her insane. The telling of the story from the viewpoints of three
teenagers-Reason, Jay-Tee, and Esmeralda's neighbor and student, Tom--de-
velops the dimensionality of the characters and their two cityscapes and increases
the dramatic tension as dangers are identified (sometimes sooner by the reader
than by the characters) at every turn. Larbalestier's tight prose and sure plotting
result in clear characterizations and a thematically unified, compellingly detailed
story in which deceit and sabotage impact every decision and no one's intentions
can be trusted, not even those of Reason herself. A glossary defines Australian
phrases for American readers. TC
LEWIN, TED 
Top to Bottom Down Under; written and illus. by Ted and Betsy
Lewin. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14114-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14113-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
It's autumn in Australia, and the Lewins-outfitted in khaki togs-are leading the
way on a survey of the continent's most interesting animals. The authors' conver-
sational first-person narration combines newsy factoids with minute-by-minute
descriptions of the variety of animal life and vegetation found Down Under. The
narrative arc is effectively paced-fascinated readers will stick with the Lewins
right to the last page-and comic punchlines are well timed. Ted Lewin's detailed
watercolors of furred, feathered, and scaled animals inhabit almost photorealistic
scenes of dramatic, deeply hued beauty. Betsy Lewin's droll sketches of travelers
(presumably the authors) saving their tucker from a brush-tailed possum and of
Aboriginal hunter-gatherers getting the best of fish, snakes, and crocodiles provide
child-accessible visual commentary. The engaging combination of serious and
comedic images correlates effectively with the textual balance of humor, narration,
and information to form an inviting book that will encourage readers to check out
the Lewins' other collaborations. A slang glossary, maps ofAustralia comparing its
size with the area of the continental United States and showing the location of the
narrative, and a page of "fair dinkum" (true) facts about the animals described are
included. TC
LEWIS, PAEONY 
No More Cookies!; illus. by Brita Granstrom. 
Chicken House/
Scholastic, 2005 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-439-68332-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
Florence and her monkey doll, Arnold, have cleaned out the cookie tin, and they
are now banned from cookie eating for the rest of the week. So not fair! Florence
and Arnold therefore come up with plan after plan to trick Mom into giving them
"a cookie-just one." Even when they dress up as a tooth fairy (and fairy mon-
key), a witch (and magic monkey), a nurse (and wounded monkey), and a chef
300 
* THE BULLETIN
(with monkey assistant), Mom still says, "No cookies. No. No. No!" Arnold
threatens to cry, so Mom presides over the making of "Magic Monkey Bananas!"-
recipe included. Arnold's collaboration with Florence as related by Florence to the
audience provides verisimilitude as the practical-minded monkey questions the
efficacy of Florence's plans and then participates fully in her repeated defeat.
Florence's rough-and-ready attitude comes out loud and clear in her first-person
narration, making her a charismatic protagonist whom audiences will cheer. In
the illustrations, thick black lines border the broad strokes of the watercolors, draw-
ing detail and scribbled intensity into each spread. Florence's own illustrations of
her schemes, roughly sketched on scraps of paper, accompany the images in which
she puts her ideas into action, the juxtaposition visually pointing up the mixture of
reality and make-believe within which Florence and Arnold live. The large font
will also make the concise text inviting to beginning readers, and the repetitive
format increases listener comfort, while Florence's indomitable personality and
the universal appeal of the age-old need for more cookies will win the little girl and
her monkey unquestioning support. TC
LOCKHART, E. 
The Boyfriend List. Delacorte, 2005 
[2 40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90238-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73206-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
After recurrent panic attacks send Ruby Oliver into counseling, she creates, at the
request of her doctor, a list of guys who have been featuring in her life: in other
words, a Boyfriend List. The main Boy on the List is Jackson, Ruby's adored
boyfriend of six months who recently dumped her for Ruby's friend, Kim. Ruby's
devout hopes for Jackson's return led her to attend a dance with him post-dumpage;
this action has been perceived by Kim and the rest of the school as a betrayal of the
most basic rule of friendship and has led to Ruby's complete ostracism (and her
panic attacks). There's plenty of interesting subject matter here, but the book
undercuts itself with gimmickry: the Boyfriend List is a bit of high-profile distrac-
tion from the meatier tale of Ruby herself, and the bulwark of digressive footnotes
interrupts the flow of the narrative and lacks the authentic wit found in Ruby's
main tale. It's in Ruby's anguished and sincere account of confusion, hurt, and
longing for the affectionate relationship she thought she'd found that the book
really shines. There's a genuine appreciation of the significance such a relationship
can have and the stunned sorrow a breakup can leave in its wake, even as the
confiding and rueful tone of Ruby's narration edges the story into comedy and
away from tragedy. It's hard to beat romantic tribulations for primary pain but
vicarious enjoyment, and readers willing to wait for Ruby's dilemma to unfold will
sympathize with her sadness even as they relish her drama. DS
MACCULLOUGH, 
CAROLYN 
Stealing Henry. 
Brodie/Roaring Brook,
2005 
[208p]
ISBN 1-59643-045-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Finally reaching the breaking point with her abusive stepfather, Jack, Savannah
downs him with a frying pan and leaves for New York with her little half-brother,
Henry, in tow. Once in the city, she seeks shelter with a former boyfriend, now a
college student with a live-in girlfriend; when his girlfriend feels obliged to contact
MARCH 2005 
* 301
Savannah's family, Savannah and Henry need to evade a pursuing Jack and make
their way to their mother's old hometown to seek help from their mother's aunt.
MacCullough's present-tense narration vividly captures Savannah's experience,
describing in intense detail the world in which she travels, and Savannah's pained
questioning of her mother's loyalties adds poignancy to the dramatic story. The
narration loses impact, however, when the point of view shifts around between the
present, Savannah's earlier days, and her mother's own youth, and these threads
never really tie together credibly or compellingly as a picture of Savannah's mother;
in fact, Savannah's yearning for the earlier, pre-Jack version of her mother seems to
be largely wishful thinking, since even then Alice appears flighty and malleable.
Coman's WhatJamie Saw (BCCB 12/95) is a more tough-minded account of a
child's escape from abuse, but readers will still be drawn by the prospect of a teen
taking control over her troubled life, and they'll be relieved to see Savannah facing
a more hopeful future. DS
MACKEL, KATHY 
MadCat. HarperCollins, 2005 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-054870-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-054869-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Madelyn Catherine, known as MadCat, is aware that she's probably the "best twelve-
year-old catcher in New Hampshire" and that her fast-pitch softball team, the
Sting, is consistently the team to beat. When the opportunity arises for the Sting
to compete at the national level, she's gung ho to take on the challenge. What she
hasn't reckoned on, though, is that loyal players will necessarily be cut, new talent
imported, drastic coaching changes made, and a new level of aggression and some-
times shady tactics implemented that make her wonder at times where the fun has
gone. Mackel is at her peak when she sticks to this plotline, exploring MadCat's
concern for old buddies, her effort to adapt to new teammates, her worries over the
security of her catcher position in the advent of a talented new recruit, and the
lengths to which coaches and players will go to gain a competitive edge. Too
often, though, the tension dissipates among subplots involving MadCat's father's
struggle with MS, her love of the family farm, and rhapsodic descriptions of home-
grown meals improbably whipped up on the road. Still, MadCat sets herself high
standards, and if her final bliss with good comradeship and lower-level team play
comes up short of convincing, readers who know they're good and who long for
the arena to prove it will (if they can look past the misleading baseball on the
cover) appreciate her stretch for the best. EB
MARSDEN, CAROLYN 
Moon Runner. Candlewick, 2005 
[112p]
ISBN 0-7636-2117-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
No one is more surprised than Mina herself to discover that she loves to run-
except, perhaps, her good friend Ruth, "the fastest runner in the school." Unfor-
tunately for Mina, competitive Ruth doesn't take too well to this development,
and it looks like Mina's success on the track may lead to the breaking up of the
Fellow Friends, the group of four classmates sworn to be friends forever. As in Silk
Umbrellas (BCCB 3/04), Marsden has crafted a simple, focused tale that packs a
quiet punch in a compact format. Her careful drafting of fourth-grade friendship
angst is perfectly matched by the tale of athleticism; Mina's new passion for run-
302 
* THE BULLETIN
ning is gracefully depicted in her self-reflections. There are no surprises to be had
in the rather neat ending (the relay team that both Ruth and Mina are on goes on
to the city track finals, and the girls celebrate together), yet its conflict-free resolu-
tion is gratifying. Young readers exploring their own individualized skills and
talents will find lots to hone in on in this concise yet satisfying read. HM
McCAUGHREAN, GERALDINE, ad. 
Odysseus. 
Cricket, 2004 
148p 
(Heroes)
ISBN 0-8126-2721-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
In this retelling of what surely must be the original series of unfortunate events,
veteran refashioner of myths McCaughrean introduces young readers to the ill-
fated Odysseus, struggling to get home from the Trojan Wars. She includes all of
his most famous misadventures with mythic creatures-the Lotus Eaters,
Polyphemus, Cerberus, Scylla and Charybdis, the Laestrygonians, the Sirens, etc.-
in the context of his ongoing enmity with Poseidon, who does everything he can to
prevent Odysseus' homecoming. Even his dalliances with Circe and Calypso are
managed with tasteful fades into soft white pillows. McCaughrean preserves the
high mimetic quality of the characters by presenting them as men and women of
action rather than introspection. She further captures the oral resonances of her
source material through the use of formal diction and repetitive phrasing; hence
we are presented with a masterful and accessible retelling rather than a noveliza-
tion. A useful companion for those struggling with the epic, McCaughrean's ren-
dition offers in addition a ripping good yarn and a dose of cultural literacy (as in,
"so that's where Rowling got her idea for a three-headed dog!") even for those
unmotivated to seek out the original. KC
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
Sly the Sleuth and the Pet Mysteries; by Donna Jo Napoli and
Robert Furrow; illus. by Heather Maione. 
Dial, 2005 
[96p]
ISBN 0-8037-2993-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Sly the Sleuth (real name Sylvia) runs a detective agency after school. Her first,
second, and third cases cover a fat cat, a wish fish, and a crazy puppy (which, Sly
notes, doesn't rhyme like the first two, but it is "a case about a pet" so that's okay).
Through events that develop individual characters and illuminate neighborhood
politics, Sly's friends and neighbors come to rely on her to solve their domestic
mysteries, setting the stage for future installments. Sly's careful clue-spotting and
analysis are straightforward but not overly simple, and her candid narration is
humorous without becoming slapstick. Though the understated humor and the
realistic story structures create relatively complex narratives for the youthful audi-
ence, the short sentences and concrete images make the book easily accessible.
The chapters are dotted with detailed pen and ink sketches in a rumpled style
(somewhat reminiscent of Emily Arnold McCully's work) that echoes the focused
yet slapdash personality of the protagonist. As likable a protagonist as Cam Jansen,
Sly the Sleuth merits her own cadre of loyal fans. TC
OATES, JOYCE CAROL 
Sexy. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
[272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-054150-4 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-054149-0 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
At sixteen, Darren Flynn is embarking on manhood, and he's acutely uncomfort-
MARCH 2005 
* 303
able with just about all of it: his private desires, the attention his swimmer's body
draws, the adulthood his father expects. He therefore moves quickly from awk-
wardness to choking embarrassment when his English teacher, Mr. Tracy, gives
Darren a ride home and displays a degree of attention that suggests more than
friendly interest. When Mr. Tracy threatens to flunk Darren's teammate for pla-
giarism, Darren's friends decide to mount a smear campaign against Tracy, sug-
gesting pseudonymously that he's a pedophile; an ashamed Darren keeps secret his
encounter with the teacher, hoping that he'll leave as a result of the rumors and
relieve Darren of his discomfort. There are echoes here of Oates' Big Mouth and
Ugly Girl (BCCB 6/02), with a character's life in ruins as the result of false accusa-
tions and another struggling with the morality of intervention, but the take here is
quite different: Darren ignores Mr. Tracy's pleas for assistance, Mr. Tracy ac-
knowledges that Darren correctly perceived his interest, and the teacher not only
receives no exoneration, he dies in a car crash. This isn't quite as solidly conceived
as Big Mouth, either, with credibility creaking at some plot junctures and in some
of the boys' speech, but what's most memorable here isn't the examination of the
dynamic but the exploration of Darren's character. The depictions of the various
definitions of and demands for manliness are touching and believable as Darren
tries to sort through them to some kind of reachable goal. The difficulties of
finding one's way to mainstream manhood haven't received much YA ink in the
last few years, and this is an unusually sensitive and sympathetic assessment of the
often painful complexities of that important transition. DS
PRICE, PAM 
CoolRubber Stamp Art; ISBN 1-59197-743-6; CoolScrapbooks; ISBN
1-59197-744-4. 
Each 
book: 
ABDO, 
2005 
32p 
illus. 
with
photographs 
(Cool Crafts) 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
As these crafts continue to ride their wave of popularity, they've spawned plenty of
how-to books for children through adults. This pair ofABDO "Cool Crafts" titles
should be particularly valuable for children who are latecomers to the hobbies;
who haven't advanced much beyond a stamp, ink pad, and photo album; or who
can't figure out how come everyone else's stuff looks better than theirs. Price
offers a useful, clearly photographed gallery of samples, but her real contribution is
in her thorough introduction to a broad range of supplies (including trendy em-
bellishments such as eyelets, die-cuts, and computer clip art and journaling), the
compatibility of inks and papers, definitions of terms frequently encountered (e.g.,
"archival quality," "sleeves," "croppers"), and solid hints to improve the product.
She can be refreshingly blunt in critiquing a poor composition-"This page is a
mess.... Some croppers call a page like this a 'sticker sneeze'"-and duffers will
probably cringe when they recognize a similarity to their own efforts. Crafters
who stick with Ms. Price, though, should produce greeting cards, wrapping paper,
and memory books that will be the toast of the middle school. EB
RAPPAPORT, 
DOREEN 
The Secret Seder; illus. by Emily Arnold
McCully. 
Hyperion, 2005 
40p
ISBN 0-7868-0777-6 
$16.99 
R Gr. 3-5
Young Jacques and his parents are living secretly as Jews in France during the
Holocaust, constantly speaking in whispers and rushing through town with a hur-
ried, wary step. On the eve of Passover, Jacques and his father hike up the moun-
tain to attend a secret Seder in an isolated forest shack (as Jacques assures himself,
304 
* THE BULLETIN
"I am not afraid of the darkness, only of the black-boot men"). There they find
other Jewish men gathered around a meager spread: a single matzah, one candle,
some wine. The old man leading the Seder recalls the story of the Jews' enslave-
ment in Egypt, and the juxtaposition of the ancestral enslavement to the current
lot of those gathered is affectingly observed as the men openly weep when the
chanting begins. This illustrated tale serves as a moving tribute to the faith of the
Jewish people living under "the brutal and demoralizing circumstances" of the
Holocaust as those gathered at the Seder remember better times while reflecting
on the cruelty of the present and the need to hold fast to their faith. Jacques' ritual
querying of "Why is this night different from all other nights?" yields a heated
exchange among the men comparing the fate of those enslaved under Pharaoh and
those driven out under the Spanish Inquisition with the present ("'It is different,'
insists the deep voice. 'For hundreds are being murdered every day, and thousands
more will be murdered if Hitler is not stopped'"). McCully's watercolor composi-
tions are full of plays on light and shadow, bringing faces in and out of focus as the
candlelight flickers in the foreground. The faces of the men are lined with worry,
but young Jacques remains hopeful and inquisitive, his dark eyes peering out un-
der a shag of bangs. This is a deeply resonant and poignant tale of darkness and
dark times that offers as its only hope the words whispered at ceremony's end:
"Next year in Yerushalayim." An author's note, description of the symbolic foods
of the Seder, and recommended books for young readers on both Passover and the
Holocaust are included. HM
REPKA, JANICE 
The Stupendous DodgeballFiasco; illus. by Glin Dibley. 
Dutton,
2004 
181p
ISBN 0-525-47346-7 
$16.99 
R Gr. 4-6
While most kids dream about running away to join a circus, eleven-year-old Phillip
Stanislaw, of the Stupendous Stanislaws, wants nothing more than to run away
from the circus and join real life. His parents reluctantly agree to let him go live
with his aunt and uncle, but what he finds in Hardingtown, PA, the unofficial
Dodgeball Capital of the World, is something of a circus in its own right. He soon
realizes that the name of the game in this town is take-no-prisoners dodgeball.
When the dodgeball bullies find out that his dad is a circus clown and that he
himself used to shovel elephant poop, Phillip becomes a target, and he decides to
take action-legal action, that is, as he mounts a lawsuit that seeks damages for his
broken glasses, an injunction against the school to stop them from forcing kids to
play dodgeball, and a complaint against the dodgeball factory for making an un-
reasonably unsafe product. Taking on the history and economic security of a town
isn't easy, but with the help of a harrowing but well-timed mishap with a cargo
plane full ofdodgeballs, Phillip the troublemaker becomes Phillip the hero. Repka
gets off to a shaky start in this first novel, initially trying to pull too much physical
comedy out of circus shenanigans, but once she settles into her tale of an underdog
fighting for the dodgeball-challenged of the world, the absurdity begins to work in
her favor. Each chapter begins with an arcane bit of circus lore that provides
inspirational wisdom for Phillip's predicament, and as the plot unfolds, each char-
acter and his or her individual peccadilloes become intricately involved in the suc-
cessful resolution of the action. With lots of silliness, plenty of action, and a
universally despised villain (if dodgeball can be called a villain), this is sure to be a
hit with fifth-grade boys, and then some. KC
MARCH 2005 
* 305
RICHARDSON, CHARISSE K 
The Real Slam Dunk; illus. by Kadir Nelson. 
Puffin,
2005 
[64p]
ISBN 0-14-240212-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 2-4
Marcus is so jazzed up at the prospect of being spokesman when his class meets
basketball superstar Jason Carter that even the untimely shrinkage of his prized
Giants jersey can't diminish his joy. When the big day arrives, Carter proves to be
every inch the hero Marcus anticipates, but in an informal chat between the class
and the Great Man, Carter shares some surprises (he loved chemistry in school and
sees it as a post-retirement career possibility) and some advice: stay in school.
Well, let's face it, Richardson is the one with the advice and Carter patently serves
as her fictional mouthpiece. It's unlikely, though, that even the youngest readers
will fail to recognize heavy-handed homiletics when they see it, particularly when
Richardson doesn't seem all that comfortable courtside, dubbing the hoop the
"basketball goal" and allowing her make-believe class to stomp over the gleaming
wooden court in the arena. In his generous helping of black-and-white artwork,
Nelson portrays Carter as stately, intelligent, engaged, and gentlemanly-every-
thing a role model should be. Too bad his "always dream more than one dream"
message is slam-dunked down primary schoolers' throats. EB
RINALDI, ANN 
Brooklyn Rose. 
Harcourt, 2005 
222p
ISBN 0-15-205117-1 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
At fifteen, Rose Frampton considers matrimony to be the proper province of her
older sister, who is fortunate to make a love match with a well-off young man. She
suspects, however, that her parents may have designs for her immediate future as
well when an oh-so-eligible French silk merchant, Rene Dumarest, is welcomed
into family gatherings and he and Rose are given more unchaperoned freedom
than propriety would dictate. A school chum, who seems to know much about
Frampton family affairs, snitches to Rose that Dumarest holds the mortgage to the
failing Frampton estate, and Rose accepts Rene's proposal mainly from a sense of
duty, while acknowledging genuine attraction to the handsome, attentive older
man ("He's got to be thirty, at least"). He whisks her from her South Carolina
home to his mansion in Brooklyn, where young Rose takes on the management of
the household, forces open the door of local society, and finds the same love with
her husband that has blessed her sister's marriage. Rose's story, based loosely on
the life of Rinaldi's own grandparents, unfolds through her year's journal entries
in 1900, and as is the case with so many fictional diaries, the writer's remarks are
largely transparently intended for a modern adolescent reader rather than her own
confidence. Those who can get beyond the obvious contrivance, however, will
find this a solid, old-fashioned love story, likely to easily beguile historical fiction
fans who, like Rose, crave romance but cannot yet quite imagine themselves into
the role of adult heroine. EB
ROBBINS, KEN 
Seeds; written and illus. with photographs by Ken
Robbins. 
Atheneum, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-689-85041-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Robbins reprises his signature style-photographed still life, enhanced with satu-
rated color and afloat on pristine white space-more to celebrate than closely ex-
amine seeds in their varied forms. With its odd imprecisions ("though every seed
306 
* THE BULLETIN
has the power to make a new plant, not every seed will do it") and omissions
(Robbins coyly neglects to mention berry seeds' course between their ingestion by
birds and the time they "eventually drop to the ground"), this is not a title to
anchor a science unit. Even the photographs themselves, which suggest knife-
edged clarity, occasionally disappoint upon close examination. The delicate fila-
ments emanating from the milkweed seed are blurry, acorns are grainy, the familiar
white dandelion poofs appear leaden gray, and lotus pods in various states of vigor
and decay have the look (if not the reality) of an awkwardly crafted computer
composite. Although this may not be the pinnacle of Robbins' artistry, it does
fulfill its mission of promoting children's awareness of the many guises of seeds,
from coconuts at sea to "sticktights" on socks, and it may encourage their own
avocado experimentation to boot. EB
RUSHTON, ROSIE 
The DashwoodSisters'Secrets ofLove. 
Hyperion, 2005 
[3 3 6p]
ISBN 0-7868-5136-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Conscientious Ellie, audacious Abby, and spirited Georgie lose their dad and their
childhood home but find romantic love in this modern reworking of Sense and
Sensibility. Rushton's version, crammed with hip brand names and references to
hot trends, bears little resemblance to the original but provides teen readers with
the kind of frothily luxurious novel in which the volatile Abby herself might choose
to indulge. The exploits of thirteen-year-old Georgie, a reckless tomboy on the
brink of a romantic awakening, add humor and liveliness to the story, while six-
teen-year-old Ellie's sweet but slow romance takes a back seat to the adventures of
the self-assured, impetuous, fifteen-year-old Abby, who ensnares (at least tempo-
rarily) nearly every guy she meets and then must choose whether to live up to their
expectations of her. Though the prologue and epilogue assert that within these
pages the Dashwood sisters discover "secrets of love" that are never defined and are
certainly not immediately apparent, readers hooked by the chic, flirtatious story
and enviable characters won't mind this thematic omission one little bit. TC
SHANNON, DAVID 
Oh, David!; ISBN 0-439-68881-7; Oops!; ISBN 0-439-68882-
5. 
Each book: written and illus. by David Shannon 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
2005 
[12p] 
(A Diaper David Book) 
$6.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-5 yrs
It goes without saying that before there was maniacal, saw-toothed preschooler
David (from No, David!, BCCB 9/98, and others), there must have been "Diaper
David." And here he is, in prequel, packaged up for the board-book crowd. Oh!
finds him joyously unrolling the toilet paper, turning his clenched face from a
proffered spoonful of glop, loading his diaper while sporting a most satisfied grin,
and of course, nestling contentedly in the arms of his adoring, if long-suffering,
mom. Oops! hustles him forward a bit in age and equates each of his first spoken
words with an accompanying disaster or delight: "ball" shatters a window, "dog"
is saddled with drippy mac and cheese, "bath" connotes pure bliss in the company
of his tub toys (hmmm, no surprise to find pirates floating beside rubber ducky).
The antics are entirely predictable, but Shannon's strength in this series has consis-
tently lain in pictorially hyperbolizing domestic mess into the scrawling lines and
fiery hues of high drama, and in pinpointing the core of lovability in his graceless
MARCH 2005 
* 307
little scamp. Vocabulary is minimal and largely monosyllabic, so even older and
wiser siblings in, say, kindergarten or first grade can take a turn at reading aloud.
That's good, because Mom probably needs a break. EB
SHERMAN, PAT 
The Sun's Daughter; illus. by R. Gregory Christie. 
Clarion,
2005 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-618-32430-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-7 yrs
Golden Maize and her sisters Pumpkin and Red Bean bless the earth with their
dancing, which calls forth spontaneous growths of life-sustaining food. When a
cocky Maize ignores the warning of her mother, the Sun, and wanders away from
the open fields, icy Silver entices the girl into his cave. The Sun refuses to touch
the earth with her warmth until her daughter is returned to her, but eventually,
with the intervention of some importunate birds, Silver agrees to release Maize for
half the year, and the Sun shines again during her daughter's return. Bold strokes,
scrawls, and blobs of gouache, acrylic, and tempera paint in shades of ochre, verdi-
gris, and lemon endow Christie's illustrations with chaotic power, while swift,
sharp strokes create intense facial expressions. The starkness mirrors the bleakness
of the story, in which the humans grow "weaker and thinner" and even the trees
turn to stone. The brief characterizations combine with the dire events to create a
moving tale of selfishness and bravery, suitable for readalouds with children old
enough to be absorbed by the drama of the story. An author's note identifies this
as an original tale and discusses Greek, Hopi, and Navajo versions of the myth,
and the story would partner well with retellings of the Persephone legend for a
folkloric look at seasons. TC
SILVERMAN, ERIUA 
Sholom's Treasure: How Sholom Aleichem Became a Writer;
illus. by Mordicai Gerstein. 
Farrar, 2005 
[40p]
ISBN 0-374-38055-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Drawing on experiences gained as both the Hebrew school's clown and prize pupil
in his native Russia, turn-of-the-century author Sholom Aleichem used the power
of humor and literature to open up opportunities for himself and ease the harsh-
ness of life for his readers. His stories (later the source material for the musical
Fiddler on the Roof) were a "treasure" he offered his father and his oppressed people,
a way of giving them hope and showing how their endurance of difficulty made
them special. Sholom Aleichem's own story is told here with the wit and compas-
sion for which he was himself known. The important passages of his early life are
tied together in genial prose that maintains the episodic form and repetitive style
of the oral tradition. While the narrative thrust fades on the last page into a disap-
pointingly terse ending, the heartiness of the text as a whole gives this biography
an attractive warmth. In the closely textured illustrations, scribbled outlines lend
definition to oil compositions loaded with gobbets and streaks of paint. Heavy
shading and touches of white point up such focal points as faces and eyes, increas-
ing the vigor of the spreads and intensifying the viewer's emotional involvement in
the story. A two-page spread of Voronko, Sholom's childhood home, complete
with visible breeze bursts and cascades of wind-wafted leaves, showcases the illus-
trations' tactile vitality. The comedic thrust of the images-such as a sequence of
308 
* THE BULLETIN
shots showing Sholom mimicking others' yawns and nosepicking--echoes the tone
of the biography; an appropriate match, as the writer requested that "his name 'be
recalled with laughter.'" An author's note, a biographical afterword, and a list of
sources are included. TC
SOTO, GARY 
Worlds Apart: Traveling with Fernie and Me; illus. by Greg
Clarke. 
Putnam, 2005 
[64p]
ISBN 0-399-24218-X 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
The imaginary travels of an unnamed speaker and his best friend, Fernie (first
introduced in Fearless Fernie: Hanging Out with Fernie andMe, BCCB 6/02 ), are
captured in forty brief free verse poems. Each poem describes a scene in which the
speaker and Fernie enjoy a country or city far from their California home: they
model extreme tattoo transfers in the Philippines, box a kangaroo in Australia, and
paint portraits in Paris. The quality of Soto's poetry is hit-or-miss here; while
some symbols and phrasings are clear and elegant (the brief "Another Kind of
Spanish Armada" is a fine example), his sentence constructions are occasionally so
convoluted that the central image is lost ("What did I have my sights on? A close-
up/ Of Fernie picking his nose by the fanning wings/ Of princely butterflies"). In
the crisply executed drawings, precise black lines carve pointy-nosed heads and
round-shouldered bodies out of white space. 
These restrained images combine
with the spare lines of Soto's text to jumpstart an imaginary world tour for travel-
hungry readers. TC
SPRADLIN, MICHAEL P. 
Spy Goddess: Live and Let Shop. 
HarperCollins,
2005 
[2 2 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-059408-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-059407-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Fifteen-year-old Rachel Buchanan, child of rich, negligent parents in Beverly Hills,
has finally been busted too many times. Caught joyriding in a stolen car, she is
given two choices by the court: juvenile hall for a month, or Blackthorn Academy
for a year. Afraid of what terrible fate awaits her in the violent atmosphere ofjuvie,
she chooses the academy and sets herself on a much more interesting course. Classes
such as microelectronics and code theory, requirements such as daily Tae Kwon
Do lessons, and a Dumbledore-ish headmaster, Mr. Kim, who seems to know
everything about her combine to tip her off that Blackthorn is no ordinary school.
After Mr. Kim disappears into his office and never comes out, Rachel connects his
disappearance with the mystical Book of Seraphim that was recently stolen from a
Washington, D.C. gallery, and she realizes the headmaster's on the trail of the
thief-and heading right into a trap. The adventure that follows, first in a series,
stretches credibility too much to be taken seriously, but nonetheless, it is an enter-
taining and action-packed mystery. Though Rachel's blase attitude occasionally
becomes annoying, she is an appealing character; her glib demeanor and almost
childish backtalk is funny and light, but at the same time, readers know that she
will come through in the end. The plot points unfold quickly, so kids won't have
a reason to stop reading, and the many details about the school and its classes will
be enough to capture their imagination. Blackthorn will rank up with Hogwarts
MARCH 2005 
* 
309
as the coolest school to attend, and young readers will enjoy returning to it in the
next book. KH
STEIN, TAMMAR 
Light Years. 
Knopf, 2005 
263p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93023-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83023-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 8-12
For Maya Laor, a twenty-year-old veteran of the Israeli army, her first year at the
University of Virginia is not the happy adventure she had anticipated. Between
application and matriculation, her boyfriend, Dov, is killed in a suicide bombing
at a Tel Aviv cafe as he waits for her to meet him. Stricken not only with grief but
with self-blame-she is convinced the bomber was a Palestinian cafe worker she
had gotten fired for his openly anti-Israeli opinions-she now finds the American
university little more than a hoped-for refuge as far away from Israel as she can
easily get. She expects little understanding from American students, whom she
initially dismisses as shallow and pampered, but her bubbly roommate Payton
turns out to be surprisingly supportive, and a new love interest, graduate assistant
Justin, insinuates himself into her life. Stein spends little time examining the
complexities of the Palestinian/Israeli struggles, but her focus is, admittedly, ex-
ploration of emotional rather than political terrain. Although Maya's circum-
stances are occasionally a bit stage-managed (who but the temporarily spurned
Justin would ride to her rescue when she breaks her ankle on a deserted road at
night?), the personal devastation that impels her to crave support and push it away
when offered rings painfully true. Love, tragedy, healing, a romantic campus set-
ting, and a dishy grad student-Stein's debut novel should win her a cadre of YA
fans. EB
THESMAN, JEAN 
Singer. Viking, 2005 
[30 4p]
ISBN 0-670-05937-4 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 8-12
Gwenore has been hated-and later, hunted-by her sorceress mother, Rhiamon,
all her life. Protected and hidden by gentle, magic-wielding women until the time
she can use her own supernatural gifts to defeat her mother's malicious plots,
Gwenore watches the years go by while visions of crying swans come and go in her
silver looking-glass. Soon enough, those visions are fulfilled as Rhiamon marries
the King of Lir and kills his children, sending their spirits into four swans. Gwenore
uses her magic to rescue three of the four children (the fourth still being too far
away to be reembodied) and destroy her mother forever. Though destined for
immortality, Gwenore is very much a part of her beautiful yet harsh medieval
world-a survivor of incest, she is still moved by occasional glimpses of happy
families enjoying a kinship she cannot have, a touch of softness that smooths the
narrative's implicit criticism of her male-dominated culture. A deft mixture of
religious and pagan mysticism allows healings and transmogrifications to seem
both arcane and rational, and the frequent incursion of helpful but irritating Fair
Folk-in the forms of crows, cats, and chickens-both lightens the mood and
intensifies the otherworldly ambience of the story. Like McKinley's Spindle's End
(BCCB 4/00), this folktale-inspired novel weaves a new story from old threads,
inviting fans of both love and fantasy. TC
310 
* THE BULLETIN
TINGLE, REBECCA 
Far Traveler. Putnam, 2005 
[240p]
ISBN 0-399-23890-5 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
When LadyAethelflaed, a ruler in tenth-century Britain (and protagonist of Tingle's
Edge on the Sword, BCCB 10/01), dies unexpectedly, her brother King Edward of
Wessex comes to claim her orphaned daughter, Aelfwyn, who is then lost from the
Anglo-Saxon historical record. Tingle jumps into this historical gap with a com-
pellingly imagined fate for the Lady Aelfwyn. In her version, neither the Mercians
nor the folk of Northumbria are willing to pledge fealty to Edward, whose protec-
tion will come at the cost of their sovereignty; rather, they wish Aelfwyn to take
her place as her mother's heir. Aelfwyn is timid and uncertain, however, and her
hesitation allows her to be taken by her uncle and pledged in marriage to an ally.
Seeking to escape her fate, she steals away and disguises herself as a boy bard,
making her way back to Mercia and unwittingly becoming party to a plot to force
her uncle to defend Northumbria against the northern invaders without claiming
it as his own. Tingle is a sure-footed plotter, drawing the reader into the suspense
ofAelfwyn's plight by offering dashes of excitement and danger alongside a devel-
oping romance and complicated political intrigue. Aelfwyn is believably drawn;
reared by a strong, competent leader who respects and fosters her daughter's book-
ish inclinations, she is neither brash nor feisty, but rather depends on her strengths-
a strong memory, an ear for a good story, and an ability to turn her intelligent
assessments of situations into practical action-to carry her through difficult times.
The romance that develops between her and her benefactor, Wil, is subtly played
and satisfyingly realized; the conflicted loyalty that she feels for Edward combines
with a realistically resigned pragmatism that allows her to save Wil's life and gain
her own. Fans of historical fiction will be swept along here without reservation.
Notes and a map of tenth-century Britain are included. KC
VAUGHT, SUSAN 
Stormwitch. Bloomsbury, 2005 
208p
ISBN 1-58234-952-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Sixteen-year-old Ruba has moved from Haiti to Mississippi to stay with her Grand-
mother Jones after the death of her maternal grandmother. Raised in the Amazo-
nian tradition of her Dahomey ancestors, Ruba can't adjust to the meek behavior
expected of her in the racially unstable South of 1969, nor can she lay aside her
spirit magic to embrace the Baptist beliefs of Grandmother Jones. Through her
magic, Ruba knows when evil is massing in the wind and waves, and she senses it
around her new home; though trained to deflect the punishing storms that
stormwitch Zashar sends out of vengeance, Ruba is afraid that she is not strong
enough to stand up for herself and her people. With the added trouble of the
Klan's Grand Wizard and his aggressively mean son, and the fact that no one
believes in her magic, Ruba must find a way to fight Zashar's storm of evil, as well
as the racial one that is already among them. With lyrical writing and a measured
pace, Vaught uses the changes in Ruba's new life as a way to highlight the danger-
ous, conflicted atmosphere for blacks in Mississippi in 1969, as well as to examine
the intersection of very different black cultures. The writing is sometimes melo-
dramatic (events are meaningful enough without awkward poetic metaphor), and
occurrences are clearly contrived for maximum drama. Nonetheless, Ruba's
thoughtful narration rises above the well-worn ground of Southern black/white
conflict, offering an ultimately fulfilling example of how two worlds can be merged
MARCH 2005 
* 311
into one person to the betterment of all. This historical fantasy will spark interest
in the real events it captures. Historical notes and a bibliography of sources are
included. KH
VELMANS, HESTER 
Isabel ofthe Whales. 
Delacorte, 2005 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90233-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73202-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
"Call me Isabel," begins this story of a twelve-year-old who has been chosen by fate
to be a go-between for the human and whale species. A fall from a whale-watching
boat during a school field trip catalyzes Isabel's change into a humpback whale and
commences her training in the traditions and songs of the deep. She travels with a
pod of whales from Cape Cod to the southern ocean, where she helps birth a calf,
and in the spring returns to the shore near her home, injured but triumphant after
having bested a whaling ship. The beginning of the story is realistically told and
sharply focused on Isabel as a human girl; the rest of the book is less successfully
written, becoming ever more vehicular as the plot progresses. The dangers the pod
faces give Isabel and her whale friends much opportunity to vent about the viola-
tion of marine mammal rights without doing a great deal to maintain reader inter-
est, while the whale lore Isabel learns is predictably sentimental and farfetched
(Herman Melville and Jonah are offered as examples of Chosen Ones from ages
past). On the other hand, Isabel's (reciprocated) interest in a cool young male
humpback, Jessaloup, and the anger and anxiety they both feel when their mutual
involvement is forbidden provide enough narrative tension to keep most readers
involved in the story. For this audience, DeVita's Blue (BCCB 5/01) is a more
inventive (and believable) exploration of the friction caused by human miscon-
duct toward the denizens of the deep; nonetheless, this chatty and digestible novel
may appeal to readers eager for underwater adventure but unready for an extended
undersea journey. TC
VESTERGAARD, HOPE 
Hello, Snow!; illus. by Nadine Bernard Westcott. 
Kroupa/
Farrar, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-374-32949-4 
$16.00 
R 3-6 yrs
The promise of waking up to a snow-covered world is one of those perennial dreams
of childhood. Our manic protagonist enthusiastically greets such a day and drags
a reluctant dad out of bed (on which is tellingly placed a swimsuit catalogue and a
vacation brochure, suggesting alternative winter dreams for adults) to revel in the
snow. The snappy rhyming quatrains cover most of the things that kids are sup-
posed to do with snow-make a snowman, sled down hills, and return to a waiting
cup of cocoa. The getting-dressed odyssey ("Hello, pants./ Goodbye, knees./ I
don't want/ You guys to freeze") is nearly worth the price of admission here, with
its comic portrayal of the frantic and all-too-familiar mayhem of a kid trying to get
a lot of bulky clothes on in a hurry. The energy and pace doesn't slacken as Dad
and daughter take to the white world, where the little girl seems to be everywhere
at once. Large round heads with minuscule features and exaggerated expressions
add to the humor. The illustrations have a clarity that will carry across the room,
and the bouncy text fairly reads itself, making this a good choice for winter story
hours-have the marshmallows handy. KC
312 
* THE BULLETIN
WAITE, JUDY 
Trick ofthe Mind. Atheneum, 2005 
263p
ISBN 0-689-87014-0 
$16.95 
Ad Gr. 6-9
Erin and Matt are both misfits: Erin, poor and naive, is geekily obsessed with
becoming a magician, while Matt, well off but discontented, hears voices. When
they meet one day at the castle-an old ruin that is the favorite gathering spot for
older kids-Matt is fascinated by Erin's magic tricks, while Erin is fascinated with
Matt. Determined to hold his interest, she teaches him some of her best material,
but little does she know that Matt has his eyes set on her beautiful classmate Kirsty.
When Kirsty is found dead and the clues point to Matt, who has coincidentally
run away, Erin's illusions crumble-but is what's behind them the truth, or is it
another trick of the mind? Told alternately from Erin's and Matt's perspectives,
the story quickly gets tiresome as each scene is repeated from both viewpoints;
both voices are natural and distinct, though (Matt's has a shade of Holden Caulfield),
and the plot gains interest as it branches off into new territory. The buildup is
slow, though appropriately so for the psychological drama. While a development
where Matt begins to work miracles doesn't come across as fully developed or
convincing, tricks and illusions work as strong motifs throughout the novel; Erin's
use of "magic" underscores both her and Matt's realization that people are also
invented beings: "We don't know who anyone is really... not even the people we
love the most." This will draw the thoughtful reader interested more in dysfunc-
tional relationships than fantasy magic. KH
WESTERFELD, SCOTT 
Midnighters: Touching Darkness. Eos/HarperCollins,
2005 
[336p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-051955-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-051954-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
At midnight in Bixby, Oklahoma, time freezes, and the darklings take over the
town. Five teenaged residents-Rex, Melissa, Dess, Jonathan, and Jessica-can
still move in this secret hour, gaining special powers that help them fight the
darklings. After their victory in Midnighters: The Secret Hour, they have finally
begun to feel safe, until one midnight hour Jonathan sees a man immobilized
outside Jessica's bedroom window and they realize darklings may not be their only
enemy. They begin an investigation into the history of Bixby and the midnight
hour, and as they delve into the past, they learn of the terrible fate of the prior
midnighters-especially the Seer, bound alive into the body of a darkling. Rex,
the current Seer, knows this fate awaits him, unless the other midnighters can find
a way to defeat both their human and their darkling foes. The logic of the mid-
night hour, where tridecologisms (groupings of thirteen, particular thirteen-letter
words) and new alloys like steel are the only weapons against the darklings, remain
consistent and continue to create a unique environment for a fantasy adventure.
This second offering also describes in more detail the powers of the midnighters,
the significance of Bixby, and the relationship between the darklings and their
human allies. Though the ultimate explanation for the downfall of the prior
midnighters at the hands of other humans is vague, the quick pacing, high-stakes
action, and cleverly crafted characters assure that readers will be so caught up in
the unfolding events that they will barely notice the gaps. This will be a favorite
for readers looking for a hidden world among their familiar surroundings. KH
MARCH 2005 
* 313
WHYMAN, MATT 
Boy Kills Man. HarperTempest, 2005 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-074664-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-074663-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
"Music, money, Jesus Christ, and soccer: that's what made our world go round,
and for me it hasn't stopped spinning," says young Sonny about his life in the
Colombian city of Medellin. There he runs bootleg cigarettes rather than attend-
ing school, ducks the abusive wrath of his uncle, and, with his friend Alberto,
dreams of a future on the soccer field. When Alberto gets a gun-carrying and,
later, gun-using job for a major player in the city's underworld, Sonny becomes
keenly aware of the dangers of his surroundings; frustrated at being left behind and
resigned to the absence of alternatives, he takes over Alberto's job when Alberto
"disappears," becoming one of Medellin's legion of underage hitmen in the drug
wars. This is a stark and dark picture of the optionless, often literally dead-end
lives of Medellin's young boys, growing up in a city composed of criminals and
"everyday citizens who have decided that it's better to accept a bribe than see their
loved ones go missing." The boys' only chance at manhood lies paradoxically in
the tradition of using underage and therefore legally unaccountable kids for crime
hits. Sonny's fatalism is shocking yet credible, all the more depressing for the
occasional flashes of hope for a wider future that he knows he'll never see. Readers
prizing their own peer bonds will understand the importance of his crucial friend-
ship with Alberto and the desolation he's left with in Alberto's absence. Books
such as Myers' Scorpions (BCCB 7/88) have detailed the tragedy of young Ameri-
can lives defined by violence; this is a sobering reminder that such existences are
globally endemic. DS
WILKINSON, CAROLE 
Dragon Keeper. 
Hyperion, 2005 
[352p]
ISBN 0-7868-5581-9 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
As a slave in service to the Imperial Dragon Keeper during China's Han Dynasty,
eleven-year-old Ping sees nothing in her future but a continuing struggle to sur-
vive. In spite of her limited hopes for herself, Ping runs to set free the only remain-
ing dragon, Long Danzi, when the current emperor cuts a deal (just before perishing
from eating pickled dragon meat) to sell Danzi to a hunter who will chop the body
up for sale to sorcerers. In return, the dragon carries Ping off on a journey to the
faraway country of Ocean, where, Danzi tells her, he can regenerate his life force
and become young again. Unwillingly, Ping comes along to care for what she
comes to think of as Danzi's pet rock, a large, beautiful stone that the dragon
insists she guard to the best of her ability (and that later turns out to be a maturing
dragon egg). Ping's discovery of her own special gifts and her heritage as a true
Dragon Keeper allow her the opportunity to choose between a life of ease as a
favorite of the new boy Emperor and a life of adversity spent in service to the last
Imperial dragon. The wide range of Ping's travels allows for description of the
grandeur of many wonders of China two thousand years ago, from the emperor's
palaces to the wide Yellow River and the majestic mountain peaks. Her daily
association with a quirkily charismatic magical beast-who has watched human-
kind for centuries, yet still speaks only a rudimentary version of their language-
provides its own attraction, and Ping's growth from singleminded slave to
314 
* THE BULLETIN
self-sacrificing friend will resonate with fantasy readers already dreaming of drag-
ons. TC
WI~ANs, TOM 
Wait! I Want to Tell You a Story; written and illus. by Tom
Willans. 
Simon, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-689-87166-X 
$15.95 
R 
4-6yrs
A muskrat about to be devoured by a tiger yells, "Wait! I want to tell you a story."
"Okay," the tiger replies, "but make it quick!" So begins a lively cycle in which a
frog and a shark, a lizard and a snake, and a fly and a spider repeat the pattern of
the muskrat and the tiger. When the spider eats the fly and the story comes boo-
meranging back to the original pair, a crocodile is waiting to eat the tiger, and the
muskrat scampers free. In the magnetically messy line-and-watercolor illustra-
tions, each animal pair looms large on the page, deep fuchsia and tangerine spiders
and lizards bursting from the white space with bugged-out eyes that heighten the
urgency and humor of the situation. The large, bold font and circular plot encour-
age young listeners to try out reading for themselves, while the repetitive pattern
enhances listener glee at the muskrat's escape. Especially well suited for group
reading aloud, this original trickster tale has all the earmarks of a new favorite. TC
WINTER, JONAH 
Roberto Clemente: Pride of the Pittsburgh Pirates; illus. by Radl
Col6n. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2005 
40p
ISBN 0-689-85643-1 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
An exotic player on a last-place team, Puerto Rican Roberto Clemente was initially
as confounded by the mainland United States as it was by him: "Instead of palm
trees, he saw smokestacks./ Instead of Spanish, he heard English./ Instead of
being somebody,/ he was nobody." Announcers garbled the new Pirate's name, and
sports reporters "mocked his Spanish accent" and "called him a Latino 'hothead."'
But there was no arguing with his astonishing feats of fielding, his impressive bat-
ting average, or his flash ("But it wasn't just how he played/ He had style. He was
cool'), and, as baseball-crazed listeners will already know, Clemente became the
first Latino inducted into the Hall of Fame. This is about as straightforward and
solidly satisfying as picture-book sports biographies get-balanced neatly between
exploits on the diamond and achievement off the diamond. Col6n's grainy water-
color and pencil artwork supplies some visual change-ups, with literal, full-color
action scenes, loosely hatched black-and-white drawings and sequential art, and a
particularly clever portrayal of Clemente's growth as a player, melding triple im-
ages of him at bat from youth to adulthood. An endnote mentions major awards
and evaluates Clemente's importance in the United States and in Puerto Rico. EB
WYETH, SHARON DENNIS 
Orphea Proud. Delacorte, 2004 
189p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90175-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32497-9 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
The exhilaration of first love is cut short when Orphea and Lissa are interrupted by
Orphea's brother and guardian, Rupert, storming into Orphea's bedroom on a
snowed-in morning. It's lost forever when Lissa speeds away in her van, only to be
involved in a fatal crash on the snowy roads. Orphea is undone, and Rupert,
insisting that "we don't have those kind of people in our family," sends her off to
live with her elderly aunts in the mountains of Virginia. Here Orphea finds a
MARCH 2005 
* 315
salubrious atmosphere in which to grieve and heal; her aunts accept her uncondi-
tionally, and she finds a cousin, Raynor, from the white side of her family, who is
a kindred artistic spirit. Together they take their show--Orphea's prose and po-
etry and Raynor's painting-to New York, where old friends of Orphea's have
opened a club. The text is staged, then, as the performance itself, with Orphea
introducing the crew and occasionally breaking into her narrative with direct ad-
dresses to make sure the audience is still with her. She bleeds out the pain of losing
her mother and of finding and losing her first love, and she finally receives the
acceptance and affection she craves among her mother's people. Orphea's voice is
rhythmic and powerful in both her prose and the poems interspersed throughout
the performance, and the mythic connection to her namesake Orpheus is a rich
image as she longs to bring her loved ones back to life through her poetry. A
compelling coming-out, coming-of-age, coming-to-terms story, this will surely strike
many chords with teen readers who struggle to love themselves and their lives, and
who believe in the power of words to help them do so. KC
Yu, CHUN 
Little Green: Growing Up During the Chinese Cultural Revolution.
Simon, 2005 
[96p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-86943-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-10
Born in 1966 at the inception of the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, Yu
(Little Green) mines memories and family stories to reconstruct in free verse the
impact of Chairman Mao's movement on her own family. With her father in the
country for "reeducation" and her schoolteacher mother under constant political
scrutiny, Little Green spends long spells with her maternal grandmother. Imbed-
ded in the rambling verses are telling details of a life that, at four decades' distance,
strikes readers as rampantly dysfunctional, but it is simply status quo to a child
who knows nothing different. Baba (father) is a figure to be seen twice a year, and
he is a cause for family readjustment upon his return. Nighttime whispering be-
tween parents hints at the political peril under which the well-educated pair lives.
Scant mealtime offerings belie the optimistic reports, piped by loudspeakers into
every home, of agricultural bounty and national prosperity. The slow-moving
poems require considerable patience, and readers may wonder whether the ragged-
right-edge "verses" are not simply prose in masquerade. More problematic, how-
ever, is the lack of context (largely unmitigated by the appended glossary) and the
story's abrupt conclusion at Mao's death, which leaves readers wondering how the
Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution came to be viewed as "Ten Years of Great
Calamity," and how Little Green's family weathered the aftermath. Though this
is a well-meaning chronicle of a troubling time, a clearer portrait of adolescence
during the Revolution can be found in Zhang's Red Land, Yellow River (BCCB
11/04). EB
316 
* THE BULLETIN
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 2005
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Cynthia Kadohata for Kira-Kira (Ath-
eneum). Three Newbery Honor Books were also named: Al Capone Does My
Shirts, by Gennifer Choldenko (Putnam); The Voice that Challenged a Nation:
Marian Anderson and the Strugglefor Equal Rights, by Russell Freedman (Clarion);
and Lizzie Bright and the Buckminster Boy, by Gary D. Schmidt (Clarion).
Kevin Henkes is the 2005 winner of the Caldecott Medal for his book Kitten's First
Full Moon, written by the illustrator (Greenwillow). Caldecott Honor Books are
The Red Book, illustrated and written by Barbara Lehman (Houghton); Coming on
Home Soon, illustrated by E. B. Lewis and written by Jacqueline Woodson (Put-
nam); and Knuffle Bunny: A Cautionary Tale, illustrated and written by Mo Willems
(Hyperion).
The Coretta Scott King Award for writing will be presented to Toni Morrison,
author of Remember: The Journey to School Integration (Houghton). The Coretta
Scott King Award for illustration will be presented to Kadir Nelson, illustrator of
Ellington Was Not a Street, written by Ntozake Shange (Simon). The King Author
Honor Books are The Legend ofBuddy Bush, by Shelia P. Moses (McElderry); Who
Am I Without Him?: Short Stories About Girls and the Boys in Their Lives, by Sharon
G. Flake (Jump at the Sun/Hyperion); and Fortune's Bones: The Manumission
Requiem, by Marilyn Nelson (Front Street). Two King Illustrator Honor Books
were selected: God Bless the Child, illustrated by Jerry Pinkney, written by Billie
Holiday and Arthur Herzog, Jr. (Amistad/HarperCollins); and The People Could
Fly: The Picture Book, illustrated by Leo and Diane Dillon, written by Virginia
Hamilton (Knopf). The Coretta Scott King/John Steptoe New Talent Award for
writing goes to Barbara Hathaway, author of Missy Violet and Me (Houghton).
Frank Morrison, illustrator of Jazzy Miz Mozetta (Farrar), written by Brenda C.
Roberts, is the recipient of the Steptoe New Talent Illustrator Award.
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is
Delacorte Press for Jodlle Stolz's The Shadows of Ghadames. Two Honor Books
were also selected: The Crow-Girl: The Children of Crow Cove, written by Bodil
Bredsdorff and published by Farrar, Straus and Giroux; and Daniel Half Human
and the Good Nazi, written by David Chotjewitz and published by Richard Jack-
son Books/Atheneum.
The Michael L. Printz Award for a book that exemplifies literary excellence in
young adult literature goes to Meg Rosoff for How I Live Now (Lamb). Honor
books are Airborn, by Kenneth Oppel (Eos/HarperCollins); Lizzie Bright and the
Buckminster Boy, by Gary D. Schmidt (Clarion); and Chanda's Secrets, by Allan
Stratton (Annick).
MARCH 2005 
* 317
The Robert F. Sibert Award for most distinguished informational book for chil-
dren goes to Russell Freedman for The Voice that Challenged a Nation: Marian
Anderson and the Struggle for Equal Rights (Clarion). Three Sibert Honor Books
were also named: Walt Whitman: Words for America, written by Barbara Kerley,
illustrated by Brian Selznick (Scholastic); The Tarantula Scientist, written by Sy
Montgomery, with photographs by Nic Bishop (Houghton); and Sequoyah: The
Cherokee Man Who Gave His People Writing, written and illustrated by James
Rumford, translated into Cherokee by Anna Sixkiller Huckaby (Houghton).
The Schneider Family Book Award picture book winner is My Pal Victor, written
by Diane Gonzales Bertrand and illustrated by Robert L. Sweetland (Raven Tree
Press). Pam Mufioz Ryan is the winner of the middle school award for Becoming
Naomi Ledn (Scholastic). The winner of the teen award is Samantha Abeel for My
Thirteenth Winter (Orchard).
Francesca Lia Block is the 2005 winner of the Margaret A. Edwards Award for
Outstanding Literature for Young Adults, honoring an author's lifetime contribu-
tion in writing books for teenagers.
The winner of the 2005 Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal for a substantial and lasting
contribution to literature for children is Laurence Yep.
The 2006 May Hill Arbuthnot Honor Lecture will be delivered by Russell Freed-
man.
The Scott O'Dell Award for Historical Fiction goes to A. LaFaye for Worth (Si-
mon).
The Canadian Library Association's Book of the Year for Children is Boy O'Boy,
written by Brian Doyle (Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre). The Amelia Frances
Howard-Gibbon Illustrator's Award goes to Bill Slavin for Stanley's Party, written
by Linda Bailey (Kids Can). Polly Horvath is the winner of the Young Adult
Canadian Book Award for The Canning Season (Farrar).
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Jennifer Donnelly for A Gathering Light
(Bloomsbury).
The Kate Greenaway Medal was awarded to Shirley Hughes for Ella's Big Chance,
written and illustrated by the author (Simon).
,on I
318 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: MacCullough
Actors and acting-fiction: Curry;
Dhami; Koja
ADVENTURE: Graff; Gross;
McCaughrean; Spradlin; Tingle
Africa-stories: Kurtz
African Americans: Bolden
African Americans-fiction: Curry;
Richardson; Wyeth
African Americans-poetry: Duncan
African Americans-stories: Cohen;
Isadora
Animals: Lewin
Animals-fiction: Cutler; Gleitzman;
Hartnett; Velmans; Willans
ANTHOLOGIES: Lanagan
Appearance-fiction: Butcher
Art: Price
Art and artists: Bryant
Art and artists-fiction: Gross
Babies-poetry: Duncan
Babies-stories: Jenkins
Baseball: Curlee; Winter
Baseball-fiction: Jennings
Baseball-stories: Isadora
Basketball-fiction: Richardson
BEDTIME STORIES: Duncan;
Kurtz
BIOGRAPHIES: Bryant; Bustard;
Demi; Silverman; Winter; Yu
Brothers-stories: Cohen
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
MacCullough
Brothers and sisters-stories: Kurtz
Campers and camping-fiction:
Hartinger
Chickens-stories: Khan
China: Yu
China-fiction: Wilkinson
China-stories: Andersen
Circuses-fiction: Repka
Clothing-fiction: Brashares
College-fiction: Stein
Colombia-fiction: Whyman
CRAFT BOOKS: Price
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Blacker; Graff; Gross; Spradlin;
Waite; Whyman
Cultural studies: Gallo
CUMULATIVE STORIES:
Chwast
Current events: Whyman
Dating-fiction: Rushton
Death and dying-fiction: Geisert;
Griffin; Wyeth
Dogs-fiction: Hartnett
Dogs-stories: Jenkins
Dragons-fiction: Wilkinson
Easter-poetry: Grimes
Ecology: Velmans
Ethics and values: Baskin; Butcher;
Demi; Isadora; Mackel; Oates;
Repka; Richardson
Faith-fiction: Geisert
Families-fiction: Geisert; Hogan
Families-stories: Cohen; Kerley
FANTASY: Banerjee; Curry; Fisher;
Keehn; Larbalestier; Thesman;
Vaught; Velmans; Westerfeld;
Wilkinson
Farm life-fiction: Geisert
Fathers-fiction: Hartnett; Jennings
MARCH 2005 
* 319
Fathers-stories: Vestergaard
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Andersen; Butcher; Keehn; Kurtz;
Sherman; Thesman
Food and eating-stories: Andersen;
Lewis; Willans
Friends-fiction: Brashares; Cutler;
Marsden
Friends-poetry: Soto
Gays and lesbians-fiction:
Hartinger; Koja; Wyeth
Gender issues-fiction: Blacker;
Oates
Gods-fiction: Fisher
Growing up-fiction: Brashares;
Hartnett; Oates
HISTORICAL FICTION: Geisert;
Graff; Rappaport; Rinaldi; Tingle;
Vaught
History, British: Curry; Tingle
History, U.S.: Bolden
Holidays: Chwast; Grimes;
Rappaport
HUMOR: Codell; Dhami;
Gleitzman; Hogan; Jenkins;
Keehn; Lewin; Lockhart; Repka;
Shannon
Identity-fiction: Banerjee; Gallo
Immigrants-fiction: Fleming; Gallo
Islands-fiction: Graff
Jealousy-stories: Khan
Jews-fiction: Rappaport
Journalism-fiction: Feinstein
JOURNALS: Rinaldi
Language arts: Codell
Latinos: Winter
Literature: Silverman
Magic-fiction: Larbalestier;
Thesman; Vaught
Mental illness-fiction: Griffin
Mothers-fiction: Butcher;
MacCullough; Thesman
Mothers-poetry: Duncan
Moving-fiction: Fleming
Music and musicians: Bustard
Music and musicians-fiction: Curry
MYSTERIES: Feinstein; Graff;
Gross; Napoli; Waite
Mythology, classical: McCaughrean
Nature study: Robbins
Passover: Chwast; Rappaport
Pets-fiction: Fleming; Napoli
Pets-stories: Khan
Photography: Kerley
Physical education: Baskin; Curlee;
Jennings; Mackel; Marsden
Plants: Robbins
Plants-stories: Andersen
POETRY: Grimes; Soto; Yu
Racism: Bolden
Racism-fiction: Vaught
Reading aloud: Gleitzman; Keehn
Reading, beginning: Shannon
Reading, easy: Cutler; Fleming;
Napoli; Richardson
Reading, reluctant: Curlee;
Marsden; Price
Relationships-fiction: Koja;
Lockhart; Hartinger; Waite
Religious instruction: Demi;
Grimes
ROMANCE: Hogan; Rinaldi;
Rushton
Runaways-fiction: MacCullough
School-fiction: Blacker
Science: Robbins
Seasons-stories: Sherman
Seeds: Robbins
SHORT STORIES: Codell; Gallo;
Lanagan
Sisters-fiction: Griffin; Rushton
Slavery-fiction: Wilkinson
Snow-stories: Vestergaard
Softball-fiction: Mackel
Soldiers-stories: Cohen
SONGS: Chwast
Spies and spying-fiction: Spradlin
Sports: Curlee; Winter
Sports-fiction: Repka
SPORTS STORIES: Baskin;
Feinstein; Isadora; Jennings;
Mackel; Marsden
Storytelling: Willans
Storytime: Jenkins; Khan; Willans
Summer-fiction: Hartinger
Time travel-fiction: Curry
TODDLER BOOKS: Shannon
Toys-stories: Lewis
320 
* THE BULLETIN
Transformations-fiction: Velmans
Transvestitism-fiction: Blacker
Treasure-fiction: Graff
Voyages and travel: Lewin
Voyages and travel-fiction: Fisher;
Gleitzman; MacCullough;
McCaughrean; Stein; Tingle;
Wilkinson
Voyages and travel-poetry: Soto
War-fiction: Stein
War-stories: Cohen
Whales-fiction: Velmans
Winter-stories: Vestergaard
Wishes-fiction: Banerjee
Women's studies: Bryant; Demi
World cultures: Kerley
World War II-fiction: Rappaport
Writers and writing: Silverman
Writers and writing-fiction: Wyeth
RENT'S CHOICE RECOMMENDED AWARD 
WINNER!
Fat Cat will be a favorite
read-aloud and simply
demands that listeners
shout along." -K-,
IT CAT A Danish Folktale
argaret Read MacDonald
lustrated by Julie Paschkis
The 
storytellers rhythmic version of this classic
folktale is fun to read and fun to hear. Cat's
boundless appetite gets her into more and more
trouble as the refraindrven story careens toward its
cimax.
"MacDonald's text has the verve of
language honed by frequent telling."
-Bulletin 
of the Center for Children's Books
"A 
crisp, charming text is set off by
Paschkis's cheery gouache folk art style
illustrations."
-Rombles: A Cultural 
Arts Magazine
IBN U-8/483-616-6
Hardback $15.95
ALso 
AVAABLE:
Fat Cat and Friends (CD)
ISBN 0-87483-628-4
$14.95
sed Fat Catfor 'growing' storytime this
ad to write and tell you that the children
just LOVED it! They laughed in all the right places. It's
really a joy to have a book that 'tells' so well."
-Susan Anderson-Newhom
Margaret Read MacDonald is the author of Three
Minute Toles: Stories from Around the Wodd, The Gir Who Wore
Too Much, and Shake4t-Up Tales. Julie Paschkis is the
illustrator of oward-winning children's books.
www.augustbouse.co
catalog may be 
downloaded
from web site 
or requested 
by
phone.
1-800-284-8784 AUGUST
HwOUSE
www. augusthouse com
August House is the
Storytelling Source.
A sweeping, historical Russian saga
from National Book Award-winning author
GLORIA WHELAN
i "This companion to Angel on the
Square and The Impossible Journey
continues the story of a Russian family
struggling for survival. Whelan creates a
memorable ... indelible picture of time
and place." -Starred 
Review/ Booklist
S"Compelling characters and
historical detail.... Young fans of the
historical novel will race through this
book" 
-Starred 
Review / Booklist
Tr 0-06-054112-1 
$15.99 ($23.99)
I L A U fCACI I 
V 
1l 106 
Ioa 
0\
I *· Aoon· IA ,n (:b 
--
rl -
S--.-.... 
..---...----
F
I 
I
I: 
* 
Ili· 
** 
11- 
** 
-
; 
·
·
I 
l·i 
* 
-
, * 
I*
Tr 0-06-029030-7 $15.95 ($23.95) 
Tr 0-06-623811-0 $15.99 ($23.99)
Pb 0-06-440879-5 $6.99 ($9.99) 
Pb 0-06-441083-8 $599 ($8.99)
Ages: 10 up Grades: 5 up 
Ages: 10 up Grades: 5 up
HHarperCollinsChildren'sBooks *iHarperTrophy 
The THwfg
www.harperchildrens.com * www.harperteacher.com 
co ing W
i
AWARD-WINNING 
STORIES 
NOW 
ON 
CD!
The pain and self-consciousness
of getting braces and living
with the "tin grin"
-
-itk 
all harea
BRACES
Created and performed by
Donald Davis
A Circle of Excellence
Storyteller of the National
iorytelling Network
een reasoning at its
st realistic...a terrific
yteller."
arent Council
iite pictures come to
n these inventive tales."
list
F 
Award
SFinalist
ISBN 0-87483-772-3
Compact Disc $14.95
Running time: 59 minutes,
Digipack format
Family audiences
or Grades 5 and up
www.wgpstlomse.com
otolog may be 
downlooded from web
site or requested 
by phone.
1-800-284-8784
"[Davis's] storytelling will encourage
listeners to share their family stories.
It might even encourage them to record
their stories for posterity."-KLIATT
AUGUST August House is the
HOUSE 
Storytelling Source.
www. augusthouse.com
-I
S7
-cI
-C
FREE
TRIAL ISSUE
of an award-winning
publication!
wU-
Visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
Click on
FREE TRIAL ISSUE
Teaching K-8 is 
filled with hundreds of unique ideas
and activities that help teachers present new challenges
to their students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
To receive your
FREE TRIAL ISSUE visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
Teaching K-8 Magazine
40 Richards Avenue * Norwalk, CT 06854
STOar:,FI RlFIACE TO CaWACE
Conecting Chidren and Nartive
EDED BY BETSY HEARNE,JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRsNEJENINS, AND DmEBOR 
STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget
that children are not simply passive receptacles for
whatever treasure or trash the adult world throws at
them but are lively agents who are continually inter-
acting with their environment. Children actively cre-
ate meaning as readers, viewers, and listeners. The
3 9* Allerton Park Institute papers emphasize the criti-
cal need to connect children and narrative as a way to
ISBN 0-87845-105-6; 
affect their development as listeners, readers, view-
Number 39; 143 pages; 
ers, and evaluators of literature-and information in
paper; $21.95* 
all forms.
The Bulletin Storyteing Revie 
Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSOI
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin Storytelling Review con-
tains:
* 162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
each review
* Price, distributor, and grade level information for | 
.'g*" 
* 
|
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by ISBN 
0-87845-106-4; 
99
At diLlhIt" 6(ml the 
41
I-, It/ I I. I I 
St-1 m 0 )1 fd 1 '11 ) 1%, 
1 1-ýv A- 
I I I fi)rl I )ý It It) I I ý'ý-cictlcc
1325Sasj
CBnmani
US~JC
1325Sasj
CBnmani
US~JC
University of 
Iloi 
Pre
1325 Sou Oaktet
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA
ADiRS SS.V( 
REQUisr
yPofERIini Press 
PODICMS
1325 South 
a 
t 
~Pos
Champain, IL61820
U.S.A.PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDtss SERVIE BEQUS~TE
hLS
;rNln
r
(~ ..np~ i
and passwoi
The Bulletin C
1998-2004'
The online w
database by
To access f
I. Gotohl
2. WheiMa
scriber r»
mailing la
word. If
number (
3. After log
*pasiworc
case sens
passworc
*scriber i
Remember,
vidual print
access, so pie
expand The I
electronic sul
Non-subscrii
Children's Boo
Please e-mail
..~p·
52-,
The Buletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and ncludes the
1998-2004 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online verson alows you to search the curren issue r the 
re
database by author, title, age or grade level.
Toaccess The Buetn Online:
.
Go to h 
www.praenetorgcc
2. 
hen 
ssing The Buetin Online for the first 
e, use the ub-
scriber 
ber that appears in the upper lef-h 
c 
er of
mailing lal 
on your print copy as both 
ur use 
and 
-
word. 
is subscriber number will usually be a four- or 
ig
number 
may also be a five-character letternum 
combination.
3. 
After lo 
g n for e frst time you will be required to 
y
passw 
o somethingother than your u 
e. Th
casesens 
andshould be one wor only. 
store this new
password 
a safe place. Your userna 
(whic 
also 
r sub
scriber number) wil not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for 
ic 
only ini-
vidual pnt 
crbers and institutional subscribers' staff are g
acess, so plee do not share your access cod 
We 
working to
expand The Bulletn Online's capabilities and therefo crte broader
electronic s 
pton options for iividuals and insttut
Non-subsc 
can learn more bout The Bulletin 
Center for
Chldren's Boo 
is 
a 
:luc
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bcc@alexlaJsuluc.edu.
(~ ..np~
i
4-·
Ttre ~ 
On
~e 
ORline 
vera
~ 
~ ir~c~
I· ~ta~
~1613 
latr
~ber bu
3, 
~r~
~·~ld
~rd 
k
vlduat R~ 
~
~.u) 
pl~
~ic 
5~
~e 
~I 
sc
6
g
a
'11
II
is
ht:
gllil
ul
1
re
rt
B
nrl
d
On
vail
~iera
'Nil
1Un
iadbji
hig;
bu
sf:t
Ibld
dk
lar
i::! 
::::
.. .
I 
'I 
i·: 
i 
.
.
.
I ; I- --- -~~--I~--_- -~- a .ii ·
1
..~p·
52-,
krs, and includes the
; ~ 
~ published,
t issue Or the ~M3
: ~Ct use the tub-
~ ce~r of·d·re
Isc~s 
and ~-
~or~l&hc
~m~ 
~bt~n.
sul~ td ~ 
~
Sne: ~kp~/s
~ 
~ 
dlis ~
h is ~O ~~ sub-
~rQi ~-orrfy ind;i-
I· ~·~ ~
V;Cb 
~ 
~~ 
~
~ ~;b;~e
al~lQ~luc.~
j_ 
I
c~..np· 
~41C 
ri"
r""
5~)L" iP~
.6
