I L LIN 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
ii
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
;,iB 1'
;*
·B:3 
~:·"- 
'
I
I-:
There is a language
between two languages
called Ivijean but who will admit
they are speaking it?
"Let's change places," the teenagers said.
"For a week, I'll be you and you be me.
Knowing if they did, they could never fight again.
Listen to them.
-From "Trenches and Moats and Mounds of Dirt'
This volume collects for the first time in one place all of
Naomi Shihab Nye's poems about the Middle East, about
peace, about being an Arab-American in the United States.
There are familiar poems, poems that Nye's readers have
cherished for years, as well as new poems being puhlished
for the first time. Nourishing, haunting, and hopeful-
here is a timeless and necessary book.
$16.95 TrO 
(006 009765 5), $16.89 Lb (0 06 009766 5)
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
May 2002
Vol. 55 No. 9
A LOOK INSIDE
307 
THE BIG PICTURE
Little Rat Sets Sail by Monika Bang-Campbell; illus. by Molly Bang
308 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
322 * Summersaults written and illus. by Douglas Florian
323 * Hole in My Life by Jack Gantos
331 
* How I Became a Writer & Oggie Learned to Drive by Janet Taylor Lisle
334 
* Patrol: An American Soldier in Vietnam by Walter Dean Myers; illus. by
Ann Grifalconi
337 * When My Name Was Keoko by Linda Sue Park
342 
* Loser by Jerry Spinelli
347 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
348 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
X 
fy 
l
\
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Jeannette M. Hulick, Reviewer (JMH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Sabrina Austin
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus
Reprint Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300
North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2002 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Molly Bang from Little Rat Sets Sail ©2002. Used by permission of Harcourt,
Inc.
MAY 2002 
* 
307
THE BIG PICTURE
Little Rat Sets Sail
by Monika Bang-Campbell; illustrated by Molly Bang
It's been a couple of good months for literary daughters: last month the Bulletin
Big Picture featured Small, by Clara Vulliamy, daughter of Shirley Hughes, and
this month we're focusing on a glorious team effort by Monika Bang-Campbell
and her mother, Molly Bang. They've turned their attention to that perennially
difficult genre, the easy reader, and the result is a witty and understanding outing
that should make quite a splash.
Right off, readers will recognize Little Rat's parental-caused pickle: "Little
Rat did not have a choice about sailing lessons. Her parents just signed her up."
Far from being an old or even a wannabe salt, she is afraid of everything connected
with boats and water ("She was scared of the water. She was scared of falling in.
She was scared of falling in even with her life jacket on") and ill at ease among her
eager classmates ("Little Rat felt like a dork. She wanted to go home"). Fortu-
nately, instructor Buzzy Bear gives Little Rat a helping paw and allows her to
proceed at her own pace, so that even if she doesn't sail a pram solo like her gung-
ho cohorts, she manages to work through some of her fears, acquire some skills,
and even enjoy herself a bit on the bounding main.
The rodent-sailor theme may recall Stuart Little, but Bang-Campbell is
dealing with a very different kind of mariner here in reluctant Little Rat. The text
treats her reservations with a brisk sympathy ("She was embarrassed the others
would think she was a fraidy cat. Little Rat WAS a fraidy cat") while touching
understandingly on the multiplicity of anxieties a fish out of water-or a rat nearly
in it-can have: every new detail, instruction, or action makes Little Rat more
certain that she's in over her head, and worse, in over her head alone. Readers will
warm to the heroine's wry and skeptical outlook ("'Only one person can fit in a
pram. You get to sail them by yourself.' Buzzy Bear said this like it was a good
thing"), and they'll appreciate both the pithy offhandedness of the text and the
realistic groundedness to her growth: she never saves anybody or even sails solo,
instead achieving success on her own terms. The story's separation into five easy
chapters helps struggling readers achieve success on their terms, too, and sailing
terminology is as clear as it needs to be in context (a diagram helps the uninitiated
with the points of the boat).
Bang's well-trimmed illustrations don't luff for a minute: she's got a nice
line in watercolor seascapes in gleaming cobalt blue, accented by flotillas of crisp-
sailed boats and seen from a variety of imaginative perspectives (youngsters will
certainly understand Little Rat's alarm at her heeling craft). The amiable little
critters (all safely ensconced in life vests) are cuddly yet realistically drafted, with a
Garth Williams flair, and telling details abound: the skunk pair, clearly siblings,
peer inquiringly off the dock at their own reflections, the bunnies' ears stream in
the breeze, and the opossum floats comfortably on his back, all under the comfort-
308 
* THE BULLETIN
ing supervision of enormous Buzzy Bear. Little Rat's obvious discomfiture, whether
she's anxiously fiddling with her pink tail or hanging back from the enthusiastic
crowd, is both amusingly and tenderly depicted, especially in imagined scenes vi-
sualizing her worst fears (such as an overhead shot of a solitary Little Rat, adrift as
jellyfish and "slimy eels" encircle her boat). Reassuringly, however, there are also
views of Little Rat coming to enjoy her new milieu, throwing her minimal weight
into hoisting the centerboard and leaping off the bow with something approach-
ing gusto.
The book pleasingly shares this gusto; amid the comforting treatment of
anxiety are some seductive nautical touches that capably convey the joys of mess-
ing about in boats ("The salt left white powder all over her fur"), of developing
competence ("Little Rat held the tiller as the boat sailed forward"), and of passing
milestones ("She had made it to the last day of sailing lessons!"). Reading a good
book can offer youngsters some of those joys as well, and they'll enjoy embarking
on literary and maritime adventures in this seaworthy little craft. (Imprint infor-
mation appears on p. 309.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADKINS, JAN 
Bridges: From My Side to Yours; written and illus. by Jan
Adkins. 
Roaring Brook, 2002 
96p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2510-7 
$25.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1542-X 
$18.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Admired, feared, or ignored, bridges are virtually unavoidable realities for anyone
bent on straying more than a few miles from home, and here Adkins takes a close
look at the ways bridges go up (especially in the Western hemisphere) and the
reasons they stay up (quite well, thankfully, for the most part). His discussion
follows a rough chronological pattern, with enthusiastic digressions onto related
themes as exegesis requires. Touring the Roman aqueducts, the Venetian Rialto,
New England's weather-resistant covered bridges, the Brooklyn and Golden Gate
Bridges, and a host of other marvels ancient and modern, readers are treated to a
cogent crash course in the engineering aspects of design and the relative strengths
of available building materials. There's a fair amount of social history as well, in
imagining a visit to the original London Bridge and in examining the system of
cooperative labor behind Andean rope-suspension bridges. Black-and-white
drawings, carefully captioned and labeled to display elements discussed in the text,
capture both aesthetic and structural features. An index directs bridge-spotters to
their favorites, and a fairly comprehensive glossary takes some of the terror out of
daunting terminology. Introduce fans of David Macaulay to a new mentor. EB
MAY 2002 
* 
309
ARMSTRONG, JENNIFER, ed. 
Shattered: Stories of Children and War. 
Knopf,
2002 
166 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91112-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81112-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-10
How do you tell a truthful war story to and about children? This collection con-
tains a dozen responsible answers to that question from writers including Marilyn
Singer, Suzanne Fisher Staples, Joseph Bruchac, and Jennifer Armstrong. Though
only five stories are set outside the United States and only four center on non-
American characters, readers will encounter a variety of situations and perspec-
tives: in one story, an American Indian boy fights for the Union; in another, an
all-American kid in Venezuela reevaluates his position in the food chain following
a coup attempt; in still another, a young girl harbors a Vietnam draft dodger. A
compact gray one-line crawl along the bottom of each page provides relevant sta-
tistics about, for example, the use of napalm in Vietnam, the survival rate of chil-
dren in Nazi death camps, and the Witness for Peace program; source notes for
these statistics are included, and an editorial introduction adds more information
(according to a United Nations report, "armed conflicts now kill and maim more
children than soldiers"). Overall, the quality of these accessible stories is high:
each contains significant moments or realistic details that capture the experience
of children and teens learning to survive while "caught in the middle of someone
else's war" on a home front that has become a battleground. This invitation to
imagine the unthinkable is well worth taking up. Brief, personal authors' notes
appear in the back of the book. FK
ASARE, MESHACK 
Sosu's Call; written and illus. by Meshack Asare. 
Kane/Miller,
2002 
38p
ISBN 1-929132-21-2 
$15.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Sosu lives in a small Ghanaian village between the sea and a lagoon. Unable to use
his legs since his birth, he spends most of his time in the family compound, playing
with the dog, watching the chickens, and helping out any way he can, all the while
longing to be able to go to school and to get around the village. When a fierce
storm strikes unexpectedly, Sosu drags himself to the drum shed to play on the
talking drums, calling the villagers home to save their loved ones, their goods, and
their village from the winds and flood. In gratitude to Sosu, the villagers repair the
village road, run it to Sosu's door, and present him with the gift of a new wheel-
chair so he can get around the village and travel to school. This isn't the most
original of plots or messages, but there's a gentle ease to the telling and an aesthetic
satisfaction in the closing's repetition of the opening. Asare's free-flowing water-
colors sometimes render faces awkwardly, but the earthy tones and speckled, dappled
effects add texture to the spare views of Sosu and to the livelier village scenes.
Originally published in Ghana, the story has a smooth narrative flow that lends
itself to reading aloud, and it will be adaptable to a number of curricular needs.
JMD
BANG-CAMPBELL, MONIKA 
Little Rat Sets Sail; illus. by Molly Bang. 
Harcourt,
2002 
4 8p
ISBN 0-15-216297-6 
$14.00 
R* 
Gr. 2-3
See this month's Big Picture, p. 307, for review.
310 
* THE BULLETIN
BECHARD, MARGARET 
Hanging on to Max. 
Roaring Brook, 2002 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2574-3 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1579-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
The Max of the title is a baby, nearly a year old now, and the person doing the
hanging on is Sam, his father, currently going through his senior year in high
school while raising his baby alone. Periodic flashbacks offer insights into Sam's
relationship with Max's cheerleader mother, into Max's birth, and into his mother's
decision to give him up, while the ongoing narrative focuses on Sam's ambivalence
about his change from college-bound math talent to teenage father just trying to
finish high school before taking a job with his father's construction firm. There's
definitely some contrivance here, and Sam's concluding decision to give Max up
for adoption is awfully tidy (there's also no acknowledgment of the difference be-
tween surrendering a newborn and a kid Max's age). The exploration of the situ-
ation is compelling, however, and the drain an infant puts on parental mind and
body is vividly and credibly depicted. Also credible is Sam's quiet yearning for the
life he had and the future he had planned, as he sees old friends across a chasm of
experience and finds kinship with an old crush now a teen parent herself. The
paternal slant adds fresh interest to what's essentially a classic and enjoyable prob-
lem novel. DS
BLACKABY, SUSAN 
Rembrandt's Hat; illus. by Mary Newell DePalma. 
Houghton,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-618-11452-1 
$15.00 
R 6-9yrs
Rembrandt, a bear, is wandering through the park one day when "a gust of wind
snagged the tip of his hat and carried it away, just like that." Rembrandt chases his
hat but finds a bird instead: "'Cheer up!' said the bird. 'I'll be your hat.' He
hopped onto Rembrandt's head. 'How's that?' he called. The bird's wet little feet
felt prickly." Rembrandt lives with his avian chapeau until a cat chases the bird/
hat away-and takes its place on Rembrandt's head. A chance meeting with a
rabbit ("Rembrandt imagined having a rabbit for a hat. It could work") sends
bear, cat, and bunny to a mad hat shop in a comic hat-buying spree. Eventually,
Rembrandt finds himself a near-perfect replacement for his old lucky hat, and all
ends well. Mixed-media illustrations feature a popeyed, cuddly bear and his popeyed,
cartoony animal companions in a generic outdoor setting consisting mostly of blue
sky and green triangle trees that are enlivened by bits of collage newsprint and
maps. The facial expressions of the rather prim, anthropomorphized animals are a
rare treat, through, and the understated humor of both text and illustrations is
surprising and effective. Try reading this aloud with tongue in cheek and see how
the subtle humor flies. JMD
BRADLEY, KIMBERLY BRUBAKER 
Halfway to the Sky. 
Delacorte, 2002 
[17 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90029-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72960-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Dani (short for Katahdin, the mountain at the end of the Appalachian Trail) is
running away, but not aimlessly: she's determined to thru-hike the two-thousand-
odd miles of the Trail, the place where her parents met and married. She's also
MAY 2002 
* 311
determined to leave behind her parents, newly divorced after the death of Dani's
brother, Springer, and her own grief for Springer. Unsurprisingly, Dani's mother
catches up with her twelve-year-old daughter and refuses to let her continue alone
on her trip; more surprisingly, Mom manages to take leave from work and con-
tinue with her daughter on the hike once she sees how important it is to Dani.
Bradley effectively uses the stresses and strains of the hike to reveal and explore the
stresses and strains of Dani and her mother's relationship, and it's also a plausible
situation to elicit some truths about life as a well sibling ("I had a dying child, and
he did die, and he took up a lot of attention that would otherwise have gone to
you," says Mom flatly) and about Dani's parents' divorce ("So you stayed together
for Springer," says a stunned Dani, "but you wouldn't do it for me?"). The book
also deftly depicts the community of the Trail, with connections often quickly
occurring between hiking mates; Dani, in fact, seizes overeagerly on an early com-
rade as a substitute for the brother she misses so terribly. It's nice to see an outdoorsy
bonding story about women, especially mother and daughter, and readers will find
the family drama affecting. A note about the Appalachian Trail is appended. DS
BRANFORD, HENRIETTA 
Little Pig Figwort Can't Get to Sleep; illus. by Claudio
Mufioz. 
Clarion, 2002 
[30p]
ISBN 0-618-15968-1 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Pig Mama and Pig Papa have bidden their piglets goodnight, and "Dill, Chive,
and Caraway, Tansy and Pansy" are out like lights. Not so little Pig Figwort: "He
tossed and he turned, he wriggled and he jiggled, he tried and he tried, but he
could not get to sleep." The resourceful porker therefore defiantly eschews sleep
and drifts instead into entertaining fantasy--submarining below the seas, Ski-
Dooing up to the North Pole, and blasting off to the moon-which of course
convinces fickle sleep to come at last. While the sequence of adventures teeters on
the verge of rambling, Branford crams the mini-expeditions with enough succinctly
described action and specificity to keep the interest ofnot-so-dozy youngsters, and
Figwort's insomniac trials are described in diverting and divertingly repeated phrases.
Mufioz' eloquent watercolors skillfully emphasize Figwort's dilemma, providing
pace (they shift to a series of spot art as Figwort tosses and turns and expand to full
bleeds when he's off into a fantasy) and effectively contrasting thick black with
smoky gray linework to differentiate the sharply conscious Figwort from his som-
nolent siblings. Active young piglets will appreciate this adventurous approach to
bedtime. DS
BRILLHART, JULIE 
Molly Rides the School Bus; written and illus. by Julie
Brillhart. 
Whitman, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-5210-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Molly's ready for the first day of kindergarten from her blue-gingham hair bow
right down to her zippy new red sneakers. Spiffy duds, however, are poor comfort
for a girl filled with anxiety about the ordeal immediately ahead-a bus ride with
big kids that she doesn't even know. No sooner has Mom kissed her goodbye and
the door swung shut than Molly's fears come to life. Her teddy bear Willy, who
has tumbled from her backpack, is tossed from seat to seat in a rowdy version of
keepaway, and he ends up in the lost-and-found bin at the front of the bus. Luck-
ily Ruby, a big kid from Molly's bus stop, recognizes the toy, returns it, and shares
312 
* THE BULLETIN
the rest of the ride with Molly: "Molly felt much better now. She held Willy up
close and whispered into his ear, 'Mom was right, Willy. Big kids ARE nice, and
riding the school bus is fun!"' Ah, that all kindergarten angst could be swept aside
so lightly. Brillhart's bubbly line-and-watercolor paintings discreetly keep Molly
out of view as Willy makes his airborne journey down the aisle, but viewers with
bus anxieties of their own will surely imagine her distress even if they can't see it.
Ironically, the penultimate spread featuring "Ruby's Ten Tips for Riding the School
Bus" has no advice on the issue of torment by fellow bus riders. Listeners trusting
enough to believe there's a Ruby on every bus may breathe a bit easier; recalcitrant
little skeptics, though, are likely to remain unconvinced. EB
BROCKMEIER, KEVIN 
City ofNames. 
Viking, 2002 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-670-03565-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Though fourth-grader Howie had placed a book-club order for 101 Pickle Jokes,
he instead receives a copy of The Secret Guide to North Mellwood, which gives the
"true names" of places around their small town of the same name. Howie and his
two friends find that they can transport themselves anywhere from one of five
portals (one of which is the statue of Larry Boone conveniently located in front of
their school, Larry Boone Elementary) simply by knocking on the portal and say-
ing the true name of the place they want to go; repeating the name returns them to
the portal. Eventually, Howie tries again to order 101 PickleJokes, only to receive
a more detailed map of the town which takes him, via various portals, to such
bizarre places as the Room of Failed Inventions, the Room of Lost Pets, the Hall of
Babies (where Howie meets his as-yet-unborn sister, Marie), and finally to meet
the eccentric Larry Boone, inventor of all these portals and passages, who lives in a
secret bunker beneath the statue of himself. Brockmeier writes with an under-
stated surrealism that echoes the tone of some of Pinkwater's novels (LizardMusic
in particular), effectively placing unbelievable events solidly in an everyday setting
so that the story remains fantastic without becoming ridiculous. Despite the bi-
zarre setup, Howie and his friends are realistic characters who take these strange
adventures in stride, and the pacing draws the reader into the action without paus-
ing too much or too long for explanation. Fans of offbeat fantasy will appreciate
this gratifyingly weird story. KM
BROOKS, BRUCE 
Dolores. HarperCollins, 2002 
[14 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029473-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027818-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7 up
In What Hearts (BCCB 12/92), Brooks covered six years in the life of a boy in four
long stories; here he covers nine years in the life of a girl-Dolores-in seven short
stories. Dolores is quite a different figure from the uncertain protagonist of What
Hearts, however. Whether she's a seven-year-old being abducted in a Wal-Mart
(in "Half Good in Black," in an incorporation of the well-worn urban legend), a
sixth-grader effortlessly defeating the attempts of the class bully to make her life a
misery ("Do They Mean It?"), or a sophomore cheerleader jolting the glossy regu-
lars with her direct approach ("Rah"), she has an admirable sureness and a comfort
with her individuality as well as physical allure ("She is simply more gorgeous than
any of them, though in a decidedly stranger way, a way that the others can almost
MAY 2002 
* 313
dismiss as being odd"). Brooks' prose is, as usual, beautifully crafted and elegantly
polished, and there are some tender glimpses of the human spirit here, especially in
Dolores' relationship with her older brother. The glitter too often becomes brittle,
however, with Dolores so preternaturally wise and well-spoken that she's not cred-
ible (adult dialogue, particularly that of Dolores' mother and her friend in "Ladies
for Lunch," is even more laden with artifice). 
She also remains a distant and
elusive being, more visible and sympathetic in other characters' eyes than in the
narration's (the characters who focus on her are also much more tangible than she
herself is); the bookended emphasis on her response to abduction (sixteen in the
final story, Dolores thwarts a would-be rapist, paralleling her seven-year-old expe-
rience) seems a strange focus, contradicting the characterization of Dolores by
underscoring her significance as reactor rather than independent agent. Nonethe-
less, readers who enjoy knottier and less yielding narratives may appreciate these
stories of a girl who marches to her own drummer. DS
BROWN, DON 
Across a Dark and Wild Sea; written and illus. by Don
Brown. 
Roaring Brook, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2415-1 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1534-9 $15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-5
For his latest "adventurers" picture book, Brown reaches across some fifteen cen-
turies for the tale of Columcille (more often known as Columba), who, together
with Patrick and Brigid, completes the triumvirate of most revered Celtic saints.
Fashioning what passes as history from sketchy legend has its obvious challenges,
and the pool of fact from which Brown can draw is shallow and murky indeed.
However, the resultant narrative is both involving and credible, focusing more on
the monk Columcille's political struggle for the right to copy manuscripts (a his-
torical possibility) than on his famed glowing finger (a charming but, at best, du-
bious attribute). Within the confines of a brief text, Brown captures the monastic
infighting and clan warfare, spiritual dedication and passionate defense of learning
that have shaped Columcille's renown. Chill olive greens and khaki browns mist-
ily tint watercolor scenes of monastery, battlefield, and swollen sea, softening to a
more verdant hue for Columcille's final settlement on the Scottish island of Iona.
An author's note comments further on Columcille's life and on his religious and
political milieu; a bibliography and an Uncial hand lettering alphabet are also
included. EB
BURLEIGH, ROBERT, ad. 
Pandora; illus. by Raul Col6n. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202178-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
Burleigh and Col6n (co-creators of Hercules, BCCB 11/99) return to classical Greek
mythology with the story of the first woman, Pandora, and that notorious forbid-
den container. In a stately, somewhat overwrought style (arranged in centered
lines of text), Burleigh relates Pandora's battle to obey the stricture of Zeus that the
jar remain unopened. Inevitably, she opens the vessel and releases greed, pesti-
lence, war, and all manner of ills on an unsuspecting mankind, with only Hope
remaining in the jar. The author underplays Pandora's curiosity and overplays her
naivetd, perhaps to give her a more positive image, perhaps to ameliorate her re-
sponsibility for her actions. The attempted characterization of Pandora is unfor-
tunately still flat, and the author's careful balancing does little to make her more
314 
* THE BULLETIN
interesting. Col6n's framed watercolor and colored pencil illustrations are richly
textured and deeply hued, the palette a balanced combination of gold and green
tones. While the human figures are sometimes stiffly drafted, Pandora herself
sometimes evokes the glamour of Parrish. Despite its weaknesses (exemplified by
a melodramatic cover of Pandora's horrified face), this is a retelling of an impor-
tant myth that will provide an accessible entry point for younger readers and lis-
teners. A note on the myth and a glossary are included. JMD
CABOT, MEG 
Princess in Love. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
229p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029468-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029467-1 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
By now everybody probably knows Mia, normal New York teenager except for
being a princess and heir to the throne of Genovia, and everybody knows that
under her grandmother's tutelage, she's preparing to be presented to her people.
She's also still yearning after Michael, her best friend's brother, despite now pos-
sessing a perfectly serviceable boyfriend of her own and despite Michael's apparent
connection with brainy Judith, the girl who clones fruit flies in her bedroom; she
hopes that sometime before her Christmas departure she'll be able to divest herself
of nice but unsuitable Kenny and win the man of her dreams-if only she can
bring herself to tell him that she likes him. This is a bit more rambling and one-
note than The Princess Diaries (BCCB 12/00) and Princess in the Spotlight (9/01),
and the contrast between Mia smart (in her observations) and Mia stupid (in her
schoolwork and romance) is more sit-commy and less convincing. Cabot still
makes the most of her heroine's appealing situation, however, and Mia's comedic
overwhelmedness, reminiscent of Rennison's Angus, Thongs, and Full-Frontal
Snogging (BCCB 5/00), remains funny and readable. Mia does manage to obtain
Michael by the end of the book ("I'm living happily ever after"), but as she's yet to
be presented to her Genovian subjects, it'll be interesting to see if Cabot considers
this sufficient culmination or if Mia will return in a fourth book. DS
CARTER, DON 
Get to Work Trucks!; written and illus. by Don Carter. 
Roaring
Brook, 2002 
24p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2518-2 
$21.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1543-8 
$14.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
It's sunrise, and the trucks are gearing up for a day of earth-moving, falling into
line as they drive to the construction site: "One, two, three, four. Big trucks, little
trucks. Five, six, seven, eight. Orange trucks, red trucks, green trucks, yellow
trucks. These trucks have work to do." After pausing when their convoy meets a
turtle crossing the road (which viewers can then find in each subsequent scene),
the trucks arrive at the worksite and perform their bridge-building tasks: "The
loader lifts a big rock. The dump truck drops a pile of little rocks." Carter lever-
ages the three-dimensional properties of his artwork (acrylics, plaster, and foam
board with broad brush strokes in gleaming colors) to create illustrations young
viewers will want to touch (and taste-the mud looks exactly like chocolate frost-
ing). The appeal in subject (what child is not impressed by these earth movers?)
and medium (a visually scrumptious treat) combines effectively with concepts rel-
evant to a child's conceptual development: numbers, colors, and opposites. Though
the repetition may begin to tire adults, fans of Peter Sfs' Fire Truck (BCCB 1/99)
and Andrea Zimmerman's Trashy Town (5/99) will thoroughly enjoy this mud-
luscious ride. EAB
MAY 2002 
* 
315
COONEY, DOUG 
The Beloved Dearly; illus. by Tony DiTerlizzi. 
Simon,
2002 
183p
ISBN 0-689-83127-7 
$16.00 
M 
Gr. 5-7
Ernie Castellano is, at twelve, already a gung-ho business entrepreneur, and de-
spite his father's injunction against further growth ("And if I hear any more
cockamamie business schemes, you're grounded"), he's taking his skills in a new
direction: pet funerals. He acquires a staff-Dusty, the gifted creator of coffins,
Tony, the gravedigger, and Swimming Pool, the official mourner-and swings
into overdrive, planting pets for pay right, left, and center for the neighborhood
kids. The book is adapted from Cooney's play, but as a novel, it's shallow indeed,
with the source of comedy the kids' parodic indulgence in adult behavior rather
than any realism, the dialogue bogging down amid overexplanatory narrative, and
the concluding shift from high-spirited satire to predictable meaningful lesson ("You
brought people together," says the local Cat Lady, just before Ernie's own dog dies
and his friends rally round him) both corny and unconvincing. There's an unde-
niable allure in both the idea of successful kid moneymaking and in graveyard
hijinks, but readers in search of a snort-worthy trip to the cemetery will be better
off with the mordant humor of Waugh's The Loved One. DiTerlizzi's springy and
light-hearted line drawings begin each chapter. DS
COOPER, SUSAN 
Green Boy. 
McElderry, 2002 
195p
ISBN 0-689-84751-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Trey takes care of his electively mute younger brother, Lou, on
their visits to idyllic Long Pond Cay on a small Bahamian island. The boys live
with their grandparents, Grand and Grammy, while their mother works in Nassau,
and Grand teaches the boys to navigate the waters of the cay and beyond, to appre-
ciate the natural environment, and to understand the delicate balance of the eco-
system. Plans to develop the cay into the Sapphire Island Resort, however, will
destroy the ecosystem and bring little economic benefit to the locals. At the threat-
ened cay, Trey and Lou are called into a parallel dimension to save the over-devel-
oped, over-polluted world of Pangaia. Lou is the savior mentioned in prophecy,
and members of the Underground see him as the key to restoring the natural
balance of Pangaia. The battle to save the cay and the battle to save Pangaia
parallel one another, and the boys shuttle between the worlds, both witnessing and
participating. In Pangaia Lou follows the prophesied path and becomes Lugh, the
Green Man, servant of Gaia, who restores Pangaia to ecological health; back in the
Bahamas a timely hurricane destroys Sapphire Island and effectively halts the de-
velopment. This ecological fantasy inescapably pointed, with the author's adult
voice clumsily intrusive; the plot is crowded, transitions between worlds are overly
convenient, and Pangaia is muddily evoked. Still, Trey's is a believable voice, and
his relationship with his brother and their relationship to the island come through
vividly; the boys' voyages through the clean shallow waters of the cay in search of
bonefish and shells provide real moments of near-tangible peace. Readers with a
yen for some escapist eco-fantasy may wish to visit here. JMD
CROSS, GILLIAN 
Phoning a Dead Man. 
Holiday House, 2002 252p
ISBN 0-8234-1685-2 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Hayley and her parents are devastated when her older brother, John, is killed in
faraway Russia, where he was overseeing a building demolition. Determined to
316 
* THE BULLETIN
uncover the mystery ofJohn's death, John's fiancee, Annie, plans to travel to Russia
and to take Hayley as companion and assistant, since Annie's reliance on a wheelchair
makes solitary travel into the wilds of Siberia impossible. On their trip, Hayley
and Annie begin to realize that something is indeed shady about the handling of
John's fate and that he became entangled with the Russian mafia; in fact, as
interleaved narrative shows, John is not dead but fleeing from his enemies, suffering
from a loss of memory and an inability to speak Russian that make his seeking help
virtually impossible. Cross plays effectively on both the natural tension of the
situation and the tension between her narratives, as Hayley and Annie fight tooth
and nail to convince their Russian minders, who are trying to cover up the truth,
to take them into Siberia even as John fights to leave it. There's also an interesting
ethical component to the plot, with questions about John's involvement in a
dangerous demolition (the answers to which aren't entirely satisfactory) and with
ripples of consequences from John's escape spreading to those who assist him in
his search for self and safety. The unusual protagonists and setting add fresh touches
to the time-honored pleasures of the cloak-and-dagger story. DS
CULLEN, LYNN 
Nelly in the Wilderness. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029134-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029133-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Trouble comes in threes and then some in this readable but untextured historical
fiction set in 1821: first Ma dies, then Pa runs off, leaving fourteen-year-old
Cornelius and twelve-year-old Nelly to fend for themselves on their Indiana home-
stead; then, weeks later, Pa reappears with Margery, a "fancy-dressed" city gal with
ringlets he introduces to his traumatized children as "your new ma." Margery's
incompetence and moony idealism disgust her rough and tough-minded stepchil-
dren, who have little appetite for her burnt hoecakes and no use at all for her books
of nature lore, and the siblings successfully fight off Margery's maternal advances
while seeking love elsewhere: Cornelius sets his cap for the schoolmaster's daugh-
ter at the fort, leaving Nelly to take what satisfaction she can from raising a cata-
mount cub her trapper father orphaned. Nelly's emotional devastation is carefully
drawn, as is her inability to comprehend her stern father's appreciation of Margery's
soft winning ways. Unfortunately, the reader is likely to share Nelly's confusion
about how seriously to take this pampered daughter of a Pittsburgh professor,
whose simplistic ideas about humankind and nature are apparently unaffected by
the reality of life in the wilderness: she sets out honey to attract bears ("I only
wished to see a bear at close range-I've heard they have a very stately walk") and
displays an anachronistic outspoken sympathy for the local Native American popu-
lation (when told that Indians killed her husband's brother, she says only "Wasn't
that a long time ago?... And hadn't Thomas been settling on their land?"). While
too much in this novel happens with too little motivation or historical context, the
underlying story of Nelly's yearning for the things of childhood-laughter, stories,
love-may keep many readers with her to the bittersweet end. FK
CURRY, JANE LOUISE 
The Egyptian Box. 
McElderry, 2002 
186 p
ISBN 0-689-84273-2 
$16.00 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Tee Woodie is miserable. She and her family are recent arrivals in the desert town
of Oasis Wells, having moved from Maine when her father inherited eccentric
MAY 2002 
* 317
Uncle Bass' house and business, and she hates her new home and school. She's
soon diverted by adventure, however, when she discovers Uncle Bass' "treasure
room," a hidden space in his basement filled with valuable antiques and memora-
bilia, including some ancient Egyptian relics. One of those relics is an ancient
funerary shabti, a little wooden doll meant to be a servant in some royal afterlife,
that has been left to Tee. A series of random events results in the shabti's coming
to unnatural life and acting as servant for Tee, even going so far as to impersonate
her in school-and planning to switch places with her permanently. Unfortu-
nately, Tee is an unlikable character, and it's difficult to feel any real sympathy for
her when she is so unrelentingly ill-humored. The horror of the shabti's identity-
snatching is too easily overcome, so easily that the climax is, well, anticlimactic.
Readers interested in mysteries with an Egyptian motifwould do better with Snyder's
The Egypt Game or Voigt's The Vandemark Mummy (BCCB 9/91). JMD
DAY, NANCY RAINES, ad. 
Piecing Earth 6'Sky Together: A Creation Story from the
Mien Tribe ofLaos; illus. by Genna Panzarella. 
Shen's, 2002 
[34p]
ISBN 1-885008-19-8 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
As this Laotian creation story explains, brother and sister "helpers from Heaven,"
Faam Koh and Faam Toh, come down to make the sky and the earth, respectively.
After squabbling over whose work will be better, the two siblings competitively
create their art in secret. When they are finished, the two find that the earth and
sky fail to meet properly, but the clever Faam Toh stitches the edges of her earth-
cloth and, with pleats and gathers, draws it together to create mountains and val-
leys: "The sister held up the earth, and the brother, the sky. This time, they fit
together exactly right." The frame story, wherein a young girl's grandmother shares
the tale with her as they work traditional embroidery, is a bit obvious and clumsy,
but the creation myth itself has a quick pace and smooth style. Pastel art on black
pages is dominated by images of the brother and sister, and Panzarella plays up the
drama of starry sky, flourishing earth, and majestic jungle beasts. The draftsman-
ship is stolid and crude, however (though less problematic from a distance), and
the page layout is stodgy and unattractive. A concluding note explains the Mien
people's distinctive embroidery; a sampling of traditional Mien stitches is appended.
Despite the flaws, this title's multiple possibilities-for storytelling, reading aloud,
social studies-may make it useful in the classroom and library. JMD
DEACON, ALEXIS 
Slow Loris; written and illus. by Alexis Deacon. 
Kane/Miller,
2002 
32p
ISBN 1-929132-27-1 
$15.95 
R* 
4-7 yrs
Slow Loris (a rabbit-sized primate found in the tropics) is, appropriately enough, a
very slow loris ("It took Loris ... an hour to scratch his bottom"), and the zoo's
visitors "all thought Loris was boring." Loris, however, harbors a secret: at night,
he's as fast as lightning, and his torpor during the day is merely a result of subse-
quent exhaustion. Soon the other animals get wise to Loris' escapades and join
him, so the next day the whole zoo is every bit as slow as Loris. This British import
is a personably silly and effectively pared-down story, and listeners will enjoy the
confiding tone. They'll like the visuals even better, however. Paneled art with
captions and page-turn phrase interruptions aptly convey Loris' deliberate pace,
making the contrast particularly dramatic with the blurred motion and sequential
318 
* THE BULLETIN
images of Loris gone fast, and clever paper engineering (one foldout with cutout
edge and one lift-the-flap) accents two spreads only, appropriately enhancing the
revelation about Loris' nightlife. Loris himself is definitely loris-y, his dark pools
of eyes nearly hypnotic; the rough textures, subdued tones, and poker-faced ani-
mal depictions emphasize realism, making Loris' nighttime wildness (whaling on
pots with spoons, stepping out in a Australian stockman's hat and orange necktie)
all the funnier. This is a witty and engaging animal story, and youngsters may also
take to heart the subtle implication here about zoo visitors' expectations, especially
for nocturnal animals; next trip to the zoo the kids'll stun everyone by rushing to
see the lorises. DS
DEAVER, JULIE REECE 
The Night I Disappeared. Simon Pulse, 2002 
[2 56 p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7434-3979-1 
$5.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Seventeen-year-old Jamie is reluctant to travel to Chicago, where her mother is the
defense attorney in a high-profile murder case; it means leaving behind Webb, her
only true friend since she was nine and now a possible boyfriend. She's happy to
make friends almost immediately with Morgan (from Deaver's Say Goodnight,
Gracie, BCCB 2/88), but she's disturbed by her increasing tendency to fall into
daydreams about Webb, daydreams that she can't control and that cut her off from
reality. The daydream states become so acute that they send Jamie briefly into the
hospital and then to a psychiatrist (Morgan's aunt), with whom Jamie begins to
realize that these daydream states are actually a response to a terrible past trauma.
There's a TV-movie flavor to the repressed-memories gimmick, and melodrama
and contrivance abound. Deaver is a solid storyteller, however, and her characters
are sympathetic; the drifting-into-dreams device will get many dreamy readers'
attention, but the revelations about those fantasies and Jamie's eventful past will
satisfy their dramatic impulses as well. This doesn't have the verisimilitude or
believability of Deaver's previous works, but it's got plenty of page-turning appeal,
and that'll be enough to satisfy many teens. DS
DEMI, ad. 
King Midas: The Golden Touch; ad. and illus. by Demi. 
McElderry,
2002 
4 0p
ISBN 0-689-83297-4 
$19.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
Long a cautionary tale about the dangers of greed, the story of Midas is here given
Demi's golden touch. Gold paint that emphasizes Hellenic-style borders, twinkly
stars, and other shiny details keep the foolish king's folly firmly in the forefront of
included background information about the Greek pantheon and Midas' pre-
golden-touch run-in with an unforgiving Apollo. Midas' generosity toward Silenus,
satyr-friend of god Dionysus, ends in Midas being granted a wish. His wish-that
everything he touches will turn to gold-results in more hardships than riches, and
the greedy king quickly sees the error of his ways. The storytelling is direct and
conversational, and while the language is somewhat mundane, it will suit younger
audiences. Faces and figures are a bit toylike (Pan is particularly and inauthentically
adorable), but they are redeemed somewhat by the sweeping costumes, ornate tex-
tiles, and graceful animals in the paint-and-ink illustrations; youngsters will adore
the appropriately gilt-laden spreads. This is a visually arresting version of a popu-
lar myth that will get heavy cross-curricular use. JMD
MAY 2002 
* 319
DESSEN, SARAH 
This Lullaby. Viking, 2002 
[35 6 p]
ISBN 0-670-03530-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Remy's always cool, always in control, never the sucker for love that her five-times-
married mother is, and she doesn't plan on changing her ways the summer before
her long-awaited departure for college. Then she meets Dexter, a goofy, untidy,
and lovestruck musician who manages to sneak behind her defenses ("I leaned
forward and kissed Dexter, making a choice that would change everything"), but
the self-contained habits of a lifetime may prove too hard for Remy to break. As
the plot suggests, this is at its heart a classic romance, with the beautiful cynic
finally learning the importance of risk and beginning to trust when she finds the
right man, and Dessen plays the dynamics of the traditional story effectively.
Unfortunately, she also clutters it up considerably, slowing the novel down to a
sluggish pace with talky overexposition, superfluous material (Remy's close friends
never become more than ciphers, so their scenes just bog the tempo down), and
too-frequent discussion of Remy's self-protective nature. Readers prepared to wade
through the extraneous trappings may nonetheless relish the good old-fashioned
love story at this title's core. DS
DREYER, ANN L. 
After Elaine. Cricket, 2002 
[13 6p]
ISBN 0-8126-2651-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Gina and her family are devastated when her older sister, Elaine, is killed in a car
accident (she ditched school and went out on a drunken joyride with a boyfriend).
Gina drags herself through the end of fifth grade, the intervening summer, and the
beginning of sixth grade while trying to come to terms with Elaine's death, a pro-
cess made particularly difficult because of Elaine's longtime rebellion and mean-
ness ("Why was Elaine such a rotten person? She did whatever she felt like doing
and didn't care if she hurt other people. She took her problems out on everyone
else"). This isn't as insightful about bereavement as some of the other sibling-
death dramas out this spring (Wallace-Brodeur's Blue Eyes Better, BCCB 3/02, is a
stronger title for this age group), but it is nonetheless a compelling account. It's
the anger more than the grief that's memorable here, whether it be Elaine's anger
at the world, periodically recalled by her baffled younger sister, or Gina's own
increasing propensity for anger at the vagaries of her teachers and the taunting of a
schoolmate. Accessible, straightforward language makes this particularly user-
friendly, and the topic will make it instantly interesting to readers beset with their
own family dramas. DS
DRUMMOND, ALLAN 
Liberty!; written and illus. by Allan Drummond. 
Foster/
Farrar, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-374-34385-3 
$17.00 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
Alice Ross' The Copper Lady (BCCB 7/97) introduced fictional stowaway Andre, a
French orphan who accompanies Lady Liberty to the United States, and in
Drummond's title his fictional American counterpart, a New York newsboy, hops
a ride on Mr. Bartholdi's carriage to attend the festivities at the unveiling of the
statue. Caught up in the patriotic excitement, the young narrator sneaks onto the
ferry to the island and, after predictable observations on the enthusiasts, protesters,
and proud workmen in attendance, he's tapped by Bartholdi himself to give the
320 
* THE BULLETIN
signal: "Then the French girl suddenly sneezed. I gave her my handkerchief...
and suddenly hundreds of white handkerchiefs flashed!" Bartholdi responds to
the miscue, and Liberty appears in all her glory: "And at sunset Liberty's torch
shone out bright from the land of the free to light up all the world." The light-
hearted dash that brings readers to this point could reasonably have culminated on
this joyful, uplifting note, but our newsboy still has four pages to go on the mean-
ing of liberty and equality, and his preachy delivery seems better calculated to
satisfy adult readers with a lesson in mind than a kid audience that just wants to
admire the statue. Cartoon scenes, appropriately dominated by Franco-American
red, white, and blue, sizzle with energy from Drummond's spidery, scrawly ink
lines and broad slaps of watercolor. An opening note points out the true bits to the
tale; pass around the thirty-eight star flags and start waving. EB
DUNCAN, Lois 
Song ofthe Circus; illus. by Meg Cundiff. 
Philomel, 2002 
34 p
ISBN 0-399-23397-0 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Golden-haired Gisselda and little clown Bop are both children of the circus, and
their lives are colored by a splendid array of big top performers and animals. Gisselda
takes her naps "on tattooed shoulders and spangled laps," and Bop, son of the
bicycle clowns, juggles on the trunk of the elephant. They are beloved by all
except for the tiger, "so mean and wild,/ he dreams of eating a circus child." A
chance flat tire during the show sets off a chain of accidents that results in the
jungle beast's breaking free. The cat's first thought is to eat Gisselda and Bop, but
they aren't circus kids for nothing: "Those two brave children/ stood staunch and
tough/ and screamed at the Jungle Cat,/ 'THAT'S ENOUGH!/ You've got to live
by circus laws./ You can't eat children, so/ SHUT YOUR JAWS!'" Duncan's
rhyming circus adventure deftly balances magic and mayhem. The opening stan-
zas initially suggest a "House that Jack Built" accumulation that quickly shifts pace
with the introduction of circus characters, human and beast, and the segue into
the fateful performance. Cundiffs gouache illustrations are rendered in a neon
palette with little regard for standard rules of perspective or proportion (figures of
Kalman-like distortion float against intensely hued backdrops); contrast in size is
used for emphasis to particularly great effect (tiny Bop isn't just the littlest clown,
he's the littlest anything). A strong readaloud with lots of possible enrichment
activities, this title has all the magic one expects from a day at the circus. JMD
ELISH, DAN 
Born Too Short: The Confessions of an Eighth-Grade Basket
Case. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2002 
152p
ISBN 0-689-84386-0 
$16.00 
R Gr. 6-9
"Sure, Keith was my best buddy," says Matt Greene, "but I was beginning to hate
him." What's to hate? Well, Keith is a blond Adonis, chased after by hordes of
girls (some even in high school) and featured in advertising campaigns, he's a gifted
athlete who's the star of the school basketball team, and he's getting raves for
creating and performing a rock opera despite the fact that, as Matt the guitarist can
attest, he's not much of a musician. He's also, however, a nice guy and a good
friend, which means that Matt's sky-high "Jealousy Quotient" troubles his con-
science, especially after his frustrated wish that Keith experience some failure looks
to be coming true. Like Chris Lynch's Slot Machine (BCCB 10/95), this manages
to treat adolescent guyhood with authentic, rueful comedy while steering clear of
all-too-common descent into sitcom shallowness. Particularly realistic is the dis-
crepancy between Matt's brash, testosterone-laden imaginings about girls ("Matt
MAY 2002 
* 321
Greene-Babe Master!! Matt Greene-the studliest of the wudliest!!!") and his
shy, awkward real-world dates ("No, I didn't want to hump like a rabid goat. Just
kiss like a rabid teenager. Was that too much to ask?"), along with the depiction of
Matt and Keith's friendship, which is a solid and important connection to both
boys. The humorously angst-ridden narration would make a lively readaloud in-
deed, and reading and listening audiences will breathe a sigh of relief when Matt
ends up with the friends, the opportunity, and the girl he deserves. DS
FINE, ANNE 
Up on Cloud Nine. 
Delacorte, 2002 
[14 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90058-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73009-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Ian's initially unsurprised when his mother informs him that his friend Stol (con-
densed from Stuart Oliver) is in the hospital, because Stol's always running head-
long into something, but this time it's more serious: Stol's unconscious, having
taken a plummet from a window that may or may not have been deliberate. As he
waits by his friend's bedside, Ian contemplates Stol's life and character, trying to
figure out the meaning of this event and prepare for the questions of the police. As
she did in The Tulip Touch (BCCB 9/97), Fine writes of the symbiotic friendship
of two very different kids; here, though, things are much less dark, with Ian the
solid, untroubled friend whose affectionate household is the main home for Stol,
the child of two busy and distant parents. Stol himself is a fascinating and terribly
vulnerable character who, as Ian says, "never seems to have quite so much pinning
him to Earth as I have." There's a remarkable grace and nuance in the exploration
of Stol's maybe-not-accident, focusing on human dynamics and struggle instead
of preachy lessons and avoiding dramatic denouements in favor of a quiet evolu-
tion of both knowledge and hope. It's rare for such a serious subject to be accessi-
bly addressed for readers of this age group, and it's even rarer for it to be addressed
in an easygoing yet thoughtful story of friendship. DS
FLEISCHMAN, JOHN 
Phineas Gage: A Gruesome but True Story about Brain
Science. 
Houghton, 2002 
86 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-05252-6 
$16.00 
R* 
Gr. 4-9
The name of Phineas Gage may ring a bell for those with a taste for historical
footnotes: he's the man who, in 1848, had a three-and-a-half foot iron rod blasted
through his head and lived to tell the tale, providing a spectacular subject for nine-
teenth-century neurologists. Fleischman starts right up with Gage's accident ("It
will kill him, but it will take another eleven years, six months, and nineteen days to
do so"), effectively setting the scene and explaining the situation (Gage was a blaster
on the railroad, and the item of his doom was a tamping rod); he then describes
Gage's recovery, his personality changes, his subsequent difficult life, and finally
his death. Around and within this narrative is the larger story of science then and
science now: the author deftly introduces readers to a diverse range of relevant
scientific history as well as more specific beliefs that influenced the medical
establishment's understanding of Gage, then goes on to examine subsequent neu-
rological discoveries that have changed and enhanced our understanding of Gage's
fate. The book's present-tense narrative is inviting and intimate, and the text is
crisp and lucid, combining the personal and the theoretical to dramatic effect and
avoiding condescension both to readers and to the unfortunate Gage (though it's
odd that he's informally called by his first name throughout in contrast to the
322 
* THE BULLETIN
other adults). The accessible layout features some superbly effective illustrations,
ranging from photographs of nineteenth-century medicine to diagrams, historical
and contemporary, of the brain, to stunning images depicting the trajectory of the
rod through Gage's head. The riveting topic (the grossout impalement diagrams
are a booktalk in their own right) will draw all kinds of readers, and they'll be
fascinated even as they're educated. There are no notes, but a glossary, a brief but
detailed list of print and electronic resources, and an index are included. DS
FLORIAN, 
DOUGLAS 
Summersaults; written and illus. by Douglas
Florian. 
Greenwillow, 2002 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029268-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029267-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
In a companion volume to Winter Eyes (BCCB 11/99), Florian examines the joys
of summer in twenty-eight brief verses. Topics range from summer weather phe-
nomena ("Dog Days," "Names of Clouds") to summer pastimes ("The Swing,"
"Double Dutch Girls") to the thorns in summer's rose ("What I Hate about Sum-
mer," "Bees"); verse forms vary, but rhyme keeps them all bouncing along like a
ball on a hot sidewalk. While these poems don't shine quite as brightly as the
poet's eloquent winter lyrics, there's a pithy playfulness to them (nearly a third of
them are five lines or under) that will still make them kid-pleasing favorites for
reading or recitation. The book's layout is airy, with the watercolor and colored-
pencil illustrations enclosed in slender frames; hues of sun and sky predominate,
and Florian's blurry textures provide a suggestion of heat shimmer to the bucolic
images. This evocative treatment of summer's joys and disappointments will be
enjoyably relevant in mid-July, but it may be even more satisfying in darkest win-
ter as a promise of pleasures to come. DS
FREYMANN-WEYR, GARRET 
My Heartbeat. Houghton, 2002 
[15 4p]
ISBN 0-618-14181-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
Just starting her freshman year in high school, Ellen has been accustomed to happy
inclusion in the intense friendship of her older brother, Link, and his buddy, James,
on whom Ellen has long sustained a crush. When a classmate asks if Link and
James are a couple, Ellen realizes she doesn't know; when she asks Link and James,
she discovers that they don't know either, that Link is so afraid of the possibility
that he refuses to acknowledge it, and that her question shatters the delicate silence
about their relationship that enabled it to continue. A furious Link shuns James
and then, when she remains friends with James, Ellen; Ellen begins to see her
friendship with James turn to romance, but she continues to feel that she is an
interloper taking her brother's place. Freymann-Weyr (author of When I Was
Older, BCCB 7/00) writes with an astonishing combination of delicacy and clarity
of the genuine complexity of family (and all) relationships. Ellen's narration has
an innocence yet also a clear-headedness as she traverses not only huge familial
changes (Link sets the family on its ear by rebelling against all expectations largely
in response to his father's unspoken urging that he be straight) but also her own
transitions (she moves from bystander to subject and begins to outgrow her par-
ents' understanding of her). Her growing awareness of her family's particular
dynamics is credible and it's eloquently expressed, with nobody, not even her de-
MAY 2002 
* 
323
manding father, reduced to clichd. Ellen's unintentional romance is moving (and
also appealingly nonthreatening, despite its sexuality), but it's not the only love
story: underpinning everything is Ellen's devotion to her brother. Ultimately,
this is a loving reminder of just how unslottable human beings are and how en-
twined we are with one another. DS
GANTOS, JACK 
Hole in My Life. 
Farrar, 2002 
200p
ISBN 0-374-39988-3 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 9 up
Gantos, already an author of fictionalized autobiography (in the Jack books, such
as Heads or Tails, BCCB 7/94), turns here to acknowledged autobiography. He
first tells of his aimless late-teen years, where he largely lived apart from his par-
ents, read writers he desperately wanted to emulate, and grew increasingly restless.
After moving down to St. Croix, an island paradise increasingly torn by racial
strife, to work for his father, he gets a ticket not just out but to New York, in the
form of a $10,000 offer to crew a boat laden with hash from the Virgin Islands to
New York. The journey is surreal but the consequences are stunningly concrete-
Gantos is apprehended and sentenced to federal prison, where he spends eighteen
months. Gantos writes with his usual energy and crispness, and there's a devastat-
ing low-key precision to his observations about the situation, his acquaintances
and cohorts, and himself ("Dad's keen eye for spotting criminals of all stripes was
impressive. But it wasn't perfect. He never pegged me for being one of them").
He paints his young self as realistically clueless (Gantos poured out all his thoughts
about drug smuggling and the ethics thereof into the ship's log book, which was,
of course, used against him in his trial), but he's never retroactively indulgent,
instead keeping a keen eye on the issue of culpability. While the book brings
Midnight Express to mind (though Gantos fortunately got a job as an x-ray tech
that kept him out of the violence of the main prison population), there's a closer
kinship to Walter Dean Myers' Bad Boy (BCCB 9/01); like the young Myers, the
young Gantos is reading voraciously, trying to get to the writing he longs to do,
and drifting beyond the boundaries. Readers will be relieved and glad that he
found his way back, and high-schoolers who devoured the Jack books in their
middle-grade youth will savor the acerbic exploration of their author's formative
time. DS
GARLAND, MICHAEL 
The President and Mom's Apple Pie; written and illus. by
Michael Garland. 
Dutton, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46887-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
As the town band booms out "Hail to the Chief," the young narrator joins the
expectant crowd at the train station. "Finally another cheer rose from the crowd as
William Howard Taft, the twenty-seventh president of the United States, filled
the doorway. And I mean filled!" The portly president accepts the mayor's formal
greeting, but he is promptly distracted by an enticing aroma that draws him away
from his official flagpole dedication duties and on to a tour of the local eateries.
Tony's Italian Villa spaghetti, Big Ed's ribs, and Hunan Palace steamed vegetables
are darn good, but the siren scent lures him on toward the narrator's own home,
where Mom's apple pie is cooling on the window sill. "When he had finished his
pie, Mom cut him another slice. 'Oh no, I couldn't,' the President said, patting
his stomach. He undid a vest button. 'Well ... 
maybe just one more."' As
president books go, this fluffy confection is certainly higher in calories than nutri-
324 
* THE BULLETIN
tion: fact is in decidedly short supply, and even the illustrations are sometimes
ahistorical (as well as more slick than subtle). There's nonetheless a measure of fun
in Garland's portrayal of the Commander-in-Chief, round as a beach ball and
straining his high white collar and pinstriped vest, and the waxy-faced, button-
eyed locals who follow their leader on his gastronomic rounds. Lincoln and Wash-
ington will likely be the main course for Presidents' Day programming, but
down-to-earth Taft, who "had no desire to run for president," could make a tasty
appetizer or dessert. EB
GILES, GAIL 
Shattering Glass. 
Roaring Book, 2002 
2 1 5p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2601-4 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1581-0 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-12
The Glass in the title is Simon Glass, a "textbook geek" who's "easy to hate." And
hate him everyone in his Texas high school does, until charismatic Rob Haynes
decides that his clique will take Simon under its collective wing and turn him into
Mr. Popular. Young Stewart, one of Rob's satellites and the book's narrator, senses
that there's something less than benevolent in Rob's desire (Young is already aware
that Rob's efforts are tweaking the nose of Lance Anstey, Simon's constant bullier
and the Big Man on Campus prior to Rob's arrival), but he's too wrapped up in
Rob's influence to question further; the same goes for Bob and Coop, Rob's other
followers. Despite his pleasure in his elevation from object of fun to fun guy,
Simon is actually the only one willing to buck Rob's wishes-a tendency that Rob
can't forgive. This is a taut and dark drama of murder and culpability that recalls
Killing Mr. Griffin. While the psychology tends to be convenient and predictable
(Young's cold father puts unrealistic expectations on his son, Rob's father is in
prison after molesting Rob for years), characters have all the depth they need to
make the plot move; besides, this doesn't gain its tension from surprise but from
the suspense of its inexorable progression towards doom. Schoolmates, parents,
and others concerned with or affected by the tragic event (including Young's adored
girlfriend, whom he passed on to Simon at Rob's request) offer quotes from five
years down the line, which begin each chapter and emphasize the inescapability of
the outcome as well as adding urgency to the pacing. This has many curricular
possibilities, but it'll probably be most satisfying as an dark and edgy page-turner.
DS
GORDON, RANDY 
Muhammad All. 
Grosset, 2002 
60p 
illus. with photo-
graphs
Library ed. ISBN 0-448-42812-1 
$13.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-42807-5 
$3.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
This easy-reading biography of Muhammad Ali is divided into ten "rounds" (chap-
ters) that briefly recount the known facts of Ali's life and career. Gordon writes
about the public Ali, from his first moments in the gym to his last fight in 1981,
paying homage to "The Greatest." The book's final chapter focuses on Ali's daugh-
ter, Laila, who is following in her father's footsteps as a professional boxer. This
title quickly follows the release of the recent movie Ali, and the quality of the
writing is standard media tie-in fare-part encyclopedia entry, part adulation. The
organization is solidly chronological, however, and the physical design is clean and
uncluttered. Photo credits are given but there are no references or notes. Large
typeface, a generous number of captioned black-and-white photographs, and a
chatty tone will draw in reluctant and early readers. JMD
MAY 2002 
* 
325
GRIGOIRE, CAROLINE 
Apollo; written and illus. by Caroline Gregoire. 
Kane/
Miller, 2002 
26 p
ISBN 1-929132-23-9 
$13.95 
R 
2-4 yrs
Apollo is an appealing long-snouted dachshund-type dog, clearly the apple of his
narrating owner's eye. The audience will quickly realize that the discussion of
Apollo's charms focuses on concepts, especially opposing (or at least contrasting)
concepts ("From the FRONT he's adorable . . . and from the BACK he's adorable,
too"), using Apollo as concrete example for the often somewhat abstract notions.
The concepts are rather a scattered collection, and the executions are occasionally
challengingly artistic, but there's a playful spirit and successful focus here uncom-
mon in concept books and the light-hearted text will entertain even audiences
sublimely uninterested in concepts (they'll be particularly amused, and perhaps a
trifle disconcerted, when a magic trick briefly puts Apollo back together with his
anatomy all discombobulated). Elongated Apollo, with his "delightful little sau-
sage nose" (that takes up nearly the whole page), is a cuddly and endearing water-
color pup with a heart-tugging eagerness to please, and layouts wisely focus on him
and the concept word (emphasized in black) against airy white or contrasting color
backgrounds. There are more tightly executed concept books, but there are few so
spirited and enjoyable. DS
HALAM, ANN 
Dr. Franklin's Island. Wendy Lamb, 2002 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90056-2 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73008-X 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Semirah's charter flight explodes somewhere off the coast of South America. But
don't worry, because she and Miranda and Arnie make it to an island. It looks like
they'll be stranded there forever. But don't worry, because there's a lot of handy
flotsam that lands on their beach. Abrasive, insensitive Arnie builds a raft and
disappears with their provisions. But don't worry, because Semi and Miranda find
a passage behind a waterfall that leads them to an inhabited compound. Now
worry, because they're taken captive by mad scientist Dr. Franklin, who needs
teenagers for human trials of his diabolical transgenic treatment, which will create
a new race of animal/humans with the best traits of both. Semi is transformed into
a fish/human (her choice), Miranda becomes a bird/human, the missing Arnie is
now a snake/human, and they all employ their radio telepathy brain implants to
devise an escape, purloining the serum to change them back to normal teens.
Dumbed-down and dubious science rules, dialogue is tritely scripted ("'Dr. Franklin
was an evil man,' said Miranda softly. 'And he was crazy as a bedbug. But he was
a genius'"), and the whole mess would be no more than a B-movie embarrassment
were it not for the gleeful audacity with which Halam unapologetically pulls her
plot together. When the last of the Friday night monster flicks has rolled its clos-
ing credits, Dr. Franklin may be just the guy to see YA readers through to sunrise.
EB
HARTNETT, SONYA 
Thursday's Child. Candlewick, 2002 
26 1p
ISBN 0-7636-1620-6 
$15.99 
R Gr. 7 up
Six at the story's opening, Harper Flute is the middle child, with a new baby sister,
Caffy, a younger brother, Tin, and an older brother and sister; she has generally
taken her financially straitened life for granted, obliviously roaming around her
326 
* 
THE BULLETIN
family's Australian shanty on its impoverished farmland. As the years go by, how-
ever, she becomes aware of the reality of the family's poverty in the face of the
Depression of the 1930s, and she sees with frustration her impetuous father's mis-
managing of the few resources they have and increasing willingness to sacrifice his
wife and children for his own pleasures. She also absorbs loss after loss: her brother
Tin literally goes underground, preferring life in his warren of tunnels to the fam-
ily hearth; toddler Caffy is killed in a cave-in while Harper is supposed to be watching
her; both older siblings leave to ease the burden on their family and to seek a better
life. This is an evocative and unflinching portrait of existence in the face of fright-
ening odds, which bring such pressure to bear on families and individuals that
small fissures widen into huge gulfs. Hartnett (author of Sleeping Dogs, BCCB
1/96) brings her own strange twist to the narrative in the form of Tin, who essen-
tially turns feral, and his accompanying constant reminder of the importance of
the ground and what's underneath it, but it adds atmosphere to the more conven-
tionally realistic story. The vivid depiction of the cumulative effects of optionless
rural poverty on a young girl ("I didn't know, anymore, when I should be happy.
I'd forgotten, I realized, when was the proper time to smile") is reminiscent of
Hesse's Out of the Dust (BCCB 12/97), but this portrayal is more intense and
perceptive. While hope is provided at the end, it's clearly random, and readers will
be sobered by Harper's struggle to survive a life very different from most of theirs.
DS
HASELEY, DENNIS 
The Amazing Thinking Machine. Dial, 2002 
117p
ISBN 0-8037-2609-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Patrick's father disappears just as the worst of the Depression is hitting their neigh-
borhood, leaving his mother alone to care for Patrick and his older brother, Roy.
Rejecting the church's charity baskets, Roy instead puts his efforts towards making
a "thinking machine," a complicated backyard contraption that, when Roy is hid-
den inside with his handy almanac, can answer the questions of neighborhood kids
for a small fee. Meanwhile, Patrick sees one of the hoboes (or "bums," as Roy calls
them) hanging around their house and even talking to their mother, but he fails to
realize that this dirty, scruffy man is actually their father. Eventually, Dad makes
a dramatic reappearance, with a shave, haircut, and new job lined up for the next
week. Though Patrick is delighted, the reconciliation is less joyful for Roy, who
remains angry at their father's abandonment. Patrick's somewhat naive voice is
authentic, and although he doesn't understand Roy's reluctance to eat food from
the charity baskets or his prolonged anger at their father, young readers will see
through the holes in Patrick's narration to the truth of the family's grim situation.
The pace may be slow for some young readers, however, and characters and moti-
vations are not always defined; the thinking machine seems intended to carry im-
plications, but it's not clear what those implications are. Still, the story works as a
tale of day-to-day domestic survival in times of hardship, and young readers who
have devoured stories of pioneer times or wilderness survival tales may enjoy read-
ing about another kind of struggle against the odds. KM
HOBERMAN, 
MARY ANN 
The Marvelous Mouse Man; illus. by Laura
Forman. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2002 
4 0p
ISBN 0-15-201715-1 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-6
Mice overrun a town, and in despair the mayor offers a reward to whoever can
MAY 2002 
* 327
remove the cute little rodents. Enter the Marvelous Mouse Man and his magical
aroma-producing fan, which rids the town of mice. The cats can't do without the
mice, however, so they leave, quickly followed by the dogs (who can't do without
the cats), and then the children (who can't do without their pets). The Mouse
Man offers to return everything for a fee, but the town's coffers are empty. A little
girl comes up with a suitable solution for the homeless Mouse Man: he will pay
the city to build him a permanent home, where he can live with the mice and
everyone can visit. If this sounds like a kinder, gentler Hamelin, well, it is. Forman's
pencil and watercolor illustrations are an idealized dream of turn-of-the-century
Americana: a subdued golden palette, distinct drafting, and sweeping Zwergeresque
lines result in detailed compositions worth poring over for more than the multi-
tude of mice that skitter through the pages. The lengthy rhyming text does reveal
the occasional blip in Hoberman's rhythmic radar, but all in all this gentle and
restrained storybook makes an effective Pied Piper revisited. JMD
HOWLAND, NAOMI, ad. 
The Matzah Man: A Passover Story; ad. and illus. by
Naomi Howland. 
Clarion, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-11750-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Howland takes the traditional story of the Gingerbread Man and sets it in a Jewish
community getting ready for Passover. Mr. Cohen, the baker, makes a man out of
scraps of matzah dough; sure enough, the matzah jumps out of the oven, declares
himself ("Hot from the oven I jumped and ran,/ So clever and quick, I'm the
Matzah Man!"), and takes off out the door. The Matzah Man is chased by the
whole holiday planning community ("I've run from the baker whose matzah is
best,/and from the red hen who left eggs in her nest,/ from old Cousin Tillie with
brisket-filled pan,/ and big Auntie Bertha, in high heels she ran,/ then Grandpapa
Solly, from onions he's crying,/ and then from Miss Axelrod, matzah balls flying,/
and-/ ka-naidle, ka-noodle, ka-noo-/ I'll run away from you, too!") until he
winds up at Mendel Fox's house, where he hides beneath the matzah cover on the
seder table. While there's some pleasing wit and rhythm here, this is a pretty
purposive retelling, and the text rambles on longer than the story can really sus-
tain. The mixed-media illustrations (gouache, cut-paper collage with colored pen-
cil) are light, bright, and clean, the characters set against the crisp white backgrounds
or within simple framed backdrops. This isn't exactly a necessary addition to the
expanding body of not-quite-gingerbread-boy tales, but its perky style and holiday
relevance will make it useful for readalouds. No source note is included, but a
Passover glossary is appended. JMD
HUNTER, 
TOM 
Build It Up and Knock It Down; illus. by James
Yang. 
HarperFestival, 2002 
[24p] 
(Harper Growing Tree)
ISBN 0-694-015687 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-4 yrs
When two youngsters meet for a play-date, the host child is beaming but the visi-
tor is at first unsure ("Nodding yes and nodding no and nodding yes again").
Soon, though, space hats and blocks distract ("Put it on and take it off and put it
on again"), and the playmates happily romp ("Jumping high and crouching low
and jumping high again"). Hunter's text follows an interesting three-pronged
structure of action, opposite, and repeat of original, keeping the rhythm snappy
328 
* THE BULLETIN
and the words chantable (as well, perhaps, as easily readable for neophytes). Yang's
art expands the story into that of evolving camaraderie between a pair of kids, who
manage to be expressive despite their stylized faces. There's a retro feel to the
pictures with their predominantly Old Navy palette (robin's egg blue, mustard
yellow, rust, fire-engine red), sponge-painted basic shapes and expanded stick-like
figures, and 1950s details (mothers' clothing style, chair styles), but there's also an
interesting space-age flavor to the spiky linework and abstracted features. Though
the repetitions may quickly wear thin with adults, youngsters will enjoy both the
pattern and the treatment of a familiar experience. EAB
JOHNSON, D. B. 
Henry Builds a Cabin; written and illus. by D. B.
Johnson. 
Houghton, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-618-13201-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
This sequel to Johnson's first picture-book foray into the life of Henry David
Thoreau (Henry Hikes to Fitchburg, BCCB 7/00) follows Henry while he builds
his new cabin. Henry gets by with a little help from his friends Alcott, Emerson,
and Miss Lydia (all anthropomorphized bears), who drop in both to help and to
criticize the size of Henry's new house. "It's bigger than it looks," replies Henry,
and he proves it by showing how he will use his bean patch as a dining room, a
sunny outdoor spot as a library, a path down to the pond as a ballroom. Though
young listeners will still miss most of the historical implications, this title has some-
what more narrative cohesion than the first book; Henry has a concrete plan, the
cabin is a concrete result, and the chronology of events is easier to follow because
the point of view is more consistent. Colored pencil and paint illustrations are
rendered in a palette of varied verdancy; the cubist-style figures are set in busy
landscapes that are often compositionally confused and muddy-toned. A conclud-
ing note "About Henry's Cabin" includes brief biographical information on Thoreau
and a kid-friendly price list for the supplies he used to build his cabin. JMD
KEIZER, GARRET 
God ofBeer. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
24 2p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029457-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029456-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 9-12
In Kyle's social-studies class, his teacher quotes Gandhi's statement that the only
meaningful way God could come to India would be to come as bread, and he then
poses the question: in what way would God have to come to Willoughby Union
High? Kyle instantly answers: beer. This starts his friend Quaker Oats (a.k.a.
Quake) thinking about how much of life revolves around drinking in their small
working-class Vermont town. With Kyle and friends David and Diana, Quake
organizes a series of protest parties, wherein the alcohol content (or lack thereof)
of a person's beverage is known only to the drinker, attempting the undermine the
social pressure and prestige of drinking; the friends also advocate for a change in
the legal drinking age. Kyle is a sweet but highly analytical character whose con-
tinuous assessment of changing social relationships makes for a long expository
opening and occasional slowing of pace throughout the book. Nevertheless, the
authenticity of the characters isn't hampered by Kyle's tendency to analyze, and
Keizer gracefully captures the shifting alliances amongst groups in a small high
school. Of course, the protest parties are misunderstood, and when Diana is killed
on her way home from one of these parties in a car crash (she was driving a drunk
student home) their small movement is drowned in a wave of grief that overtakes
MAY 2002 
* 
329
the school. Although young adults drawn by the beery title may find the tone too
intellectual, many readers will relate to this story of a group of young people trying
to change the culture of the high school life in which they are immersed. KM
KVASNOSKY, LAURA MCGEE 
One Lucky Summer; written and illus. by Laura McGee
Kvasnosky. 
Dutton, 2002 
112p
ISBN 0-525-46455-7 $15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Lonely science geek Steven has only recently moved next door to prissy balletomane
Lucinda, and the two fifth graders are unwilling companions when their mothers
decide to vacation together at a lake cottage. Over the course of the week, Steven
and Lucinda circle round each other, trying to find some common ground. A
swim race and a square dance help, but true friendship is formed when they join
forces to help Lucky, the flying squirrel, a baby left orphaned by a thunderstorm.
This well-intentioned novel lacks the spark of the author's previous titles for younger
readers (Zelda andIvy, BCCB 4/98, et al.); narrator Steven's voice is a bit flat, and
characterizations are functional but not particularly memorable. The pacing is
slow and the plot never picks up the momentum necessary to carry readers easily to
the predictable conclusion. The mothers are oddly unaware of what's going on
between their children, even though two fifth-graders' sharing of a screened-in
porch as a bedroom (and apparently dressing in front of one another) might be
cause for reasonable supervision. Still, the squirrel-saving kids and their shared
secret are an attractive combination; those readers seeking an undemanding com-
fort zone will find it here. JMD
LEE, JEANNE M. 
Bitter Dumplings; written and illus. by Jeanne M. Lee. 
Farrar,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-374-39966-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
In fifteenth-century China, Mei Mei is cast out after her father's death, and she
wanders, hungry and desperate, until she meets a hunchbacked old woman. The
two outcasts forge a working alliance, the old woman providing food and shelter in
exchange for the young woman's assistance; a cautious exchange of kindnesses
makes them friends. When the rapacious sailors of the Emperor's fleet come to the
village, the old woman defends the girl, who finds her love in the form of a run-
away slave from the ships. The message is sincere and worthy, but Lee's lengthy
folkloric tale has a tonal sameness that produces little tension, and the exposition is
predictable. While characters' faces are sometimes stiff, the watercolor landscapes
benefit from the soft pastel palette: blue sky and blue water meet in a graceful
convergence punctuated by the swaying sea grass and curling melon vines. The
"love conquers all" conclusion is satisfying, and older readers with a taste for his-
torical romance will appreciate Mei Mei's fate. A historical note is appended.
JMD
LE GUIN, URSULA K. 
Tom Mouse; illus. by Julie Downing. 
Roaring Brook,
2002 
4 0p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2663-4 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1599-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Tom Mouse longs for adventure, something not coming his way in the train-
station diner where he makes his home. "An old hobo rat who rode the freight
trains" inspires Tom to climb aboard a train headed for Chicago, the little mouse
330 
* THE BULLETIN
finds himself sharing a sleeper with an old woman, and the two travelers gradually
become friends. This is an old-fashioned story full of worthy coincidences (the
mouse misses his family but longs to see the world; the old woman is lonely and
travels a lot) and largely devoid of tension, since the plot is fairly predictable.
Nonetheless, the story has some charm, the theme is age-appropriate, and the
chapter breaks will make this useful for sequential reading aloud or beginning
readers. While Tom is more cartoony than expressive (and the old woman doesn't
seem very old at all), Downing makes interesting use of mouse-level perspective in
her huge and looming shapes. The reassuring primary palette keeps this light
instead of scary, and the generally cheerful demeanor of the main characters will
reduce viewer anxiety about Tom's fate. This gentle adventure may just suit an
adult seeking a warm and fuzzy little readaloud. JMD
LIGHT, STEVE, ad. 
Puss in Boots; ad. and illus. by Steve Light. 
Abrams,
2002 
24p
ISBN 0-8109-4368-9 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
There's a twist to this retelling of the feline-with-footwear folktale: Puss is a fe-
male, an adaptation that expands this title's usefulness to those looking for folk-
tales that feature clever, confident heroines. Though Light's retelling is fairly
standard and traditional otherwise, his use of simple and informal language makes
this story more accessible to younger listeners than other versions of Perrault's tale.
He also adds an occasional dash of gentle humor in the characters' dialogue (Puss
muses, "This is a nice castle you have here, ogre," to which the ogre replies, "Thank
you. It's simple, but it's home"). The real focus of this title, however, is Light's
detailed collage illustrations, inspired by Fragonard and the French Rococo as well
as by his own work as an art teacher for young children. The result is an intrigu-
ing, if dizzying, mix of hand-stamped and swirling painted backgrounds topped
with cut cloth and paper and accented with pencil outlines and highlights; while
some of the compositions, with their competing patterns and colors, are rather
confused (and the unvarying page layout gets a bit dull), they work better at a
distance and the overall effect is striking. Puss herself is crafted from a humble
gold and orange striped fabric and clothed in a gilt-ornamented crimson coat and
cap and big black boots; her dot-eyed, broad, flat face gives her both an impressive
and mild appearance, and her open posture is jaunty and fearless. The simpler,
manila-toned human figures pale somewhat in comparison to the dashing Puss,
though the surly orange and pink ogre does manage to hold his own. Present this
vibrant Puss at storytime, or use it with kids as a springboard for creating collages
or illustrated narratives. JMH
LINDGREN, BARBRO 
Benny and the Binky; tr. by Elisabeth Kallick Dyssegaard;
illus. by OlofLandstr6m. 
Farrar, 2002 
27p
ISBN 91-29-65497-1 
$15.00 
R* 
4-7 yrs
Benny the piglet has wanted a younger brother, but now that the little porker is
here and constantly screaming, Benny's not so sure. He is sure, however, that he
wants a pacifier of his own, despite his mother's refusal ("'You are too big for a
binky,' says Benny's mama. 'No, I'm not,' says Benny"). The wily oinker takes his
brother out to the yard, fobs him off with a Little Piggy doll, pops the binky into
his own mouth, and charges off happily ("He runs by several houses. He is happy.
The binky is good"). His escapade hits trouble in the form of some local toughs,
MAY 2002 
* 
331
but after a helpful dog rescues him and the pilfered binky, Benny returns home
safely, restores the binky to his brother, and gets thanks from his none-the-wiser
mother for his help with the baby. There's poker-faced charm galore in the simple
text, with its imaginative phraseology and slightly skewed sensibility in flat de-
clarative sentences, and the adventure is one with which many youngsters, de-
throned siblings or no, will relate. Then there's porker-faced charm galore in the
line-and-watercolor depiction of bristly-haired little Benny, who pelts through the
neighborhood looking every bit the crewcutted porcine preschooler; the brisk so-
lidity of the lines makes a droll contrast with the entertaining illustrative details,
such as the canine passerby's laptop, yellow tie, and earpiece full of tunes. This is
a tender and cheeky slice of ham all the tastier for the binky on top. DS
LISLE, JANET TAYLOR 
How IBecame a Writer & Oggie Learned to Drive. Philomel,
2002 
[160p]
ISBN 0-399-23394-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
A year ago, when he was eleven, Archie decided to make a book out of the stories
he told his younger brother about the Mysterious Mole People, "some people who
got mad at the human race and went underground." These action-packed stories
about a kid investigator and his trusty turtle sidekick provide Archie's six-year-old
brother Oggie with a much-needed distraction from the messiness of the family's
divorce-in-progress, and writing the book becomes a major coping strategy for
Archie. Living in a borderline neighborhood where daring kids ride their bikes
past the crack house for thrills, these two have trouble coming at them from all
directions even before Archie is recruited as a messenger by the leader of the local
gang that mugged Oggie. Eventually, Archie and Oggie recover their stolen prop-
erty and, in the process, regain some sense of control. The power of this remark-
ably engaging novel comes from Archie's narration: explaining that his mother
finally found a duplicate of Oggie's favorite stuffed animal, Archie comments "One
thing I'm glad of is that when they make things like Bunny-Wunnies, they make a
lot of them that all look alike.... Some people make a big deal about only getting
originals ... but I'll tell you, I think the more they make of something the better.
It's a whole lot safer." Archie reports that he did eventually send his book off to a
publisher (he tells prospective writers "how to" on page 153) and began this one
chronicling the events surrounding its writing while he waited for response. Until
that one hits print, keep this one in circulation: readers will find a lot to like in this
efficient, appealing package. FK
MANNING, MICK 
Dinomania: Things to Do with Dinosaurs; written and illus. by
Mick Manning and Brita Granstrom. 
Holiday House, 2002 
4 8p
ISBN 0-8234-1641-0 
$16.95 
M 
4-8 yrs
What dinosaur enthusiast wouldn't welcome a source book of projects and activi-
ties focused on this most delightful topic? Unfortunately, there's nothing fresh
within these over-a-dozen entries, and the scarce collateral data to be culled on the
beasts themselves is hardly worth the effort. Nearly all the crafts are cardboard-
box intensive and involve converting crates into dioramas and clunky costumes.
(Even the most naive of children will recognize that the cartoon boy cutting dino
dentia from a corrugated box with blunt-tipped safety scissors is a sham.) Pro-
posed games are spinoffs of tag, hide-and-seek, and rock/scissors/paper, with roles
332 
* THE BULLETIN
lamely recast into dinosaur personae. A cavalier attitude toward accuracy rears up
frequently, with dinosaur profiles wildly out of scale in the "Dinosaur ID" spread,
blithe suggestions to add "giant plants and volcanoes" to a timeline with no tips on
appropriate vegetation or habitat for the periods, and instructions for a model
"Jurassic sea" that depicts fauna that appeared as late Cretaceous on the previous
page. A somewhat enlightening experiment to demonstrate how pebbles aid her-
bivore digestion cannot compensate for dud crafts such as "stomach contents" of
ketchup-soaked bread in a baggie, chocolate and granola dinosaur dung ("Ask an
adult to help you with this"), or a simulated meteor shower ("Crumple newspaper
into balls. . . . Take turns throwing your 'meteorites' at the dinosaur"). Direct
your dino dollars to Barner's Dinosaur Bones (BCCB 9/01) and leave Dinomania
to quiet extinction. EB
MCCALL, FRANCIS 
A Huge Hog Is a Big Pig: A Rhyming Word Game; written and
illus. with photographs by Francis McCall and Patricia Keeler. 
Greenwillow,
2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029766-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029765-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 1-3
A huge hog is a big pig, a "chatty parrot is a ... WORDY BIRDIE," and a "silly
rabbit" is also, as the text points out, a "FUNNY BUNNY" in this playful collec-
tion of linguistic parallels. Each of the fifteen pairings starts out on the recto, with
a photograph of the relevant critter and text setting up the rhyme; a turn of the
page delivers the turn of phrase that's the punchline and offers a second picture of
the subject in action. The entries differ in degrees of difficulty-lots of kids will
probably guess "FAT CAT" for a "chubby kitty," though "SOGGY DOGGY" for
a "wet hound" will be more challenging-but this isn't really a win-or-lose game
so much as a having-fun game, with surprise as satisfying as a correct guess. The
photographs are bland and variably successful in their conceptual relevance, but
the lively multiracial cast of kids and multispecies cast of animals (including one
"GLAD DAD") are inviting and high-spirited. While this isn't as streamlined as
McMillan's One Sun: A Book of Terse Verse (BCCB 5/90), it's still a diverting
pastime that will provide some fun for beginning readers and language-arts classes.
DS
McKAY, HILARY 
Saff'sAngel. McElderry, 2002 
[16 0p]
ISBN 0-689-84933-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The madcap Casson family, with its pack of four kids (Cadmium, Saffron, Indigo,
and Rose), its artistic parents, and its eccentric life in the Banana House, seems to
be a tightly knit group, but Saffron remains troubled by the fact that she was
adopted into the family after her mother, Mrs. Casson's sister, died. After the
death of the children's grandfather, with whom Saffron felt a special bond, she's
absorbed by his mysterious bequest to her of a stone angel in a garden; with the aid
of her friend Sarah, she determines to track down this angel, which offers a tan-
gible connection to the family of her past. The characters' disorganization seems
to have affected the author somewhat, as this is more rambling than some of McKay's
previous work (The Exiles, BCCB 11/92, etc.), but there's the same affectionate
yet pell-mell family life depicted. Saffron's sense of loss ("She seemed to have been
losing people her entire life, and she had no intention of losing the first proper
MAY 2002 
* 
333
friend she had ever made") is authentic as well as being authentically intermittent,
but the action-and the family's involvement with Saffron's yearning-ensures
that the emotional emphasis never becomes brooding. How could it, with not one
but two high-spirited and significant road trips (Saffy stows away on Sarah's trip to
Italy, where the angel stood in her childhood, and new driver Cadmium and her
brave companions Indigo and Rose strike out for Wales to retrieve the angel from
what they're sure is its current location)? Romantic yet breezy, this is another
lively family story from McKay. DS
MEDDAUGH, SUSAN 
Lulu's Hat; written and illus. by Susan Meddaugh. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 2002 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-618-15277-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Twelve-year-old Lulu was adopted into a family of magicians when she was a tod-
dler, so everyone in the family knows that she can't possibly have that genetic trace
of "real magic" that would turn her into the one true magician of her generation.
That one true magician will probably reveal his or her magic while on a tour with
Uncle Jerry ("Jerry the Great," as he's called on the magician's circuit). Though
advised to "take a cousin who has a chance" rather than Lulu, Uncle Jerry is a good
guy, and his selection of his niece as traveling companion leads to some surprises.
Lulu's discovery of an old top hat precipitates her fall into the world of magic-the
hat gives her magical powers, produces a loyal pet dog named Hereboy, and finally
reveals the secret of Lulu's shrouded past. This is fast and funny; Meddaugh's plot
is satisfyingly farfetched, and there is just the right amount of tension and sus-
pense. Lulu doesn't get her birth parents back but she does get a birth brother
(albeit a disagreeable one) and settle in to becoming a true (and wise and respon-
sible) magician. The black-and-white illustrations add just enough cartoony magic
to this fast-paced novelette. Beginning chapter-book readers will appreciate the
story's verve, the character's nerve, and the notion that the magic that is yours is
certain to find you. JMD
MORAN, ALEX 
Boots for Beth; illus. by Lisa Campbell Ernst. 
Harcourt,
2002 
20p 
(Green Light Readers)
Library ed. ISBN 0-15-216558-4 
$11.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-216546-0 
$3.95 
Ad 
Gr. K-2
It's a sad day when your favorite footwear no longer fits, as Beth the pig discovers
when she finds that her beloved red boots are suddenly too small for her portly
porcine feet. A flock of animal friends offer their own boots ("'Will my boots fit?'
asked Ned"), but none of them are right either; some boots are the wrong size,
while others are "too wet," "too soft," or "too thin." Finally, Beth is cheered up
when her friends present her with a new pair of red boots that are just right, and
together the pals go off to play. This early reader's vocabulary is right on target for
its young audience, and there's a reasonable balance of variation and repetition,
but there's ultimately little imagination or plot to the story. Ernst's pastel-toned
art (edged with wavy black lines) adds some warmth and interest to the text while
reinforcing its simplicity and order; the washes of softened sunset colors are some-
what bland, however, and the red boots are faded to an uninspiring rose. None-
theless, many beginning readers may still find this a good fit. JMH
334 
* THE BULLETIN
MORGENSTERN, SUSIE 
Princesses Are People, Too: Two Modern Fairy Tales; tr.
from the French by Bill May; illus. by Serge Bloch. 
Viking, 2002 
[64 p]
ISBN 0-670-03567-X 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 3-5
Morgenstern (author of the Batchelder honor book A Book of Coupons) here offers
two takes on the perils of princessing in the modern age. The first entry, "Even
Princesses Have to Go to School," follows eight-year-old Princess Yona, who's
lonely and "bored, bored, bored" until her family moves into a modern apartment.
There Yona observes the neighbors, realizes the pleasures of regular-kid life, and
demands to go to school with ordinary kids, because "all little girls are princesses in
their father's eyes." In the second story, "Someday My Prince Will Scratch," Prin-
cess Emma searches for the perfect prince-one who can (and will) scratch her
back where it itches. Finally she meets Prince Ray, who is both willing and able to
assist, and even when the itch doesn't entirely go away, "Emma understood. Prince
Ray might scratch with only one hand, but he did it with all his heart." Yona's
story is somnolent, innocuous, and overlong, resembling a bedtime story that a
parent or favorite aunt might make up on the spot featuring the wide-awake child
of the house. The humor of Princess Emma's story is more adult than juvenile,
and the end of the romance ("Sometimes the itches stopped. Sometimes they
didn't. Life went on. And so they lived more or less happily ever after") will be
unsatisfyingly anticlimactic to princess fans seeking something more conclusive.
Bloch's line drawings, reminiscent of Quentin Blake, add some drizzly humor.
JMD
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Patrol: An American Soldier in Vietnam; illus. by Ann
Grifalconi. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
[34 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028364-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028363-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-8
A young black soldier delivers a real-time description of his squadron's mission to
"secure" a Vietnamese village and evacuate back to base. In free verse that is at
once ethereal and white-knuckle tense, the soldier tells of fighting snipers hidden
in the thick forest and meeting the enemy face to face in the target village: "The
enemy./ A brown woman with rivers of age etched deeply into her face./ An old
man, his eyes heavy with memory./ And babies. Babies./ Little enemies crying on
the mud roads./ Little enemies with tears running down dusty cheeks." Closer
confrontation is still to come: creeping through the elephant grass toward the evac
area, the soldier meets his Vietnamese counterpart ("I know he wants me to lift my
rifle, to be the enemy./ I want him to lift his rifle./ I want him to turn away./ In
a heartbeat, we have learned too much about each other"). Although the encoun-
ter ends bloodlessly and the soldier makes his way safely to the helicopter, physical
and psychological stress have clearly taken a heavy toll and, head in hands, he
confesses, "I am so tired./ I am so tired of this war." Grifalconi's intricate paper
and photo collages juxtapose snips of explosion smoke, snapshot images of fleeing
villagers, and paper constructions of burning huts against a landscape that ap-
proaches fantasy in its lush beauty. This is both a tone and treatment unusual in
literature for young people; verse is an ideal medium for Myers' intensely personal
view of the war, and war-story fans who come for blood will leave with only pain.
EB
MAY 2002 
* 335
NEALE, JONATHAN 
Lost at Sea. 
Houghton, 2002 
[112p]
ISBN 0-618-13920-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Eleven-year-old Orrie and her twelve-year-old brother Jack, who alternately nar-
rate, are deeply protective of their depression-prone mother. They therefore don't
want to throw cold water on her enthusiasm for her new boyfriend, Skip, or on
Skip's and her plan that the five of them (Skip, Mum, Orrie, Jack, and little brother
Andy) will sail across the Atlantic on Skip's boat. The situation sinks below even
Orrie's wildest apprehensions, however, when a storm washes Skip overboard, leav-
ing the kids to sail on with no motor (Skip had scornfully disabled it) and no
functioning adult (Mum collapses into a stupor) in the hope of safely reaching
Antigua and their father. Neale is a clever naval and novel architect: the setup is
perfect, with its promotion of the kids to skipper without seriously bereaving them
(Skip's a nice enough guy but no great loss) and with their concern for their mother's
fate leading them to avoid rather than seek out help; the nautical details, complete
with the obligatory storms, are grandly atmospheric. Characterization is succinct
but believable, with Jack quite the young sea dog coming into his own while Orrie
has a darker view of their situation and their parents ("I'm turning into a grownup.
As soon as things start to go wrong, I start lying to the children"). Ultimately, this
is a seriously gripping survival story, suitable for suspenseful reading aloud, for
young Paulsen fans looking for something damper, or for kids not quite ready for
Creech's The Wanderer (BCCB 4/00). DS
NICKERSON, SARA 
How to Disappear Completely and Never Be Found; illus. by
Sally Wern Comport. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
[288p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029772-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029771-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
At twelve, Margaret's accustomed to life alone with her little sister, Sophie, and
their mother, and to the fact that her mother doesn't talk about the past, especially
not the girls' father or his death by drowning years ago. Margaret's therefore
stunned when her mother suddenly takes them to a house on a Washington island,
a house somehow connected with her father, and there she finds additional myste-
rious items: a homemade comic book (featuring the adventures of "Ratt") with a
picture of the house on the cover, a key, and a medal that indicates that her drowned
father was, strangely enough, a swimming champion. Egged on by her friend Tina
Louise, Margaret returns alone to the island to uncover the truth about her father's
death. With the ambiguous status of its reality (it proves eventually not to be
technically fantasy but merely to be an everyday world that includes some very
strange things), this is a bracingly unusual narrative, and putting together the pieces
will be part of its allure to readers. Nickerson skillfully employs some compelling
(and creepy) conceits: a weird library that includes only unpublished texts, a scary
comic-book series that reflects-and perhaps predicts?-local events, a reclusive
loner who's the subject of neighborhood wonderings, and old family secrets about
a death. Fortunately for Margaret, there's also Boyd, the boy next door (next door
to the mysterious house, that is), who's obsessed with the Ratt comics and the
house they seem to come from, and who joins her as she tries to uncover the truth
about her father's death and about the mysterious Ratt. The story's graphic-novel
336 
* 
THE BULLETIN
sensibility (and sample pages from the Ratt stories) will intrigue fans of that genre,
and readers in general will relish this compelling and offbeat adventure. DS
OPPENHEIM, SHULAMITH LEVEY 
Ali and the Magic Stew; illus. by Winslow
Pels. 
Boyds Mills, 2002 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-869-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Spoiled young Ali has no compassion for the old beggar who sits by the gate, not
even when Ali's mother tells him "a true Muslim gives to the poor, the crippled,
the homeless." When Ali's father comes down with a raging fever, only shula
kalambar, a special stew, will save him, and Ali seeks the dish's ingredients. The
old beggar at the gate tells him that only those ingredients bought with the coins in
a beggar's bowl, begged by a family member, will heal Ali's father. Ali therefore
trades clothes with the beggar and he goes to market to beg; while begging, he is
subjected to unkindness, name-calling, and even physical rebuffs, but finally he
begs enough money, he buys the ingredients, the cook makes the stew, and his
father is saved. This teaching tale, set in ancient Persia, has a clear, unambiguous
message, making it suitable for various curricular uses. Though modeled after
traditional folktales, the story unfortunately lacks that form's economy of lan-
guage. The too-obvious moral is clear long before the story's conclusion, and the
predictability of the plot adds little tension to the already slow pace. Pels' mixed-
media illustrations have an elaborate if sometimes toylike Arabian Nights quality;
ornate costumes and richly textured architectural backgrounds offer much to oc-
cupy the viewing eye. The story, despite its deliberate formality, has elements that
will capture child listeners: a young hero on a desperate quest to save a loving
parent, and, of course, Ali's beloved monkey, who appears in nearly every scene.
JMD
ORGILL, 
ROXANE 
Mahalia: A Life in Gospel Music. 
Candlewick,
2002 
132p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7636-1011-9 
$19.99 
R* 
Gr. 6-12
Mahalia Jackson came from poverty and obscurity in New Orleans to back-breaking
work and musical virtuosity in Chicago. Early in life she found God and promised
her music to the Lord, a promise she kept her whole life long, often refusing to sing
anything but gospel anywhere but church. Orgill captures her subject's fierce
devotion to her faith and makes clear the powerful truth Jackson conveyed through
her singing. She writes with a deliberate informality, steeping her words in the
flavor of her subject's own language and phraseology and blending in conversational
quotes to bring both Mahalia Jackson and her world into human and historical
context; captioned black-and-white photographs cast woman and milieu into sharp
relief. Many younger readers may not know Mahalia Jackson, but it doesn't matter;
Orgill captures the personality and spirit of a woman they'll be proud to meet. In
reference to Jackson's growing impatience with the racism that limited her, the
author says: "But a seed had been planted. It was tiny, like the mustard seed in the
Bible .... 
Her [Mahalia's] seed was a grain of resentment toward the injustices
poured upon her people. Seats in the back of the bus. Snarling white faces behind
the wheel. Filthy "colored" rest rooms next to clean "whites only" ones. Rundown
back-o'-town hotels. TV with no black faces on the screen. Separate restaurants,
swimming pools, schools. Separate but not equal. Never equal. Expect a sprout
any day now." Mahalia sings to raise bail money for protesters in the Civil Rights
MAY 2002 
* 337
movement; sings at the 1963 march on Washington; sings at the funeral of Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr.; sings. An author's introduction gives some insight into
the research done for this biography, and a bibliography, index, and suggested
listening are appended. JMD
OSBORNE, MARY POPE, ad. 
The Brave Little Seamstress; illus. by Giselle
Potter. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2002 
34 p
ISBN 0-689-84486-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
This retelling of the Grimm Brothers' tale of the brave little tailor ("Seven at One
Blow") recasts the protagonist as a brave little seamstress. The gender change does
little to alter the comic effect of this essentially tall and tricky tale: the seamstress,
beset by flies, strikes out with her napkin and kills seven at one blow. Her subse-
quent embroidered boast causes her no end of opportunities to trick silly giants
and foolish kings and ultimately to wind up with the castle and the gentle knight.
Osborne's devotion to narrative momentum is admirable; this story starts with a
bang and gallops through to the happily-ever-after conclusion, employing a lively
turn of phrase along the way. Potter's mixed-media (pencil, ink, gouache, gesso,
watercolor) illustrations have a slightly more grounded feeling than her airy art-
work in Mr. Semolina-Semolinus (BCCB 7/97) and elsewhere due to the denser,
deeper-hued palette; the skewed perspectives that characterized her earlier work
serve her very effectively here. Patchwork quilt endpapers set up the sewing motif
that is repeated in the frames of stitches surrounding the text blocks. This slightly
tongue-in-cheek, tellable tale will serve as a jolly counterpoint to other folkloric
heroic journeys. A detailed source note is included. JMD
PARK, LINDA SUE 
When My Name Was Keoko. 
Clarion, 2002 
[208p]
ISBN 0-618-13335-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
As the Japanese government takes increasingly stiffer measures to repress national-
ism in occupied Korea, the Kim family meets each new decree with subtle but
effective resistance. Forced to take Japanese names, they translate their surname to
retain its original meaning; forced to replace rose of Sharon trees with cherry trees,
they keep a repotted shoot in the shed; forced to attend block musters, they cover
for an aged neighbor whose stubborn disregard ofJapanese regulations is bound to
land her in trouble. All this means relatively little, though, to Sun-hee (Keoko),
who gets along quite well with Japanese friends at home and at school, and who is
more troubled by being left out of whispered adult discussions to which older
brother Tae-yul is sometimes privy. Short on information but swelling with desire
to aid her family, Sun-hee inadvertently draws attention to her uncle's resistance
work, forcing him to flee the country and setting into motion a series of events that
will impel her brother to risk his life as a Japanese kamikaze fighter in World War
II. Sun-hee and Tae-yul narrate in alternating chapters, and their voices meld
effortlessly to disclose the ever more tangled web of deceit into which the family is
drawn. This will undoubtedly attract readers introduced to the Japanese occupa-
tion by Choi's The Year of mpossible Goodbyes (BCCB 10/91); others, who may
have viewed World War II solely through the lens of United States involvement,
will find the Korean narrators' perspective-in which the brave Yanks figure as
little more than a curiosity-thoroughly engrossing. EB
338 
* THE BULLETIN
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW Animals on the Trail with Lewis and Clark; illus.
with photographs by William Mufioz. 
Clarion, 2002 
118p
ISBN 0-395-91415-9 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
While there's no shortage of books on the Corps of Discovery (Blumberg's The
Incredible Journey ofLewis and Clark, BCCB 1/88, is notable), Patent and Muiioz
focus on the expedition's systematic efforts to catalog and describe fauna along
their route from the Mississippi to the Pacific. Patent is at her best when she
incorporates passages from expedition notebooks, conveying the trekkers' response
to their encounters: "We have not as yet seen one [grizzly bear].... The Indians
give a very formidable account of the strength and ferocity of this animal, which
they never dare to attack but in parties of six, eight, or ten persons." However,
much of the text is devoted to chronological narrative of they-saw-this, they-called-
it-that observations: "On September 17, Lewis killed a magpie. Clark admired its
greenish purple feather and white marking. The magpie was known in Europe,
but it wasn't found east of the Mississippi River, so it was new to Lewis and Clark."
Mufioz' color photos of extant relatives of early nineteenth-century fauna are ser-
viceable, and landscapes are captioned to remind viewers that they're not seeing
what Lewis and Clark saw. Still, inclusion of contemporary photographs widens
the psychic chasm between the Corps and the reader, taming the explorers' awe-
filled descriptions with shots of animals now placidly posed on pavement or in
diminished numbers in protected habitats. A chronology of animal sightings is
appended, and a concluding note promises related Patent/Mufioz titles soon to
come. EB
PAYE, WON-LDY, ad. 
Head, Body, Legs: A Story from Liberia; ad. by Won-Ldy
Paye and Margaret H. Lippert; illus. by Julie Paschkis. 
Holt, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6570-9 
$16.95 
R* 
4-8 yrs
In this light-hearted creation story from the Dan people of eastern Liberia, Head is
rolling around wishing he could reach the cherries on top of the tree instead of just
eating "things on the ground that he could reach with his tongue." A chance
meeting with Arms (which attach themselves to Head) results in Head (and Arms)
being able to reach the delicious cherries, after which a nap is in order: "'This,'
said Head, 'is perfect.'" Encounters with a stray body and a pair of legs (all appar-
ently at loose ends) result in the first fully formed human being and a very funny
story. Paschkis' gouache illustrations (according to the liner notes, inspired by
"the Asafo flags of the Fante people from coastal Ghana") have a Matisse-like feel;
the spacious compositions are composed of collage-like individual elements set
against vivid, sunny colors. Head's simple facial features are remarkably expres-
sive, and the rest-of-the-body language is surprisingly articulate. Beginning read-
ers will appreciate the simple, dialogue-dense text, and the jocular storytelling style
and jovial complementary illustrations will make this a favorite of young listeners.
A brief source note is included. JMD
ROCKWELL, ANNE 
Becoming Butterflies; illus. by Megan Halsey. 
Walker,
2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8798-3 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8797-5 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Teacher Miss Dana brings three striped caterpillars and a milkweed plant to her
MAY 2002 
* 
339
class one day, providing an opportunity for her students to witness the process of
metamorphosis. The narrator (one of her young students) describes the progress
of the caterpillars, recording his observations ("I think caterpillars are always hun-
gry because ours ate their old skins and then more milkweed. I drew a picture of
that") as well as those of his teacher and classmates. Eventually the class releases
the newly hatched monarch butterflies so that they can travel south to Mexico.
The narrator and his classmates then write a letter to a Mexican class, later receiv-
ing back from them a photo of migrating monarchs in Mexico: "All of us looked
and looked, wondering which were the three butterflies we hatched in our class-
room and set free to fly so far away." Rockwell's text doesn't pack much of a
punch, but her simple, straightforward language and just-right pacing of the cater-
pillars' transformation will make the process clear and comprehensible to young
readers and listeners. Halsey's multicultural watercolor figures (whose features are
somewhat oversimplified) stand out against a cheery spring-green watercolor back-
ground, giving her illustrations a clean-edged, three-dimensional look. Kid-friendly
spreads feature full-page illustrations on one side, while the facing page presents a
few lines of text at the top with watercolor spot art and handwritten notes at the
bottom. An author's note provides additional information on the metamorphosis
and migration of monarchs, and Halsey's endpapers depict other butterfly species
in both larval and butterfly states. Use this to introduce a science lesson on meta-
morphosis, or pair it with Lois Ehlert's Waitingfor Wings (BCCB 4/01) for a
storytime on winged wonders. JMH
RODOWSKY, COLBY Jason Rat-a-Tat; illus. by Beth Peck. 
Farrar, 2002 
68p
ISBN 0-374-33671-7 
$15.00 
R Gr. 2-4
In his athletic family, nine-year-old Jason is the only member who doesn't play
some kind of sport involving a ball. He's not troubled by that (he's perfectly
happy playing with friends under the bleachers or daydreaming at his siblings'
games), but he is troubled by his parents' increasing insistence that he find himself
a sport. Fortunately, his wise grandfather sees Jason's irrepressible pleasure in
rhythm and his rapture at the Memorial Day Parade, and he gives his grandson the
presents of his dreams: a drum and music lessons. This is a tidy and effective early
chapter book that sensibly avoids overstating its point: Jason's parents are under-
standably taken aback by drum practice in the living room, but they're soon sup-
portive of their son's different direction. There's rueful reality in Jason's initial
lack of skill and his accompanying frustration ("When I go to try it, it comes out
all like crash and bang. That's when everybody tells me to be quiet and even
Barney the dog goes and hides"), but those obstacles are part of the learning curve
rather than overdramatic threats to his pleasure in his new pastime. Readers won't
have to be the odd ones out in their families to empathize with Jason's literal desire
to march to his own drumming, and this may well entice a few down to the music
room to try their hand at the percussion section themselves. Softly textured black-
and-white illustrations have the same gentle respectfulness as the text. DS
SANDERSON, RUTH, ad. 
Cinderella; ad. and illus. by Ruth Sanderson. 
Little,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-316-77965-2 
$15.95 
M 
5-9 yrs
The story of Cinderella may be perennially popular, but Sanderson's retelling of
the Perrault (with a confusing dash of the Brothers Grimm) tale unfortunately
features a densely written text and overwrought illustrations, neither of which have
340 
* THE BULLETIN
much to recommend them. The changes the author makes in the basic plot weaken
the justice-based foundation of the story: Cinderella is hated by her stepsisters not
because she is kind and beautiful, but because she is simply present; her father,
who has ignored his daughter's plight throughout, plucks up the courage to iden-
tify her to the prince in the end; the forgiven stepsisters are indeed attacked by
birds in the conclusion, but instead of plucking out their eyes the birds drive the
stepsisters inside and hold them prisoner for the rest of their natural lives. The
illustrations are at best uneven, with the perspectives and proportions oddly pre-
sented and the image of the heroine changing confusingly from spread to spread.
If you are looking for an elegant, glossy Cinderella, look for K. Y. Craft's lushly
illustrated version (BCCB 11/00); if you need some tonal variety, buy the recently
reprinted, humorous rendition illustrated by Hilary Knight. JMD
SAN Souci, ROBERT, D. 
The Birds of Killingworth; illus. by Kimberly Bulcken
Root. 
Dial, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2111-0 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Greedy Squire Case decides the community's farmers would make more money
from their crops if the birds, which steal grain and fruit, were eliminated. Despite
the protests of his daughter, Almira, and the town schoolteacher, Noah Arden, the
squire convinces the town to go along with his plan to kill all the adult birds.
Together, Almira, Noah, and the schoolchildren save as many baby birds as they
can, so that when the inevitable occurs-the farmers' crops are overrun with pests-
and the townsfolk regret their hasty actions, balance can be restored with the re-
lease of the now-grown baby birds. According to his note, San Souci's prose retelling
of this Longfellow poem emphasizes the romance between Noah and Almira, pro-
vides the schoolchildren with a more active role, and exacerbates the tension be-
tween father and daughter. Those are appealing elements, but the text is
unfortunately overlong, and the pace never quite gets up to speed. Root's water-
color and pencil illustrations are appropriately bucolic but somewhat bland, the
compositions crowded and the palette muddy. Still, this is an accessible tale that
emphasizes the importance of ecological balance without becoming too pedan-
tic-although after this adults may have a hard time convincing children that
saving baby birds is a bit more difficult than just keeping them. JMD
SHANNON, 
MARGARET 
The Red Wolf; written and illus. by Margaret
Shannon. 
Houghton, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-618-05544-4 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
In this homage to Sendak's Where the Wild Things Are, Princess Roselupin is held
captive in a tower by her protective father, the king. Helped by a strange birthday
present (a large golden box filled with balls of colored wool), Roselupin finds es-
cape, knitting a red suit that, once donned, turns her into a giant wolf that grows
"until she burst right through the roof of the tall stony tower, and, with one giant
leap, was out in the forest." The wolf/princess sets off to find other wolves, but the
unraveling of her suit results in her return to her pale princess state, discovery by
the villagers, and reimprisonment in a taller and stonier tower, where she knits her
father a mouse suit from the remaining wool. Though the Sendakian echoes too
often go beyond inspiration to overt imitation, this is nonetheless a successful
exploration of every child's dream of reckless but safe autonomy. Mixed-media
(watercolor, pastel, and colored pencil) illustrations depict an appropriately deli-
MAY 2002 
* 
341
cate princess (pale and wide-eyed) and an appropriately bellicose king (big, hairy,
and loud). The scenes of Roselupin knitting her wolf suit by moon-and-starlight
have a magical mystery that suits this fantastical fable; she emerges from chiar-
oscuro shadows to full, fat redness in her wolf persona. The setting is more wild
folktale than sedate fairy tale, and the unexplained magic seems right at home in
the overgrown and overwhelming forest. Textually, the conclusion is a tad anticli-
mactic, but a close look at the final illustration-wherein a crowned mouse clings
to a window curtain and watches a red-haired princess join the village children
playing around a fountain-will please young would-be wild things. JMD
SILVERMAN 
Mirror, Mirror: Twisted Tales. 
Chicken House/Scholastic,
2002 
[192p]
ISBN 0-439-29593-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
This collection features ten message-driven short stories disguised as tales of the
supernatural. The narrative style resembles that of traditional tales, and casual
browsers may be drawn in by the conversational tone. Soon, however, the collec-
tion quickly reveals itself to be pedantic and obvious, with each story set up to deal
with some form of adolescent trauma or rite of passage: "Dying for Franjibelle"
explores the dangers of hallucinogenic drugs; "Tug of War" tells of a little girl who
is literally torn apart by her divorcing parents; "The Joyride" discusses the conse-
quences of peer pressure and ignoring parental advice; "The Glass Room" exam-
ines child abuse; "You Must You Must You Must" limns obsessive-compulsive
disorders; and so on. The plots are full of contrivance and convenience, and char-
acterizations are sparely archetypal at best. The stories don't work as moral tales,
either, since no consequences are ever permanently suffered, and all the protago-
nists are able to correct for their unthinking misdeeds or actions. The psychedelic
packaging may lure preadolescent readers looking for a post-Stine hit, but this
collection will only leave them longing for simpler, less manipulative goosebumpy
days. JMD
SLOAN, CHRISTOPHER 
Supercroc and the Origin of Crocodiles. National Geo-
graphic, 2002 
[57p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-6681-9 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Supercroc or Sarcosuchus imperator, the mammoth Cretaceous beast that took on
dinosaurs and won, may grab the headline, but it's his extinct and surviving kin
who are examined here in detail. Twentieth-century fossil discoveries in sub-Saharan
Africa, including Paul Sereno's notable unearthing of a forty-foot Supercroc's
remarkably intact skeletal remains, set the stage for broader discussion of the species'
origins and attributes, its multimillion year record of adaptive "experiments," and
ecological issues impacting its current chances for survival. Though the strong
visual appeal may grab youngsters, this is really aimed at older dinophiles, and
young browsers drawn to dramatic photographs of contemporary crocodylia and
artist reconstructions of battling and feasting carnivores will soon find themselves
over their heads in a text that addresses readers with a deepening interest in the
biological history of and precise scientific comparisons within the crocodile line.
A glossary and index guide readers through what could be a daunting mass of
terminology and substantive sidebars highlight and expand the text. Middle-graders
342 
* THE BULLETIN
whose Mesozoic mania has survived the primary-school dinosaur flutter will find
this title worthy of attention. EB
SPINELLI, JERRY 
Loser. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 2002 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000483-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000193-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Donald Zinkoffis just one of those kids, the dork on the fringe who lives happily
in his own world, so heedless of social nuance that he's largely unaware and un-
troubled by his outsider status. Spinelli follows Zinkoff from his first days at
school through sixth grade, through teachers charmed by his ungainly exuberance
and teachers offended by his academic limitations and tendency to throw up,
through status of invisible outsider to status of class scapegoat and back again, and
finally to his changed status as a kid perhaps capable of heroism. This is a quietly
sensitive analysis of an individual, the swells and eddies of group dynamics, and
the effects of the group and the individual upon each other, couched in terms to
which young readers can relate. Spinelli capably manages the difficult task of
compressing a narrative that covers a long period of time into a smoothly paced
story, largely by using Zinkoff himself as the driving force without ever turning the
book into a static character study; he also manages to make Zinkoff the outsider
sympathetic without sentimentalizing (his heroic attempt to find a lost little girl is
actually superfluous, as unbeknownst to him she turns up safe early on), so kids
may well be able to connect him to his real-life counterparts. This is a deft balance
of the straightforward and the unusual, and as a result many readers will travel
someplace they'd never expected to: somebody else's shoes. DS
SWANSON, SUSAN MARIE 
The First Thing My Mama Told Me; illus. by Christine
Davenier. 
Harcourt, 2002 
34p
ISBN 0-15-201075-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
A little girl tells about key events in her life organized around her name, Lucy:
"Mama says my name comes from a long ago word for light. When I was born,
she let that name shine on me." While the text has some prettily poetic moments,
the writing is consistently list-like. Incidents are haphazardly strung together
through a sequence of birthdays, straying just often enough into non-birthday
activities to make the chronology confusing. Davenier's pencil, ink, and pastel
illustrations provide a consistency unachieved by the text, with gleeful scenes of
baby Lucy eating birthday cupcakes, toddler Lucy scribbling hither and yon all
over the house, and schoolgirl Lucy coping with the intricacies of kindergarten.
The drafting is sometimes clumsy, and the scribbly lines occasionally obscure more
than they reveal, but the faces are emotionally articulate and the everyday images
have a cozy familiarity. Muted primary colors splash the cream-colored pages, the
sturdy hues imbuing the pictures with an attractive concreteness that supports the
text. Listeners with their own stories to tell about their names will fancy this as an
easy bedtime story; those without such stories will seek out or invent them. JMD
TESTA, MARIA 
Becoming Joe DiMaggio; illus. by Scott Hunt. 
Candlewick,
2002 
5ip
ISBN 0-7636-1537-4 $13.99 
R Gr. 6-9
In delicate, deceptively simple unrhymed verse Testa refashions the story of her
MAY 2002 
* 343
father's youth and, particularly, his close relationship with his Italian immigrant
grandfather, Papa-Angelo, who shares with Joseph Paul a reverence for Joltin' Joe
that cushions for them both some of life's rougher blows. Sparingly sprinkled
allusions disclose the grandfather's and grandson's common heartache-Joe's fa-
ther is an abusive man and a petty criminal, constantly on his way in or out of jail,
but focusing on DiMaggio deflects Joe's thoughts from a fractured home, the ar-
rival of World War II, and ethnic taunts "when the freckle-faced/ nephews/ of the
parish priest/ talk about me." Thus Papa-Angelo and the mythic figure of DiMaggio
coax Joe through his boyhood years until 1951, when DiMaggio retires and Joe is
ready to replace his boyish dream of "becoming" Joe DiMaggio with a young
man's ambition to become a doctor. Briefer than Robert Cormier's Frenchtown
Summer (BCCB 11/99), this title nonetheless achieves its sensitive evocation of
the shadows and light of family life, and middle-schoolers who think they don't
like poetry might want to take a swing. EB
THESMAN, JEAN 
Between. 
Viking, 2002 
[224p]
ISBN 0-670-03561-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
The summer their mother enters a sanitarium for tuberculosis and their father is
called into the Navy, Charlotte, her older sister Meg, and their adopted younger
brother, Will, are sent to live with the Warders, who run a small hotel on the shore
of Puget Sound, close to a mysterious forest. Charlotte quickly becomes aware
that all there is not what it seems, discovering that Will is a "Fair Prince," one of
the magical beings-gryphons, unicorns, dragons-of the nearby Darkwood; foes
of the Darkwood oppose Will and attempt to prevent his prophesied return. The
action here consists of waiting for Will to decide whether or not he'll return to the
Darkwood; Charlotte spends most of her time fleeing from magical beasts, overex-
plaining the proceedings, and trying to keep her brother from going into the for-
est. The climax fizzles because the evil opposition never achieves the status of a
real threat, and the end is hardly ever in doubt. Attempts to tie the existence of
magical beasts to the existence of undeveloped rainforests and virgin woods are
laudable, but they fall flat. Readers seeking to step outside their own world should
take a tour of Patricia McKillip's The Forgotten Beasts ofEld instead. JMD
VYNER, TIM 
World Team; written and illus. by Tim Vyner. 
Roaring Brook,
2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2409-7 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1497-0 
$15.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
"One big round world, one small round ball. Right now, more children than you
can possibly imagine are playing soccer"-such as the opening page's bronze-skinned
boy in baggy blue shorts, who contemplates the goalpost on a sun-bleached soccer
field that could be anywhere on earth. Elsewhere at that same moment other
World Cup hopefuls are perfecting their moves in some very specific places: "En-
gland / 1:00 p.m.... Joe is playing soccer outside his school. He practices every
afternoon. 'And when I grow up, I'm going to be a professional!"' A continent
away in Lebanon, it's 3:00 p.m. and "Sami buys a drink from the ice seller in the
ruined stadium. 'Imagine what this place was like in the old days,' he says. 'And
think of all the people inside.'" Vyner checks out the action on six continents, and
the random order of his visits only serves to fire imaginations with a sense of com-
344 
* 
THE BULLETIN
mon interest, even purpose, that unites the footballers. Geography and math teach-
ers should fairly leap at an inviting opportunity to introduce time zones and their
calculations, but kids in blissful ignorance of the International Date Line will sim-
ply appreciate Vyner's sprawling watercolor scenes of a Calcutta street emblazoned
with crayon-bright murals or a Japanese boy's bedroom bedecked with posters and
paraphernalia familiar thousands of miles away. There's no need for ham-handed
one-glorious-world pedantry; it's crystal clear that setting is only a piquant detail
in a common dream. EB
WEATHERFORD, 
CAROLE BOSTON 
Remember the Bridge: Poems of a
People. Philomel, 2002 
53p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-399-23726-7 
$17.99 
R Gr. 3-6
Weatherford pairs over two dozen poems honoring famous and anonymous fig-
ures from African-American history with historical images of hardship, hard work,
and achievement in this visually striking collection. The facts speak for themselves
in lilting and literal verses that ask readers to "remember the bridge/ that your
ancestors crossed/ the sweat that was spilled/ and the lives that were lost." Poems
memorialize those who were "marched/ into the ship's hold and wedged spoonlike/
against two hundred other Africans" and name the "Slaves' Chores" that were
their fate ("Beulah nurses Little Master;/ Esther's spinning thread;/ Lucy's fanning
houseguests;/ Lottie makes the beds"); they ensure that readers know there were
"Bronze Cowboys" and celebrate black entrepreneurs (like Madam C. J. Walker,
"The Millionaire"), athletes, artists, explorers, freedom fighters, and just plain folks.
Rough brown and black fabric effectively frames the rich variety of magazine illus-
trations and sepia or black-and-white photographs that bring these versified facts
to life, from the ancient and impressive baobab tree that accompanies "Mother
Africa Speaks to Civilization" to the aerial view of a 1968 Washington, D.C. pro-
test. Photo and illustration credits (but no notes providing dates or other histori-
cal context) appear after a brief author's note describing the process of writing
poems "inspired by pictures that begged for words." A prosy but engaging over-
view of African-American history, this collection also invites curricular use as a
source of pieces to speak or as a source of inspiration for young artists who could
make their own museum of speaking images. FK
WEEKS, SARAH 
Oh My Gosh, Mrs. McNosh!; illus. by Nadine Bernard
Westcott. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2002 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-008858-3 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-694-01204-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
Weeks and Westcott pair together for another romp with Mrs. Nelly McNosh,
whose adventures are predictably ridiculous and rhymed (Mrs. McNosh Hangs Up
Her Wash, BCCB 5/98, and Mrs. McNosh and the Great Big Squash). This time,
Nelly takes her dog, George, for a walk in the park. Perceptive viewers will note
that the path through the park is not empty: squirrel, baseball diamond, boat,
wedding cake, and fountain lie ahead. Add a loose dog (the leash has broken), and
chaos ensues as George wreaks havoc and Nelly tries to catch him. Weeks' charac-
teristically tight rhythm keeps the rhymed story bouncing along, and there are
plenty of invitations for audience participation on the repeated catchphrase: "He
dove and he wove right past Mrs. McNosh. /Tll catch you!' cried Nelly. / But
MAY 2002 
* 345
then-Oh, my gosh!"). Westcott's familiar line-and-watercolor illustrations evince
their usual flyaway charm, and they play a larger role in this story than in the other
McNosh books, filling in the details of the adventure in a pastel palette. Fans of
Mrs. McNosh will enjoy meeting her in another chaotic outing. EAB
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
Wingwalker; illus. by Brian Selznick. 
Hyperion, 2002 
[80p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2347-X 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0397-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Reuben's comfortable life in a 1930s small Oklahoma town is swept away with the
dust-laden wind that suffocates local agriculture and subsequently shuts down town
enterprises as well. Truckers abandon the diner where Reuben's mother cooks and
students can no longer afford lessons at his father's dance academy, but Father
seizes an opportunity to put his light-footed grace to a new use-as a wingwalker
for a traveling carnival. The family joins the troupe in Minnesota, and soon Fa-
ther is delighting audiences with newfound aerial skills, Mother is back behind the
stove, and Reuben is coming to terms with all his worst fears-the eerie, eccentric
showmen who steadily befriend him, and his crippling terror of flight. Adult
Reuben narrates, and some of his dreamy remembrances may not resonate with
readers decades removed from his references: "Every night villages of cabins ap-
peared in the ground mist just in time for us to go to bed.... The cabins came up
out of the soft falling blueness of night, and disappeared behind us as suddenly as
the coming and going of the strange radio stations." However, for each puzzling
allusion there is a wealth of more involving detail-Reuben's cathartic description
of his first airplane ride, cousin Mary Ellen's nasty taunting, the performers' tales
of how they ended up in the carny. Oversized font bridges the span between
chapter book and short novel, and Selznick's paintings, spare in detail and formal
in composition, speak of loneliness, mystery, and the promise of broader skies and
wider horizons. EB
WILLIAMS, CAROL LYNCH 
A Mother to Embarrass Me. 
Delacorte, 2002 
136p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90028-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72922-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Laura used to adore her mother, but now at twelve she's overcome with pain at the
affronts Mrs. Stephan offers to her daughter's dignity, such as singing terribly to
awful old music and, lately, getting fat. Veteran readers will know what that last
means-Laura's mom is pregnant, much to her delight and Laura's utter humilia-
tion ("She's been doing It, very possibly here in the house"); while Laura is actually
rather looking forward to a little sibling, she's realizing that her mother's preg-
nancy means an endless stream of additions to her "things to change about MY
MOTHER!!!!!!!" list. This is an amusing and not inaccurate portrayal of the bundle
of exposed nerve endings and parental allergies young adolescent girls can become,
and Williams (author of My Angelica, BCCB 2/99) has a good eye for particularly
mortifying detail (Mom nearly kills her daughter by going out in public in Elmo
slippers when that's all Mrs. Stephan can wear on her swollen feet). Ultimately,
though, the adult bias is too great and obvious: the book clearly thinks the world
of Laura's mom, making her into rather a paragon of free-spiritedness, and ends
up condescending to Laura as a consequence; readers are therefore placed in the
awkward position of identifying with a character who's essentially the butt of adult
346 
* THE BULLETIN
humor. So long as they don't take it to heart, however, they may still enjoy this
parodic picture of a girl's shifting gears into teenagerhood. DS
WILLIAMS, LINDA 
Horse in the Pigpen; illus. by Megan Lloyd. 
HarperCollins,
2002 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028548-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028547-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 4-7 yrs
"Heeey, Ma," announces a sturdy farm girl, "horse is in the pigpen, rollin' in the
slop," but Ma's got too much on her hands already to deal with the problem ("Tell
it to the pigs, dear. It's time for me to mop"). The girl finds the displaced pigs in
the chicken coop, the ousted hens in the doghouse, the dog in the bunny hutch,
and so on, with her mother continuing to be diverted by daily duties until a cow in
her daughter's bed finally drives her to action. This doesn't have the same daffy
out-of-place farmyard charm as Teri Sloat's Farmer Brown Goes Round and Round
(BCCB 4/99), as there's not enough initial chaos and not enough zip in the resto-
ration to order; nonetheless, there's still a goodly amount of diversion in the disar-
ray and in the downhome phraseology. Lloyd's vibrant black lines bring the
barnyard into sharp relief, and she affectionately grants its denizens a certain home-
spun style as they scramble from place to place and, finally, face down their inter-
loping farm-mates and return to their rightful homes. As usual, kids will appreciate
the hubbub while adults wish restoration of order was really that easy. DS
MAY 2002 
* 347
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
TAYLOR, PAIGE 
Dewey 6- the Decimals: Learning Games andActivities; written by
Paige Taylor and Kent and Susan Brinkmeyer. 
Alleyside, 2001 
93p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57950-050-1 
$16.95
Covering material ranging from basic information to the difference between Li-
brary of Congress and Dewey to an introductory explanation of Boolean search
terms, this volume offers a pile of useful activities (worksheets, lesson plans, games,
activities, and reproducibles) for teaching information retrieval to grades PreK
through 6. An opening chart of progressive "Activities and Information Sharing
Sequences" clearly designates appropriate grade levels for each module; all the sec-
tions in the book are clearly labeled with recommended grades. Appendices in-
clude the final "Dewey Want to Be a Millionaire?" trivia game, answers to included
games and worksheets, and suggested online catalogs for searching. This is stodgy
and unimaginative but nonetheless useful, so professionals just embarking on the
teaching of library skills may find it a bolstering assistant as they encourage young-
sters to dog-paddle through Dewey. JMD
WEISS, JACQUELINE SHACHTER 
Profiles in Children's Literature: Discussions with
Authors, Artists, and Editors. Scarecrow, 2001 
399p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8108-3787-0 
$55.00
In 1969, Weiss began videotaping interviews with children's book authors, illus-
trators and editors for her children's literature class at Temple University. Herein
she summarizes more than seventy interviews, including biographical information
and extensive quotations. Each interview opens with a photograph of the subject
or subjects and the date of the taping. Overall the interviews themselves are adu-
latory and safe, addressing little that could cause controversy, and many of the
concluding "Updates" are already somewhat dated. Still, there are many, many
gems here, including interviews with such luminaries as Arna Bontemps, Lorenz
Graham, Marguerite de Angeli, Eleanor Estes, and Margaret McElderry. Jesse
Jackson (author of CallMe Charley) discusses legendary editor Ursula Nordstrom;
Elizabeth Vining explores issues regarding historical fiction that are still timely.
Pair this with Berman's The Kerlan Awards in Children's Literature for an insight-
ful look at the creators and producers of children's books. Lists of children's book
award winners (Newbery, Caldecott, King, Belpre) and an index are included.
JMD
348 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: McKay;
Meddaugh
ADVENTURE: Brockmeier; Neale
African Americans: Gordon; Orgill
African Americans-poetry: Myers;
Weatherford
Africa-stories: Asare
Animals: McCall; Patent
Animals-stories: Blackaby; Deacon;
Williams, L.
Arithmetic: Vyner
Australia-fiction: Hartnett
Aviation-fiction: Wells
Baseball-poetry: Testa
BEDTIME STORIES: Branford
BIOGRAPHIES: Brown; Gantos;
Gordon; Orgill
Birds-fiction: San Souci
Birthdays-stories: Swanson
Bridges: Adkins
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Brooks;
Cross; Freymann-Weyr; Neale;
Thesman
Brothers and sisters-stories: Day
Brothers-fiction: Cooper; Lisle
Brothers-stories: Lindgren
Business-fiction: Cooney
Butterflies-stories: Rockwell
Carnivals-fiction: Wells
Cats-stories: Light
Circuses-stories: Duncan
Clothing-fiction: Moran
Clothing-stories: Blackaby;
Shannon
Comics-fiction: Nickerson
CONCEPT BOOKS: Carter;
Gr6goire
Crafts: Manning
Crime and criminals: Gantos
Crime and criminals-fiction: Cross;
Lisle
Crocodiles: Sloan
Death and dying-fiction: Bradley;
Cooney; Dreyer; Keizer
Depression, the-fiction: Hartnett;
Haseley; Wells
Dinosaurs: Manning; Sloan
Disabilities-stories: Asare
Divorce-fiction: Bradley; Lisle
Dogs-stories: Gregoire; Weeks
Ecology-fiction: Cooper; San Souci
Engineering: Adkins
Ethics and values: Cross; Giles;
Keizer; Oppenheim; San Souci
Explorers and exploring: Patent
Families-fiction: Bradley; Dreyer;
Freymann-Weyr; Hartnett;
McKay; Nickerson; Park
FANTASY: Brockmeier; Cooper;
Curry; Meddaugh; Thesman
Farms-stories: Williams, L.
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Shannon
Fathers and sons-fiction: Bechard
Fathers and sons-poetry: Testa
Fear-fiction: Bang-Campbell
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Day; Hoberman; Howland;
Light; Morgenstern; Oppenheim;
Osborne; Paye; Sanderson;
Shannon
Food and eating-stories: Garland;
Howland
Friendship-fiction: Elish; Fine;
Kvasnosky
Friendship-stories: Hunter
MAY 2002 
* 
349
Gangs-fiction: Lisle
Gays and lesbians-fiction:
Freymann-Weyr
Geography: Vyner
Giants-stories: Osborne
Grandfathers-poetry: Testa
Growing up-fiction: Spinelli
HISTORICAL FICTION: Cullen;
Drummond; Garland; Hartnett;
Haseley; Park; San Souci; Wells
History, European: Brown
History, U.S.: Myers; Weatherford
Holidays: Garland; Howland
Houses-stories: Johnson
HUMOR: Blackaby; Cabot;
Deacon; Gregoire; Lindgren;
Meddaugh; Paye; Weeks;
Williams, C.
Insects-stories: Rockwell
Jealousy-fiction: Elish
Korea-fiction: Park
Language arts: McCall
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Meddaugh
Mice-stories: Le Guin
Mice-fiction: Hoberman
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Bradley; Williams, C.
Murder-fiction: Deaver; Giles
Music and musicians: Orgill
Music and musicians-fiction:
Rodowsky
MYSTERIES: Cross; Nickerson
MYTHOLOGY: Burleigh; Demi
Nature study: Patent; Rockwell
Pets-fiction: Cooney
Physical education: Gordon; Vyner
Pigs-stories: Branford; Lindgren;
Moran
POETRY: Florian; Testa;
Weatherford
Presidents-stories: Garland
Princesses-fiction: Cabot;
Morgenstern
Princesses-stories: Shannon
Rats-fiction: Bang-Campbell
Rats-stories: Le Guin
Reading aloud: Elish; Florian; Lisle;
Neale; Weatherford
Reading, beginning: Hunter;
McCall; Moran
Reading, easy: Bang-Campbell;
Gordon; Meddaugh; Rodowsky
Reading, reluctant: Cabot; Gordon
Religious education: Brown
RHYMING BOOKS: Duncan;
Hoberman; McCall; Weeks;
Williams, L.
ROMANCE: Cabot; Dessen;
Freymann-Weyr
Running away-fiction: Bradley
Running away-stories: Lindgren
Safety education: Brillhart
Saints: Brown
School-fiction: Giles; Keizer;
Spinelli
School-stories: Brillhart; Rockwell
Science: Fleischman; Rockwell;
Sloan
SCIENCE FICTION: Halam
Scientists-fiction: Halam
Secrets-fiction: Nickerson
Ships and sailing-fiction: Bang-
Campbell; Neale
SHORT STORIES: Armstrong;
Brooks; Silverman
Sleep-stories: Branford
Social studies: Weatherford
Sports: Gordon; Vyner
Stepmothers-fiction: Cullen
Storytelling: Day; Howland;
Osborne; Paye
Storytime: Carter; Duncan; Light;
Paye; Weeks; Williams, L.
Summer-poetry: Florian
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Curry; Silverman
SURVIVAL STORIES: Neale
SUSPENSE: Cross; Giles
Teenage parents-fiction: Bechard
Therapy-fiction: Deaver
Trucks-stories: Carter
Vietnam War-poetry: Myers
Voyages and travel-fiction: Cross;
McKay; Neale
Voyages and travel-stories: Le Guin
War-fiction: Armstrong
World cultures: Asare; Vyner
World War II-fiction: Park
Writers and writing: Gantos
Writers and writing-fiction: Lisle
Writers and writing-stories: Johnson
Zoos-stories: Deacon
tradition of American tall tales. A thundering
good choice for reading aloud." 
-Starred 
review / ALA Booklist
"The climax of the story is Davy's battle with the comet and, true to
his tall-tale image, he saves the planet. Even libraries with several tall
tales on their shelves will appreciate this fresh look at a legendary
character." 
-School Library Journal
Ages 6-12. $16.95 Tr (0-688-16991-0); $16.89 Lb (0-688-16992-9)
* HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
IN LOVING MEMORY
VIRGINIA HAMILTON
(1936 - 2002)
WRITER
COLLEAGUE
FRIEND
T BLUEPRESS THE BLUE SKY PRESS 
ALFRED A. KNOPF BOOKS
FOR YOUNG READERS 
MM
SCHOLASTIC INC.
DELL LAUREL-LEAF
GREENWILLOW BOOKS
PHILOMEL BOOKS/
PENGUIN PUTNAM
HARPERCOLLINS 
BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
CHILDREN'S BOOKS
SIMON 8 SCHUSTER
Harcourt 
HARCOURT, INC. 
CHILDREN'S PUBLISHING
Keep Up
with the
Latest in
Tbachinnl
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas
and activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Children's Books * Teaching in the Library * Plus...
The Parent Connection * Interviews with Children's Book Authors
and Illustrators * Science * Technology and MORE!
If you decide to subscribe,
you'll get one full year
(7 more issues) for just
$12.50. That's 47% off the
regular rate of $23.97 per
year. If you decide not to
subscribe, just return the
invoice marked "cancel"
and owe nothing.
Don't miss this valuable resource for your library!
I
II 
as 
rra 
~arr 
E11$I 
all 
Is" 
r(l 
IXllsl
F 
FR!l 
ria isue
Call 800678-879
r 
Avilabefro 
th
ISBN 0-87845-105-6;
Number 39; 143 pages;
paper; $21.95*
STORFROM FIEAE O CtBERSPACE
ConnecdngChildren andNanraive
EDITED BY BETSY HEARNE, JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINE JENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget that
children are not simply passive receptacles for whatever
treasure or trash the adult world throws at them but are
lively agents who are continually interacting with their
environment. Children actively create meaning as read-
ers, viewers, and listeners. The 39 th Allerton Park Insti-
tute papers emphasize the critical need to connect chil-
dren and narrative as a way to affect their development
as listeners, readers, viewers, and evaluators of litera-
ture-and information in all forms.
The Bulletn StorytellingReview, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin StorytellingReviewcontains:
* 
162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
* Price, distributor, and grade level information for
each review
* 
Ordering information for each distributor listed
* 
An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use
ISBN 0-87845-106-4; 99 pages;
paper; $14.95*
to: 6SIT" Iltlhlic:ttioils ()Ilicc. Room 2 iý ý,01 1'. Dmiid Sti-co, Cllumpýiign, 11,
61820, llrcpý 1\ 11 
rcquil-co 1ý \ is'l, ýN 
(1, Ati icri(m I 
I )iso)ý cr and d wcks
Illf'orill'ition ivgmditl,ý11 (dle] 
CJ11 
\\j'jtjIl It) flic abm(l ý1(1_
dlcýý or ("In hc 
Aeh it(', 11ttf)
\01
hoo), 
,I It )I cadi additional I )ý )o ol\ Ip tll( "allic ordo ( h1i'l( 1, -( '1 111, 11ite, I 
it 1, , 'I fil )I mig
1ý ý-i 1, 1 01c I ly'l N 
1. ý0 1( 
It 11 ýIdcfii it 'T%1 
I I )(ýt)k if 1 11 Ic ,111w ý )I t lc[, (Wý, 'I lip h 'L 11*111
hhi'm I"(w.)
uniYr,;
1325 So
Champa
U.S.A.
RETURN
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
B"
C
:r$; "
rls
;NIL
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2001 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.orglccb/
2. 
When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and password.
This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit number but
may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
1111110008-9036(200205)55:91-6
0008-9036(200205)55:9; 1-6
%~c/
ooo8-903s(200205)55:9;1-6
;-ii 
~·i":
;~i": 
'"; ""
ii
I".I
·~
a~e 
'::"-"· 
;·r· 
1~: 
4~6~
I, 
.i·-L~
ooo8-903s(200205)55:9;1-6
;-ii 
~·i":
;~i": 
'"; ""
ii
I"
·~
I, 
· i·..". 
1":
B~c· '::~-"' 
L~ 
;.ri
