T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
September 2013
Vol. 67   No. 1
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 66 (2013).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $58.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$98.00 (print); $105.00 (online);  
$137.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
September 2013
Vol. 67 No. 1
3 
 the BIg PICture
 
 Niño Wrestles the World  written and illus. by Yuyi Morales
4 
 new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
9 
• VIII  by H. M. Castor
29 • Two Boys Kissing  by David Levithan
54 • Counting by 7s by Holly Goldberg Sloan
55 • Dinosaur Kisses  written and illus. by David Ezra Stein
61 •  P.S. Be Eleven  by Rita Williams-Garcia
63  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
64  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Thaddeus Andracki, Reviewer
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $98.00; combined print & electronic $137.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2013 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Niño Wrestles the World ©2013 by Yuyi Morales and used by permission of Neal 
Porter Books/Roaring Brook Press.
September 2013 • 3
the BIg PICture
Niño Wrestles the World
written and illustrated by Yuyi Morales
Are you a monster? If you are, then you’d better watch out for Niño (short guy, 
yellow sneakers, blue-trimmed tighty-whities, wiry limbs, and lips set in stern 
determination beneath his fiery red lucha libre mask). He’s got a room full of toys 
and some slick wrestling moves, and he’s not afraid to use ’em on rudos like you—
just ask the vanquished villains of Mexican lore who’ve made the sorry mistake of 
taking him on.
First there’s La Momia de Guanajuato, disinterred from a grave in 1865, 
and now reduced to a giggling wreck by Niño’s Tickle Tackle. Next up: Niño vs. 
Cabeza Olmeca, the giant stone head from ancient Olmec civilization. He’s taken 
out by a flying leap off a jigsaw-puzzle box, followed by a vicious head butt. La 
Llorona, legendary ghost wailing for her murdered children in the night, is stunned 
into submission by Niño’s clever Decoy Doll trick. El Extraterrestra, just landed 
from his space ship, can’t defend against the Marble Mash, and even El Chamuco, 
the devil himself, gets knocked right off his cloven hoofs when he slips on Niño’s 
scooter ramp glazed with the ever-effective Popsicle Slick. Is there anything that 
Niño fears? Yes! In dismay, he watches the clock tick to 11:15: “His sisters’ nap 
is over. Time for Nino to tangle with LAS HERMANITAS!” The merciless little 
rudas pounce and tickle and even attempt to (gasp!) unmask Niño, who narrowly 
escapes defeat by joining them to form a new team: Los Tres Hermanos.
Morales isn’t the first and won’t be the last to riff on a child immersed in 
his own imaginary heroism, only to crash back to earth when family life intervenes. 
She is, however, extraordinarily adept at balancing the rough-and-tumble physicality 
of Niño the Luchador—whose adversaries may be all in his mind, while his mess is 
all over the house—with the merriment and self-restraint of Niño the Genuinely 
Wonderful Big Brother, who actually enjoys humoring his adoring younger siblings. 
The tenderness of the final scene flows organically from the lucha libre plot and 
plays out on kid terms, with Niño triumphantly winging his delighted new tag 
teamers up in the air. No adult voice commends Niño for playing nicely with his 
sisters, just as no adult voice warns him not to yank their arms out of their sockets. 
The audience will recognize a good brother when they see one, though, and these 
sturdy little gals certainly don’t require intervention.
Most kids will agree, though, that drawing Niño’s nemeses from the realms 
of history and folklore and setting them loose in the arena of lucha libre is Morales’ 
real master stroke. Combining the explosive action of comic book splash pages with 
the bold outlining and vibrant colors of lucha libre poster art, Morales’ illustrations 
quote their traditional cultural sources as confidently as her text and layout mine 
4 • the bulletin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
contemporary wrestling ballyhoo. Niño’s opponents are, in their traditional forms, 
truly the stuff of nightmares (don’t skip the background insets on the endpapers for 
additional detail), and even the noblest lucha tecnico can be pretty intimidating. 
Morales, though, renders them all just creepy enough for shivers yet goofy enough 
for giggles. El Chamuco would be terrifying with his yellow eyes and serrated teeth, 
but it’s hard to take him seriously with a popsicle in one hand and a Lego block in 
the other; Cabeza Olmeca likewise seems alarming, until one notices that he has 
the same nose and mouth as good-guy Niño. 
Although the text is presented in English, Morales clearly expects that kids 
will move easily among English and Spanish terms. All the rudos’ names and a fair 
amount of background banter is in Spanish, some of which is translated within the 
text, while some is left for listeners to recognize, figure out, gloss over, or save for 
later. (Do “Whunk,” “Zzzwap,” and “¡Ay, ay, ay, ajua!” really require translation?) 
What’s at issue here transcends language and culture: there are things hair-raising 
enough to scare the bejeezus out of a kid, and it’s good to know that there’s a pint-
sized luchador out there to tame them. (See p. 42 for publication information.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
Anderson, John dAvid Sidekicked. Walden Pond/HarperCollins, 2013 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-06-213314-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
Compared to the other kids in H.E.R.O., the school club that’s secretly training 
kids with superpowers to be sidekicks, Andrew’s talents seem less than stellar: 
instead of flashy super strength like his best friend (and possible love interest) 
Jenna, he has hyper-acute senses, earning him a secret identity as the Sensationalist. 
Disappointing, too, is his assigned superhero mentor, the Titan, the former leader 
of the Legion of Justice who went underground after killing his arch-nemesis, the 
Dealer, and has spent the past few years drinking away his inner demons. When 
the Dealer emerges from presumed death, breaks his minions out of prison, and 
appears to be on a mission to eliminate all Supers—with a particular vengeance 
reserved for the still-hiding Titan—Andrew and his H.E.R.O. friends must 
spring into action to aid the city’s current superhero in stopping the Dealer and 
saving the Titan. Along the way, though, Andrew uncovers a few nasty surprises, 
leading to some complicated questions about the ambiguity of what’s right and 
wrong in the real world. Comparisons to Perry Moore’s Hero (BCCB 10/07) are 
perhaps obvious, and Anderson hits the same mark of superhero action and hard 
September 2013 • 5
but relevant issues for a younger audience. Though most readers will likely see 
the final twist coming, the book’s combination of a seriously thrilling plot with 
a conclusion that satisfies without resorting to easy answers makes this novel a 
strong selection for comics kids.  TA
Anonymous Letting Ana Go. Simon Pulse, 2013 279p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7223-5 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7213-6 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7214-3 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
It starts innocently enough, with the nameless narrator’s cross-country coach asking 
the girls to keep a food diary (with accompanying feelings) to make sure they are 
getting enough to eat and drink in order to sustain their training regimen. Then 
her friend Jill reveals that she is keeping a food diary of her own with a different 
goal: to lose enough weight so that she would be guaranteed the part of Clara in 
the Nutcracker. Slowly, subtly, Jill and Jill’s mother feed the narrator the lies of 
anorexia—that thin is synonymous with attractive, that people encouraging you 
to eat are just jealous that your self-discipline exceeds their own, that being thin 
is the only way to ensure that you will be loved. Soon enough, the disease takes 
on a life of its own, even when her new boyfriend, Jill’s brother, begs her to eat, 
even when her parents put her in treatment, even when the things her doctor and 
therapist say start to make sense. In the end, after treatment, she and Jill renew their 
efforts, and while Jill survives, she does not, and the diary ends with an emergency 
transcript and a hospital report of her death. This title, part of a new diary series, 
echoes Go Ask Alice in presentation and appeal, but it’s a sounder exploration of 
its focus problem. The diary reveals its writer to be an ordinary girl who takes a 
wrong turn in trying to understand her father’s rejection of her mother; looking for 
something to blame, she believes her mother’s weight to be the reason her father 
left and determines that being good enough to sustain a relationship means being 
thin enough. Her calorie intake and scale number give her something to focus on 
as a mechanism of control; thus, the pathology of her disease is both evident and 
credible. What is left unexplained and somewhat troubling is how Jill survives, given 
that her commitment was the stronger of the two, suggesting to the vulnerable 
that only some girls are at risk while others can live well at that knife’s edge.  KC
Armstrong, K. L. Loki’s Wolves; by K. L. Armstrong and M. A. Marr; illus. by 
Vivienne To. Little, 2013 358p (The Blackwell Pages)
ISBN 978-0-316-20496-5 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Even though he’s grown up with stories of his ancestor Thor, thirteen-year-old Matt 
never thought he’d be chosen to take the long-dead god of thunder’s place in the 
final battle of Ragnarök. Yet suddenly the Seer has named him Champion, a role 
that comes with the destiny to die while saving the world. Meanwhile, Fen’s been 
raised with the curse of knowing his family descends from the trickster god, Loki, 
and is thereby doomed to an outsider’s existence, always on the wrong side of the 
law. He’s always kept his cousin Laurie in the dark about their ancestry, but now 
Ragnarök is coming, Laurie is showing signs of the family’s magical legacy, and his 
family is demanding that Fen help destroy Matt and throw the final battle in favor 
of chaos. Fen reluctantly joins forces with Matt instead, and soon the Fen, Matt, 
and Laurie are making their way across the Black Hills of South Dakota on a quest 
6 • the bulletin
to find other god-descendants to help them battle a giant serpent and prevent the 
end of mankind. This smart, fast-paced, action-packed novel (by thinly disguised 
authorial heavy hitters Melissa Marr and Kelley Armstrong) offers readers a solid 
adventure story that still manages not to skimp on character. Shifting narration 
gives each character a chance to tell their story and allows the various protagonists 
to emerge as more complex than simply the burdened child of privilege or the 
angry, abandoned rebel. While the boys are largely the focus of the story, Laurie 
often manages to steal the show as an independent-minded fighter with her own 
gifts who refuses to be coddled, protected, or pushed aside. An excellent what-to-
read-next for Percy Jackson fans, this novel will also please young readers of Marvel’s 
Thor and myth-lovers already familiar with Norse lore, and its readers will eagerly 
await the planned sequels. Full-page monochromatic illustrations have a cartoon 
sensibility suitable to the zippy action.  AM
BALLiett, BLue Hold Fast. Scholastic, 2013 274p
ISBN 978-0-545-29988-6 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 5-7
The Pearl family doesn’t have much money, but fifth-grader Early Pearl is secure 
in the love of her parents, Dash and Sum, and in the wonderful world of language 
and books that Dash, a page at the Chicago Public Library, revels in. That security 
shatters when Dash mysteriously disappears and thugs ransack the Pearls’ tiny 
apartment, sending Early, her mother, and her young brother, fleeing their apart-
ment amid a bitter Chicago winter. Their only option is a homeless shelter, a fact 
that sends Sum spiraling down into depression and leaves Early taking charge of 
the family as she tries to solve the puzzle of her father’s disappearance, the odd 
behavior of his co-workers at the library, and the Langston Hughes book the family 
treasures—and everybody else seems to want to get their hands on. The picture of 
shelter life here is vivid and compelling, blending appreciation for the sanctuary 
with a clear-eyed assessment of the flaws, while the Pearls, a close African-American 
family with a delight in the life of the mind, are a sympathetic crew. The plot-
ting is fairly outlandish, however, and Balliett’s familiar love of patterning doesn’t 
work as well as usual, overlaid as it is on an otherwise standard middle-schooler-
solves-a-crime plot. Readers will still admire Early’s pluck in the face of difficult 
circumstances, and they’ll be glad to see her family back together. A note about 
homelessness is appended.  DS
BAsKin, norA rALeigh Runt. Simon, 2013 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5807-0 $15.99
E-book ed. 978-1-4424-5809-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
This multivocal narrative follows several sixth-graders (and an adjacent dog) as they 
struggle with the pack order in middle school. Elizabeth, living in a house run by her 
depressed mother and devoted to the family’s dog-sitting business, is being bullied 
by Maggie, who eventually posts a webpage featuring Elizabeth as “Smelly-Girl”; 
Matthew is the latest victim of Stewart, who urinates on Matthew’s shoes in the 
boy’s room and gets his nose punched in return, leading to Matthew’s suspension. 
As events progress and the season heads toward the spring dance, the victims deal 
with their plight—and contemplate their revenge. Baskin, author of Anything but 
Normal (BCCB 4/09), retains her smooth and accessible style, and she brings raw 
September 2013 • 7
authenticity to the politics of middle school. The shifting narration is confusing, 
however, since individual speakers aren’t well identified, and characterization doesn’t 
develop much beyond the functionary; the plot trajectories lack momentum, and 
there’s therefore not much payoff when revenge isn’t forthcoming. Kristen Tracy’s 
upcoming Too Cool for This School is a much more perceptive look at the dynamics 
of middle-school bullying, but kids who are finding too many similarities between 
their school and The Lord of the Flies may be reassured by this acknowledgment 
of their struggle.  DS
Bennett, KeLLy Vampire Baby; illus. by Paul Meisel. Candlewick, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4691-2 $15.99  
R 5-8 yrs
Tootie is no ordinary baby: she’s got a widow’s peak on her forehead, she prefers to 
sleep all day and stay awake all night, and when her first two teeth pop, “they were 
not teensy-weensy, itsy-bitsy baby teeth . . . they were long, sharp, pointed FANGS.” 
Most importantly, she keeps sinking those fangs into everything—especially her 
older brother. Convinced that Tootie is a vampire, the older brother attempts to 
convince his parents, until an outing where he secretly tries to give Tootie away 
(sticking a sign on her stroller at the store) results in an incident that arouses his 
brotherly protectiveness. Kids may not catch the clues that the “vampire” family 
who approaches Tootie in the store are actually in costume, but they’ll recognize the 
shift from annoyance to ownership, familiar from titles such as Young’s Don’t Eat 
the Baby (BCCB 7/13) and from life experience. Meisel’s mixed-media illustrations 
are predominately line and watercolor, with acrylics providing extra oomph and 
touches of collage and hatchwork detailing adding texture to the compositions. 
Vampire or not, this baby’s got bite, and the ultimate message about sibling love 
carries the day in this comic treatment of a common phase.  HM 
BenwAy, roBin Also Known As. Walker, 2013 308p
ISBN 978-0-8027-3390-0 $16.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Maggie was an adorable, precocious little lock-picker at the age of three, and she’s 
now grown into a lovely and talented teenage safecracker, a true help to her parents 
in their work for the Collective, a spy organization bent on righting the world’s 
wrongs. She has willingly followed and assisted them in their peripatetic global 
assignments, but a stateside assignment in need of a teenaged lead is about to put 
more of her skills to the test. To shut down an impending leak about the Collective’s 
existence, she must infiltrate a toney New York high school and befriend the son of 
the informant who may blow the cover on the Collective. See what’s coming? Of 
course you do. Uncertain how to make friends, she winds up as besties with Roux, 
an ex-hellion fallen from social grace. Uncertain how to flirt, she nonetheless wins 
(and ardently returns) the affection of Jesse, the informant’s son. Meanwhile, her 
loving and protective parents have a near meltdown trying to resolve their critical 
need for information and the newfound realization that their daughter deserves a 
life. Make no mistake, spying is mainly the piquant backdrop for the Maggie/Jesse 
romance; the inevitable bad-guy chase scene isn’t nearly as detailed as the couple’s 
first date, but the heart-palpitating, soul-satisfying romance make this a rom-com 
that an entire circle of girlfriends can devour in a week. Have extra copies and Hot 
Pick labels ready.  EB 
8 • the bulletin
BinghAm, KeLLy Formerly Shark Girl. Candlewick, 2013 341p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5362-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6406-0 $16.99  
R Gr. 7-10
More than a year has passed since the fateful day when Jane lost her arm to a shark 
attack (in Shark Girl, BCCB 9/07), and she’s making slow but steady progress in 
her recovery. She’s also painting again, slowly teaching her left hand to do what 
her right hand did effortlessly. Her experiences with the caring medical staff that 
helped her through her ordeal have left her with the urgent desire to help others in 
some meaningful way, and the flood of letters that she still receives reinforces her 
sense of indebtedness. Her heart is still pushing her to be an artist, though, so she is 
caught between what she feels she should do and what she wants to do. Meanwhile, 
boys: the interested but unexciting guy in her science class, or Max, the sweet guy 
whom she thought was out of reach but who now seems imminently touchable? 
This next chapter in Jane’s recovery is as solid as the first, relating the fears, hopes, 
and agonies of adjusting to her new circumstances with realistic waves of emotion 
that, while intense, never tip into the sentimental or maudlin. Jane is reasonable 
and mature, so that she is nervous and unsettled by her dissatisfaction with her 
first kiss, reluctant to have another surgery to correct the neuroma that has formed 
in her stump even though it causes agonizing pain, conflicted about her choice of 
college and major, and mature enough to approach all of these things deliberately 
and thoughtfully. The lyrical free verse is an especially apt choice for Jane’s narra-
tive voice; internal rhyme, assonance, and alliteration reflect the mental boxes that 
close around Jane’s small daily decisions, decisions that she then second-guesses and 
revises as she goes along. Though a young woman recovering from a life-altering 
trauma, Jane is also experiencing the transitions common to senior year, and her 
careful working through of her decisions will resonate strongly with readers.  KC 
BoLdt, miKe 123 Versus ABC; written and illus. by Mike Boldt. Harper/
HarperCollins, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-210299-7 $17.99  
R 4-7 yrs
The numeral 1—anthropomorphized in blue with a big mouth, thick eyebrows, 
and thin black arms and legs—is very happy that audiences have decided to open 
this book about numbers. The trouble is that the letter A (similarly concretized, 
though in ochre) is convinced this is a book about letters. When one alligator 
shows up on the scene, both glyphs claim him for their own; after the arrival of 
two bears in three cars (apparently bears are prodigious drivers) that are also car-
rying four dinosaurs with five eggs, the two go back and forth, until, after coming 
across twenty-five balls of yarn used to make sweaters for twenty-six zebras, they 
realize that this is a book about both numbers and letters. Though there’s a lot of 
text in this picture book, it’s entertaining and readable enough to be a solid readal-
oud choice, and the good-natured ribbing between A and 1 marks an interesting 
change of pace from standard fare. The boisterous, mottled acrylic illustrations 
keep the bounciness going and focus tight, setting the countable and alphabetized 
objects against a striking white background. Boldt also sets the dialogue between 
the two symbols in distinctively colored speech bubbles (blue for the numbers, 
orange for the letters), and the book emphasizes the words used for each letter and 
the numeral used to count them by color coding and bolding them, which draws 
September 2013 • 9
younger audiences’ attention to the dual purpose of this book. This fresh take on 
hallmark books of childhood offers new interest for kids who already know the 
ropes of counting and alphabet books.  TA
CAstor, h. m. VIII. Simon, 2013 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7418-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7420-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-10
Adhering closely to historical fact, Castor explores the life of Henry VIII, imagina-
tively supplying the personal demons and political exigencies that transformed the 
historical figure from neglected second son to arrogant, relentless despot. She begins 
her tale with Henry as a young child, accidentally privy to his indulgent mother’s 
anxieties concerning the death of her two brothers and prophecies that suggest that 
another claimant threatens her husband’s throne. Interpreting the prophecies to 
apply to himself, Henry suffers his father’s disdain and bides his time until he can 
step into the regal role he believes God has ordained. He views each milestone of 
his life as a step closer to one of two monomaniacal goals—an empire and heir—
and each setback can only be interpreted as a personal trial or, more insidiously, 
the work of Satan; “I am God’s chosen. That is the basic fact—irreducible—from 
which all thinking must begin. So, it follows that the thing that displeases God 
cannot be me.” Castor excels at pacing, and the seeming chronological imbalance 
of the novel (the first half takes us only to his early monarchy) is actually a master 
stroke of plotting, allowing the maelstrom of marriages and perceived treacheries 
to accelerate as Henry, plagued by visions, infection fevers, and counterproduc-
tive medications, loses his grip on reality. Readers accompany Henry to—and 
through—his death and the last-second revelation of the prophecies’ true meaning. 
That Castor can bring this fictionalized life to a soul-shaking moment of tragic 
justice without succumbing to cheesy melodrama is remarkable indeed. This is a 
must-read for fans of all things Tudor.  EB 
CLArK, henry What We Found in the Sofa and How It Saved the World; illus. by 
Jeremy Holmes. Little, 2013 355p
ISBN 978-0-316-20666-2 $17.00  
R Gr. 5-8
A mysterious sofa appears on the country road outside the Underhill Mansion where 
Fiona, Freak, and River wait for the bus on the edge of Hellsboro, the coal-seam fire 
that haunts the outskirts of the small town of Cheshire. Further exploration reveals 
that the mansion’s eccentric owner, Alf, is a visitor from another universe named 
Indorsia, the couch is part of a seven-piece sentient computer system-slash-furniture 
set named Guernica, and Alf is trying to entrap Edward Disin, the Indorsian CEO 
of a corporation that has been sneakily introducing mind control devices to the 
citizens of Cheshire to eventually take over the universe. Fiona, Freak, and River 
band together, chasing down a cat who ran off with a domino to which Alf’s dead 
sister’s memories have been downloaded, commandeering a hot-air balloon shaped 
like a toilet to get to an abandoned chemical plant in the center of Hellsboro, and 
knocking out a few minions wearing dog-shaped hats on their quest to shut down 
Disin’s portal between Indorsia and Earth and save the world. This clever story self-
consciously and irreverently follows in the footsteps of classic quest tales, quietly 
dropping homages to The Lord of the Rings and A Wrinkle in Time along the way. A 
10 • the bulletin
deus ex machina conclusion makes the explosion-filled ending significantly weaker 
than it could be, but compelling backstories make readers root for the characters, 
and the gang’s good-natured bickering and sharp perception will make budding 
science fiction fans feel like they’ve been welcomed into a circle of friends for this 
whirlwind adventure.  TA
CLiff, tony Delilah Dirk and the Turkish Lieutenant; written and illus. by Tony 
Cliff. First Second/Roaring Brook, 2013 168p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-813-2 $15.99  
Ad Gr. 6-9
Mr. Selim, an officer in the Turkish Janissary Corps and master brewer of tea, is an 
unlikely sidekick for wild-haired adventuress Delilah Dirk, who has relinquished her 
status as genteel maid at several European courts in favor of life on the road, thiev-
ing and sword fighting and flying her sea-to-air sailboat. When a woman endangers 
and then saves your life, however, you really do owe her, and as Mr. Selim becomes 
accustomed to his role as her bumbling aide de camp, he too develops a taste for 
action; after an attempt to return to quiet life in a fishing village, he tracks Delilah 
down and hitches his fate to hers. This graphic novel of mismatched road buddies, 
set in 1807 Asia Minor, has all the right components of an action-adventure tale, 
but there’s little chemistry between the protagonists, who seem to play out their 
roles side by side rather than together. Delilah rushes headlong from one cleverly 
orchestrated fight to another, and Mr. Selim clings to his formal speech and man-
ners in the most dire circumstances, but neither contributes the emotional capital 
needed to build a friendship, much less a romance. The transfer of Cliff’s concept 
from web comic to print ultimately may leave readers with the sense that Delilah 
and Mr. Selim’s story is wrapped up before it ever really took off, but the tidily 
boxed action sequences are ably choreographed and will satisfy readers who like 
their swordplay laced with humor.  EB
CoLumBus, Chris House of Secrets; by Chris Columbus and Ned Vizzini; illus. 
by Greg Call. Balzer + Bray, 2013 490p
ISBN 978-0-06-219246-2 $17.99  
R Gr. 5-8
When the Walker family purchases an enormous house in San Francisco for a low 
price, they believe it to be the first bit of good luck they’ve had in a while. Suddenly, 
though, a crazy old witch lays claim to the house and drags them into a century’s 
old family feud. As the house is magically swept away, their parents vanish, and 
the three Walker children, eight-year-old Eleanor, twelve-year-old Brendan, and 
fifteen-year-old Cordelia, find themselves and their house dropped in the middle 
of a mysterious primeval forest. The children realize that they are trapped in the 
novels of Denver Kristoff, the author who once owned their house, and as fictional 
worlds come to life around them, the house is thrown into the sea by giants and 
attacked by pirates, and the children are captured by knights and dragged into the 
presence a deadly queen. Their only hope is the dangerous Book of Doom and 
Desire, a magical tome that could save them—or could hold a fate worse than 
death. The story is a engrossing page-turner with a parade of near-escapes, hilari-
ous mishaps, and courageous face-offs with terrifying villains. The nonstop action 
will keep readers on the edge of their seats and likely keep them from noticing or 
caring about occasionally inconsistent writing and tone. The family relationships 
are delightfully real, as the siblings manage to rally together one moment only to 
September 2013 • 11
be bickering again in the next, and that authenticity more than makes up for a 
half-hearted romance between Cordelia and a fantasy pilot. A good step up for 
fans of the Spiderwick Chronicles (BCCB 7/03) who are looking for a longer read, 
this adventure is also likely to please those with fond memories of Van Allsburg’s 
Jumanji (BCCB 9/81), while adventure-film lovers will revel in a novel that reads 
like a movie. An epilogue creates new loose ends, a kind of post-credits set-up for 
planned sequels.  AM
CrossAn, sArAh The Weight of Water. Bloomsbury, 2013 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-967-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
In this verse novel, Kasienka and her mother emigrate from Poland to England in 
search of Kasienka’s father. Because of her weak English skills, Kasienka is put in 
sixth grade instead of seventh where she belongs, and because she is white among 
a community of brown and black immigrants, she is ostracized from the start and 
even actively bullied when she is moved to her rightful grade. When she learns of 
her father’s address, she seeks him out without telling her mother; when she finds 
him happily settled in a relationship with a kind woman and a new baby, her sad-
ness is overtaken by anger. Meanwhile, though, she has attracted the attention of 
William, a boy she met at the community swimming pool; he encourages her to 
go out for the swim team and stand up for herself, and his kisses and attention, 
combined with the friendship of a Muslim girl and Kasienka’s success as a swim-
mer, enable her to gain perspective on her own situation as well as her relationship 
with her estranged parents. The verse form highlights Kasienka’s emotional arc 
through the events that shape it; sharply observed, imagistic impressions of her 
first days in her new home and in school give way to more nuanced depictions of 
her feelings as she suffers her classmates’ bullying and tramps through the streets 
looking for her father. The most affecting poems are the ones where she talks about 
William; the exhale of the “w” sound mirrors her letting go of her repressed anger 
and fear in favor of balance in and out of the water. Her closing insight, “I know 
when to come up for air,/ When to keep my head down,” is therefore more than 
a technique for mastering the butterfly stroke. Pair this with Applegate’s Home of 
the Brave (BCCB 2/08) and Tan’s The Arrival (BCCB 1/08) for a revelatory and 
many-sided discussion of the emotional aspects of immigration.  KC
Crowder, meLAnie Parched. Harcourt, 2013 154p
ISBN 978-0-547-97651-8 $15.99  
R* Gr. 6-8
Three narrators—Sarel, a white girl; Musa, a black boy; and Nandi, one of the 
lion-hunting dogs that Sarel’s father breeds—share this gripping story that begins 
during a serious drought in an unspecified African setting. The Tandie, a militant 
gang, murder Sarel’s parents, whose farm had access to a secret spring, and kidnap 
young Musa, forcing the boy, a natural dowser, to search for underground water. 
With only Nandi and the other dogs to help her, Sarel must somehow find water, 
food, and a shady place to survive. When Musa manages to escape his captors, 
he joins forces with Sarel, but can they find the hidden water before the ruthless 
Tandie hunt Musa down or the drought kills them? Crowder’s spare storytelling 
and third-person narration provide young readers some safe distance for witnessing 
the tragic events, while well-chosen details and taut descriptions effectively convey 
12 • the bulletin
the intensity of the situation. The lack of identifying specifics about the setting, 
the area’s history, and even Sarel (who is not revealed as being white until midway 
through the book) and Musa means that readers will need to read carefully to piece 
together what is going on, but the immediacy that results from being thrust into 
the middle of things makes the story immensely engaging. The ending may leave 
some readers wanting to know what will happen next, but overall this is a poetic 
and powerful survival story; readers will want to tackle it with a full water bottle 
on hand.  JH
Cummins, JuLie Flying Solo: How Ruth Elder Soared into America’s Heart; illus. by 
Malene R. Laugesen. Roaring Brook, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-509-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-4
From her beauty-queen wing poses to the flirty name of her plane, American Girl, 
pioneering aviatrix Ruth Elder was not only an able and ambitious pilot but also 
a savvy dame who evidently knew that glamour would do as much as raw achieve-
ment to promote the cause of women in American aviation. In a new field abloom 
with stunts and gimmickry, Elder attempted to beat Amelia Earhart to the goal of 
women’s transatlantic flight, with a wink and a kiss to the press, and the suspiciously 
scripted intent to fly off to Europe to buy a Parisian gown. Elder landed in the 
drink and Earhart grabbed the honor, but after a brief stint in Hollywood, Elder 
was back in the cockpit, vying with nineteen other women in a 1929 California to 
Ohio race that became famous as the Powder Puff Derby. Alas, Elder limped in at 
fifth but came away with great stories to tell and a secure place in aviation history. 
While Cummins avoids discussion of the possibility that aviation was a publicity 
stunt for Elder’s acting career, readers get the full flavor of a Roaring Twenties age 
of spectacle, through both the text and with Laugesen’s lightly textured pastel art, 
some based on period photographs. A brief closing notes comments on women in 
early aviation and offers a list of sources in various media.  EB 
Cyrus, Kurt Your Skeleton Is Showing: Rhymes of Blunder from Six Feet Under; 
illus. by Crab Scrambly. Disney Hyperion, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-1-4231-3846-4 $16.99  
R Gr. 3-6
The story of a lost ghostly dog provides a running thread in this collection of 
twenty-eight compact and amusingly ghastly poems. Our speaker, a living boy, 
is trying to help the ghost dog reunite with his master, so he’s searching through 
the memorials to Wanda Gripp (a hugger who died when an anaconda hugged 
back), Baxter Blink (a guy who died of embarrassment after a public fart), Stubby 
Flub (an erring fashionista who tripped over his baggy pants), and others to find 
the dog’s owner. The rhyming verses, which range from brief couplets to longer 
collections of stanzas, include Struwwelpeter-esque cautionary stories (Freddie 
Diggs “picked his nose and now he’s dead, dead, dead”), jokey fates (Bud Pugsley, 
who was suffocated by his hat, was a “lowbrow”), and some imaginative weirdness 
(Mo Gringott was so freaked out by his skeleton that he pulled it out of himself). 
There’s both technical solidity and conceptual appeal in the goofily morbid verse, 
and Scrambly’s art recalls Schindler’s work in Johnston’s The Ghost of Nicholas Greebe 
(BCCB 10/96); though digital, its reliance on dark engraving-style linework with 
September 2013 • 13
touches of pale, cool tones is appropriately funereal and old-fashioned. The absurdly 
horrific scenes beam with contemporary robustness, so cartoonish joy carries the 
day. There are great possibilities here for reading aloud and performance, as well as 
just supplying some satisfying Halloween material for kids looking for something 
more sophisticated than simply celebratory.  DS
dAugherty, C. J. Night School. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2013 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219385-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219384-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
When sixteen-year-old Allie Sheridan has one run-in too many with the cops, her 
parents send her off to Cimmeria Academy, an elite boarding school isolated in the 
English countryside where all modern technology is forbidden. At first she struggles 
to find her place and to follow the school’s numerous, strictly enforced rules, but 
she soon finds herself making friends and unexpectedly enjoying her new life. Her 
friends, though, are part of a tight-knit clique with a long history and plenty of 
secrets, and they aren’t ready to share with an outsider. The school too seems to 
harbor secrets of its own, including a mysterious Night School with clandestine 
meetings and an unknown agenda. Then one of Allie’s friends is murdered and 
another begins acting like a stranger, and Allie has to decide if it’s worth the risk 
to discover and expose the truth. A fast-paced read with solid plotting and plenty 
of intrigue, this novel provides a diverting, straightforward summertime thrill. 
Characterization and the love story are underexplored, but this is all about suspense, 
and there the book delivers in spades. The boarding-school setting, with its spooky 
gothic atmosphere and the underlying elements of espionage and long-standing 
grudges, sets up a slow-burning tension that builds to an intense finale, with plenty 
of questions left unanswered as setup for a planned sequel.  AM 
dAywALt, drew The Day the Crayons Quit; illus. by Oliver Jeffers. Philomel, 
2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25537-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* 6-9 yrs
“One day in class, Duncan went to take out his crayons and found a stack of let-
ters with his name on them.” What follows is a hilarious epistolary tale wherein 
each crayon, in childlike printing on lined paper, shares something with Duncan. 
Some feel overworked (“Gray crayon here. You’re KILLING ME! I know you love 
Elephants. And I know that elephants are gray . . . but that’s a LOT of space to 
color in all by myself”), some feel underappreciated (writes Beige Crayon, “The 
only things I get are turkey dinners (if I’m lucky) and wheat, and let’s be hon-
est—when was the last time you saw a kid excited about coloring wheat?”). Some 
crayons are caught up in disputes (Orange Crayon and Yellow Crayon both insist 
they are the true color of the sun, as evidenced by pages from coloring books that 
Duncan completed), while others have entirely unique issues (“It’s me, PEACH 
CRAYON. Why did you peel off my paper wrapping?? Now I’m NAKED and 
too embarrassed to leave the crayon box”). Each spread includes a reproduction of 
the actual letter (written in crayon, of course) on the verso, facing an appropriate 
composition such as a childlike crayon drawing or a colored-in page from a coloring 
book. The crayons themselves, with deceptively simple line and dot faces, are rich in 
14 • the bulletin
emotion and character, and it’s entertaining to consider each crayon’s representation 
in light of the voice in its letter. While potential lessons in inference, point of view, 
and persuasive writing abound in the crayons’ letters, this is guaranteed to see just 
as much use for being just plain fun. Move over, Click, Clack, Moo (BCCB 9/00); 
we’ve got a new contender for most successful picture-book strike.  HM 
dessen, sArAh The Moon and More. Viking, 2013 [448p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78560-5 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Emaline is a steady, pragmatic girl who works hard at her summer job with her 
family’s vacation rental business in a fictional North Carolina beach town. She’s 
disappointed in her birth father, who promised to send her to Columbia and then 
bailed on the finances, but she has a solid relationship with her longtime boyfriend, 
Luke, two solid best friends, and a solid future ahead of her at the nearby state 
university; even her relationship with her younger half-brother Benji is gratifying 
as she helps him cope with the pending break-up between their mother and his 
father. Enter Theo, the ambitious young documentary filmmaker’s assistant who 
has come to town in search of a reclusive local artist. When Luke and Emaline 
suffer the common post-high-school break-up, Emaline turns to Theo, who is 
trying to make up for what he missed as a girlfriendless dork in high school by 
attempting to stage best-ever dates that most often fall flat. While the character 
constellation here is vintage Dessen, the struggling romance with barely likable 
Theo is a departure from the usual liaisons with perfect boys she creates for her 
characters (and readers) to swoon over. She makes it work, however, by keeping 
Theo little more than a convenient part of Emaline’s character arc as she prepares 
to leave her high school life behind; he’s a transition boy, a reminder that there 
will be another boy after the first one, and still others after that. From Emaline’s 
sturdy character to the quotidian plotline to the unromantic romance, a quiet 
solidity pervades every aspect of this engrossing slice of an ordinary life, remind-
ing readers that true happiness turns on accepting the fact that life provides more 
good-enoughs than best-evers. Prior fans of Dessen may balk at the lack of a 
perfect romance, but the gentle realism here may attract readers who find some 
of her other works too good to be true.  KC 
doweLL, frAnCes o’roArK The Sound of Your Voice, Only Really Far Away. Ath-
eneum, 2013 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3289-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3291-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Seventh grade continues to bring changes for Kate and Marylin, the formerly 
best friends who drifted apart in The Secret Language of Girls (BCCB 7/04) and 
discovered new relationships in The Kind of Friends We Used to Be (BCCB 5/09). 
Marylin is heading toward a crisis, as the cheerleading squad disapproves of her 
new boyfriend, the student council president, and in a desperate attempt to retain 
her status with them she promises to convince him to spend the class funds on 
new cheerleader uniforms. Meanwhile, Kate the uncompromising is denying how 
much she’s compromising for the boy she likes. Dowell’s examination of this pair 
continues to bring fresh nuance and insight to familiar middle-school dilemmas. 
September 2013 • 15
Marylin is particularly sympathetically treated as the girl who genuinely likes pink, 
cheerleading, and approval, and the book wisely makes her leaving the cheerleading 
team (and peer group) not the climax of the book but the engine for her rebalancing 
midway through. Kate’s realization that her heart won’t always obligingly cater to 
her rock chick self-image is honestly explored, and there’s a truly touching second-
ary plot about her changing relationship with her father. The author continues to 
write some of the most authentic and faceted characters in youth literature, and she 
brings new perspective to the classic story of middle-school girls in transition.  DS
duBosArsKy, ursuLA The Golden Day. Candlewick, 2013 [160p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6399-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6723-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-10
For eleven little girls in Sydney, Australia in 1967, disobeying the teacher is almost 
unthinkable. Charismatic and opinionated Miss Renshaw, a latter-day Jean Brodie 
if ever there was one, takes her class on an excursion to a nearby garden, ostensibly 
to reflect on the execution of a criminal in Melbourne, but more probably to spend 
time with the gentle gardener, Morgan, whom Miss Renshaw acclaims as a gifted 
poet. Morgan offers the group a special treat—a walk to a seaside cave with aboriginal 
paintings. The entire group goes into the cave, the girls grow skittish and leave the 
cave, but Morgan and Miss Renshaw never come out. Long since sworn to secrecy 
by Miss Renshaw concerning their discussions and outings, the girls instinctively 
adhere to a code of silence when questioned by school authorities, but an investiga-
tion is launched, revealing Morgan’s past and presuming Miss Renshaw murdered. 
Eight years later, however, as a tight little knot of four friends reach graduation, 
Miss Renshaw’s reappearance forces them to reevaluate what each has thought to 
be true. Delicate, atmospheric, and provocative, this bijou tale stirs young adult 
readers to remember vividly the beguilement in which teachers can hold their little 
charges, and to consider with mature vision the complex meanings of adult actions 
that are only half understood by child observers. With secrecy, elegant language, 
crime, a short page count, and a touch of the supernatural, here’s a teen book-club 
selection that everyone is likely to finish.  EB 
durAnd, hALLie Mitchell Goes Bowling; illus. by Tony Fucile. Candlewick, 
2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6049-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Seems like just yesterday that Mitchell was riding his long-suffering father around the 
house in raucous pre-bedtime automotive make-believe (Mitchell’s License, BCCB 
5/11). Suddenly he’s four, and with too much energy to spare, what better place to 
expend it than a bowling alley (“There were lots of brightly colored balls, a good 
pizza smell, and giant crashing noises”)? The only problem is that Mitchell is only 
racking up single digits per frame, while Dad’s amassing a string of Xs, and despite 
Dad’s encouragement, Mitchell knows he’s losing big time. Mitchell threatens to 
go home, but Dad suggests that they team up instead and heave the ball down the 
alley together. Kids who’ve met Mitchell know he’s one sharp and determined kid, 
and it seems pretty unlikely that he’d fall in line so easily with a suggestion that 
requires him to relinquish control of the ball. Durand’s take on Mitchell’s frustra-
16 • the bulletin
tion is right on the mark, though, and Mitchell’s successful collaboration with Dad 
provides a nice example of problem solving for similarly intense kids. There’s also 
plenty to sympathetically chuckle over in Dad’s tendency to showboat and the other 
bowlers’ demand to move to a further alley. Fucile’s retro palette of cool aquas and 
grays on an icy white background perfectly sets off the blazing red bowling ball, 
Dad’s russet hair, and the pitch-black mop that frames the rapid-fire expressions 
animating Mitchell’s face. It would be just too cruel to share this with a youngster 
unless you’re prepared to follow it up with a trip to the alley.  EB
eLLiot, dAvid Henry’s Map; written and illus. by David Elliot. Philomel, 
2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16072-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
“Henry was a very organized sort of pig,” so organized that he decides to map 
his surroundings to make sure everyone and everything is in its proper place on 
the farm. He first draws his own sty on his map, then proceeds to the woolshed, 
adding it and its three sheep inhabitants, then adds the tree and its adjacent cow, 
the stable and the horse, and the coop and its hens. As he adds each new location, 
the farm animals fall in behind him to see what’s next on the map until finally 
all of them are atop the hill, looking down at the farm below and comparing it 
to Henry’s map. The animals are dismayed to find that, although the map shows 
them in their places, when they look down on the farm, all those places are now 
empty. Everyone quickly rushes back to their appointed spots, making Henry’s map 
correct once more, and Henry happily refers to his mantra: “A place for everything 
and everything in its place.” The story is simple, but kids will enjoy the moment of 
feeling smarter than the farm animals as the creatures puzzle out why they are on 
the map but not in their actual places. The text is crisp and brisk, and the animals’ 
dialogue makes this a lively choice for a readaloud. The pencil and watercolor il-
lustrations, done in subdued tones, are casually drawn, with slightly scribbly lines 
depicting the animals’ fur, feathers, or wool. The sheep are particularly comical 
as they swing from the tree branch, ride on the horse’s back, or hold hooves with 
each other. Use this as an intro to a simple map-making activity, or share it in a 
farm- or pig-themed storytime.  JH
eLLis, LeAnne stAtLAnd The Ugly One. Clarion, 2013 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-547-64023-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Adolescent Micay is known as “the Ugly One” in her Incan village, thanks to a dis-
figuring facial scar she received in her youth. A stranger passing through her village 
sees her differently, however, and leaves her a gift: a scrawny baby macaw, named 
Sumac Huanacauri (Handsome Rainbow). Caring for Sumac is the beginning of a 
transformation for Micay, as the bird eventually leads her to the house of the local 
shaman, the Paqo, who takes Micay on as a student, teaching her to see “Beyond,” 
to heal, and to become more confident in herself. When a drought threatens the 
villagers and the Incan empire at large, Micay decides to travel to Machu Picchu 
with the entourage of the Incan emperor to ask the Sacred Rock a question. She 
intends to ask for healing of her scar but instead finds herself asking for help for 
the starving people, and the rains finally come. It is then that Micay learns that it 
September 2013 • 17
has been her destiny all along to be the Marked Girl who would save her people, 
and that she is meant to train as a priestess with the high priest of the Incas. The 
measured, slightly formal tone of Ellis’ prose suits the almost folktale-like structure 
of her narrative, while Micay’s pain and confusion at being bullied for her disfigure-
ment keeps the story personal and immediate. Older middle-graders and young 
teens with an interest in history and other cultures will find the particulars of Incan 
life, including some less contemporary aspects (a couple of llamas are sacrificed and 
human sacrifice is referenced but not described). A gripping story of a girl who 
transform from a cowed outcast into a confident leader, this will find an audience 
among tweens and teens beginning to question what fate has in store for them.  JH 
fArrAnt, nAtAshA After Iris. Dial, 2013 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3982-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-7
Three years ago, Bluebell Gadsby’s twin sister, Iris, died, and it seems to twelve-year-
old Bluebell like she’s the only one in their noisy English family who still misses 
her. Her mother has buried herself in an international career that keeps her away 
from home, and her father has found a job far from London and only returns oc-
casionally, leaving Bluebell, her older sister, Flora, and her younger siblings in the 
care of a kindly but overwhelmed grad student au pair. After Bluebell begins to 
open up and confide in an appealing and handsome new boy, Joss, she’s crushed 
to find that Joss is really interested in Flora. Meanwhile, the family’s dysfunction 
increases, until disasters at home threaten to overshadow the anniversary of Iris’ 
death, the one day Bluebell was sure she’d have her family’s support in mourning. 
Tarrant writes with the effervescent, engaging style of her countrywomen Sue 
Limb or Hilary McKay, and the pell-mell family is a charming, motley crew with 
their tendency to create scenarios with their pet rats and slip out of their bedroom 
windows at all hours. Bluebell is poignantly marked out as the observer in a crowd 
of actors, identified by her tendency to see the world through her videocamera 
(interludes identifiable by their script format). The book isn’t as successful as 
McKay’s work, though, in balancing the loss with the cheerful chaos; the parents’ 
abdication is too complete for a satisfactory resolution, so the happy ending is 
not only overcontrived (Dad returns home in a helicopter, bringing the two lost 
youngest children and a Hollywood producer) but also superficial and dishonest 
in so easily redeeming irredeemable parental failure. The kids are still an appealing 
group, though, so readers who enjoy quirky family stories may want to follow the 
Gadsbys’ journey to reconciliation.  DS 
frAnKeL, JordAnA The Ward. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2013 465p
ISBN 978-0-06-209534-3 $17.99  
R Gr. 9-12
One hundred years in the future, rising oceans have flooded New York City, and 
the polluted canals and lack of fresh drinking water have given rise to the Blight, 
a contagious and deadly disease. Across the rooftops of this plague-infested city, 
sixteen-year-old daredevil Renata Dane races her tricked-out speedster alongside 
her fellow dragsters in hopes of taking home big winnings. Ren’s desperate for 
money to pay for food and her sick foster sister’s pain medication, and she never 
loses, but when the government offers to pay her to throw a race as a cover for a 
risky search through derelict buildings for a secret, long-buried water source, Ren 
18 • the bulletin
accepts. Suddenly, she is caught in a battle between government officials and a 
dangerous, ancient tribe for possession of seemingly magical waters that may hold 
the cure for the Blight. As Ren fights for her freedom, her sister’s life, and her 
city’s future, her only allies are the dragsters, the bookie she loves, and an adorable 
young scientist working on the cure. The underlying plot of the angry, socially 
dysfunctional but talented heroine battling a ruthless totalitarian government while 
being torn between two attractive young men is familiar, but Frankel manages to 
give it an entertaining gloss with a variety of inventive new elements. The racing 
scenes in particular are almost cinematically intense, and the fountain-of-youth 
plot device gently treads the line between magic and science. Ren is at times coarse 
and unlikable, but she is a lioness, fearless in defense of those she considers family, 
and readers will happily root for her. A dystopian adventure that is likely to please 
fans of Dashner’s The Maze Runner (BCCB 11/09), this title will definitely have 
readers coming back for more.  AM
frost, heLen Salt: A Story of Friendship in a Time of War. Foster/Farrar, 
2013 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-374-36387-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
James is a settler boy living in the stockade that surrounds Fort Wayne, Indiana in 
August of 1812. Anikwa is a member of the Miami nation living in a village within 
walking distance of the stockade. He and James are friends, and Anikwa’s father 
trades with James’s father at the trading post. Tensions are mounting, however, as 
the Americans and British prepare for war, and the British have guaranteed land and 
protection for any Native American tribe that joins their side. The Miami people 
are resistant to joining the fight against the Americans living at Fort Wayne, but 
then James’ father is forced to limit trade and retreat to the fort, and their home 
and trading post are burned. James and his mother insist that the Miami haven’t 
changed loyalties, and James and Anikwa set up secret trades of meat for salt, but 
they are not immune to suspicion and misunderstanding as fear escalates. Ulti-
mately, they preserve their friendship, but their reunion is overshadowed by the 
knowledge, reinforced by James’ mother’s hope that relatives will come to join them 
in the area, that soon settlers will force the Miami out of their historical homes. As 
she often does, Frost creates poetic forms that suit her characters, the inspiration 
for which she explains in an endnote. Additionally, short free-verse poems about 
the discovery, use, and importance of salt for the Miami people are interspersed 
with James and Anikwa’s story. The forms are not as integrated into the subject 
matter as they have been in Frost’s other works, and as a result the overall effects 
are not as strong. Additionally, the limited perspectives of the two boys make the 
history difficult to follow without additional context, some of which is provided 
in the opening author’s note, but readers will need to do more research to fill in 
gaps. The voices of the boys are clear and compelling, however, and their poems 
carry strong emotional resonance that will supplement study of the War of 1812 
by adding accessible human perspectives to the conflict.  KC
September 2013 • 19
gAnsworth, eriC If I Ever Get Out of Here; written and illus. by Eric Gan-
sworth. Levine/Scholastic, 2013 359p
ISBN 978-0-545-41730-3 $17.99  
R Gr. 6-10
Life’s not easy on the Tuscarora reservation in upstate New York in 1975, especially 
for Lewis, who’s from one of the poorest families in town and who is the only 
Indian student in the “smart-kid” track at his junior high. Enter George, an Air 
Force brat who just arrived for seventh grade, who immediately warms to Lewis, a 
connection strengthened by their mutual love for the Beatles. The boys experience 
many milestones of adolescence together, and Lewis confronts racial discrimination 
and money-driven politics head-on when he can’t get school administration to take 
his report of bullying seriously; George steps forward to defend his friend, only to 
discover that an embarrassed Lewis has been lying about his home the whole time. 
Lewis has a strong narrative voice in spite of his insecurities—he understands the 
limitations that have been placed on him, and he’s got the gumption and intel-
ligence to deal with them. Music is woven throughout the book, providing an 
outlet for Lewis and a point of affinity for readers (chapter names are taken from 
Beatles lyrics, and full-spread monochromatic illustrations in album-cover style, 
which open each part, foreground musical plot points). Similar in theme to Alexie’s 
The Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian (BCCB 10/07), this title subtly 
introduces issues while providing a genuine slice of Native life, albeit in a more 
delicate exploration of the particular nuances of friendship between young teenage 
guys. Kids with sensitive souls are most likely to flock to this compassionate tale, 
but its smart capture of the zeitgeist and finely crafted storytelling make it a solid 
recommendation for many readers.  TA
gAy, mArie-Louise Read Me a Story, Stella; written and illus. by Marie-Louise 
Gay. Groundwood, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-1-55498-216-5 $16.95  
R 5-8 yrs
In their first new appearance in more than four years, siblings Stella and Sam spend 
a day outside together building a doghouse, picnicking, and flying a kite. As in 
previous offerings (Stella, Princess of the Sky, BCCB 10/04, etc.), the draw here is 
the casual banter between siblings, with Sam asking questions and Stella patiently 
answering, or Stella making suggestions and Sam happily complying. Stella spends 
most of the story with her nose in one of her books, and throughout the day she 
shares tidbits of stories and facts with her brother, from folklore references to 
information about caterpillars to poetry about bunnies for the benefit of Sam’s 
carrot garden. The literary references are perfectly organic to the storyline—nei-
ther pedantic nor obvious, just part of how Stella rolls; Sam’s response is also very 
natural, sometimes showing an interest in the books and sometimes busy with 
something else (“‘Do you want me to read this story to you?’ ‘Not right now,’ said 
Sam. ‘I’m trying to catch a frog’”). Stella is truly the model sister: always kind, 
always engaged, always interested in what her brother is up to. Sam, for his part, is 
earnest and lovable, the perfect comrade for his steadfast canine companion. Gay’s 
watercolor compositions dominate each spread, with text only filling the minimal 
white strip at the bottom. The delicately sketched outdoor scenes are full of but-
terflies, birds, wildflowers, and puffy white clouds, lending a sense of purity to the 
natural setting, while Stella’s mess of auburn curls draws attention to her sweet face. 
20 • the bulletin
This is an excellent model both of positive sibling relations and of the way books 
and stories can naturally play into everyday life.  HM
goLdstone, BruCe That’s a Possibility!: A Book about What Might Happen. Holt, 
2013 [32p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8050-8998-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Using crisp, bold photo illustrations and a text that builds concepts gradually and 
methodically, Goldstone introduces children to the language of mathematical 
probability. He begins with defining and contrasting possibility and impossibility: 
“Will a chicken hatch from this egg? That’s a possibility! Will a snake hatch from 
this egg? That’s a possibility! Will a spider hatch from this egg? That’s a possibility! 
Will an elephant hatch from this egg? That’s impossible!” From there he moves onto 
explaining certainty and then jumps into determining probability, demonstrated 
by the process of deciding which of a multitude of colored gumballs one would 
probably get, which other colors are possible, and which are improbable. Flipping 
a coin demonstrates odds while other visual examples, including spinners, choos-
ing a card from a standard deck, and dice rolling, are used to further reinforce the 
concept. A stuffed animal and his wardrobe possibilities make for a series of dif-
ferent combinations, and permutations are explored textually and visually with a 
hypothetical race between a rabbit, a frog, and a robot. Instructions for making a 
paper-plate spinner and playing a grab-bag guessing game are included, as well as 
additional notes on the topic. This will be incredibly useful to teachers and parents 
as an introduction to or reinforcement of probability concepts, and students who 
are visual learners will find plenty of support here from the attractive photos and 
thoughtfully designed layout. While the complexity of some of the ideas may require 
spending more time (and perhaps some hands-on practice) on certain spreads before 
moving on, the snappy narration, the (generally) large illustrations and the clarity 
of the explanations will facilitate group sharing of this title. It’s probable that you 
should buy this book.  JH
goodmAn, susAn e. How Do You Burp in Space?: and Other Tips Every Space 
Tourist Needs to Know; illus. by Michael Slack. Bloomsbury, 2013 [80p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-068-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
Children’s departments are, in general, amply supplied with books on how to be-
come an astronaut NASA–style, and Goodman herself has contributed a title of this 
variety, Ultimate Field Trip 5: Blasting Off to Space Academy. With the possibility of 
space tourism on the horizon, it’s possible that kids will find extraterrestrial oppor-
tunities through pleasure-seeking vacations, not just scientific research. Goodman 
tailors this offering to just such future travelers, laying out not only how rockets 
and space suits and extra-vehicular sightseeing might work, but also considering 
realistic probabilities for moon accommodations, local transportation, “histori-
cal” sites, low gravity sports, even areas restricted “to preserve the moon’s natural 
beauty.” The speculations pack in the fun, but the science is serious, as Goodman 
makes it clear why soda isn’t a good idea in space, why you’re going to find better 
toilets on the moon than on your spacecraft, and why you’d better not have any 
strenuous activities planned for immediately after your return. Illustrations (full 
September 2013 • 21
color to come) are an entertaining blend of astronaut and space photographs, many 
embellished with cartoon figures that reinterpret them as a tourist experience, such 
as the space-walking astronaut signaling a cartoon taxi. Index, quotation sources, 
glossary, timeline, and lists for further reading are included.  EB
grAtton, tessA The Lost Sun. Random House, 2013 [368p] (The United 
States of Asgard)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97747-2 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97746-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97748-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
In an alternate world, where Norse gods run the United States as a new Asgard, 
seventeen-year-old Soren Bearskin battles to control his Berserker impulses while 
carrying the burden of his father’s violent reputation. When Balder the Beauti-
ful does not rise on the first day of spring, though, the country panics, sure that 
Ragnarok is coming, and even the gods seem at a loss. Soren, hoping to win 
Odin’s promised boon for recovering Balder, sets out on a quest that crisscrosses 
the American West in pursuit of the god. Joining him is the lovely and beguiling 
Astrid Glyn, whose powers of prophecy and tragic past have made her famous and 
who has her own reasons for seeking Odin’s boon. When they find Balder, they 
discover that he’s changed: now mortal, he has no memory of his godhood. Can the 
teens restore Balder, his memory, and his immortality before the end of the world? 
Strong writing and an inventive recasting of mythological characters combine to 
create an evocative, romantic adventure. The novel wisely allows its characters to 
revel in their mythological underpinnings rather than trying to make them seem 
like authentic contemporary teens, yet Soren and Astrid’s struggle to understand 
their place in the larger world will still resonate with readers, while their intense, 
moving romance will elicit plenty of sighs. Reading like a slightly older sibling to 
Armstrong and Marr’s Loki’s Wolves, reviewed above, this rousing narrative offers all 
the best elements of a mythological quest while giving unfamiliar readers a thorough 
but not heavy-handed introduction to the traditional tales. AM
grAvett, emiLy Again!; written and illus. by Emily Gravett. Simon, 2013 28p
ISBN 978-1-4424-5231-2 $17.99  
R 4-6 yrs 
A bedtime readaloud session gets a little fiery as a young dragon grows frustrated 
with his parent’s sleepy refusal to reread its favorite book. Initially, the parent dragon 
willingly reads aloud the brief story of Cedric the dragon, who’s “never,/ His whole 
life,/ (Not once) been to bed.” Each time the tale ends, the little listening dragon 
ask hopefully, “Again?” This scenario repeats until the pooped parent can hardly 
get through a sentence before dozing off. The little dragon, so upset that he grows 
as red as scarlet Cedric, shakes the book so that the inhabitants of its illustrations 
fall in a jumbled heap at the bottom of their page. His final “AGAIN!” comes out 
as a flaming burst of dragon breath that burns a hole right through the pages of 
Cedric’s book and indeed the actual physical book as well: the closing pages and 
back cover all feature a charred-looking hole, through which Cedric and his fel-
low cast members prudently escape. This is a creative bit of fun to which many a 
tired parent and enthusiastic child will relate, and the dragon aspect will appeal to 
many youngsters as well. The oil-based pencil and watercolor pictures are skillfully 
22 • the bulletin
composed, with the delicately scaled green dragons contrasting tastefully with the 
crimson color of the book, of Cedric, and of (eventually) the little dragon himself, all 
posed against a soothing cream backdrop. The boldness of the pictures and brevity 
of the text will make this a sure-fire winner for group storytimes and patient parents 
with plenty of energy may find it suitable bedtime fare as well.  JH
hAsKeLL, merrie Handbook for Dragon Slayers. Harper/HarperCollins, 
2013 324p
ISBN 978-0-06-200816-9  
R Gr. 5-7
Princess of Alder Brook, a small freeholding within a larger empire, Mathilda 
would prefer to write and copy texts alone than meet her subjects, who too often 
cast repulsed stares at her misshapen foot. After her friend, Lord Parzifal (Parz), 
and Tilda’s handmaiden, Judith, rescue Tilda from a kidnapping attempt, the three 
find a taste for adventure and decide to become dragon slayers, so that Parz can 
prove his mettle to a doubtful mentor, Judith can live a life of adventure rather than 
servitude, and Tilda can be the scribe who documents it all. Not surprisingly, things 
do not go as planned, and their encounters with the Wild Hunt, with a truly evil 
lord, and with multiple dragons give Tilda new perspective on what it means to be 
herself and to be a leader. Tilda is an extremely likable heroine, and her adventures 
are compelling enough (and Haskell’s writing strong enough) that readers will slide 
past touches of plot contrivance and eagerly plow ahead. Particularly interesting 
is Haskell’s treatment of the Wild Hunt, with a female Hunter leading the pack 
and the incorporation of a trio of horses, made of gold, silver, and copper, who are 
referred to as the “Elysian horses,” whom Tilda sets free from the Hunt. Kids with 
their own physical anomalies may particularly respond to Tilda’s adventures, as 
will fans of the movie Brave or the How to Train Your Dragon book or movie.  JH
hAutmAn, Pete The Cydonian Pyramid. Candlewick, 2013 361p (The 
Klaatu Diskos)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5404-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6376-6 $16.99  
R Gr. 6-9
In the first volume of the Klaatu Diskos trilogy (The Obsidian Blade, BCCB 4/12), 
Tucker Feye met Lah Lia, an intriguing girl who came through a of the shimmering 
diskos, or time-travel portal, and their fates became intertwined. This second volume 
reveals Lah Lia’s origins as a Pure Girl, one of the few selected by the priests in her 
time to be sacrificed and thrown into the diskos as a spectacle to keep the people in 
line. Some Pure Girls return, however, having been sent to a time where the medical 
technology is advanced enough to repair the damage done by the priests; these girls 
become Yars, who train the Pure Girls with skills that may enable them to survive 
their ordeal. Lah Lia survives because of Tucker’s timely appearance through a portal, 
and her adventures as she travels through time include interactions with the vari-
ous factions that have gained and lost power over the half-millennium separating 
her time from Tucker’s. Her goal is to find and save Tucker from his own fate as 
a sacrificial victim, but to do so she must engage the very priests who tried to kill 
her, as well as risk her life by hurling herself through portals that may lead to unsafe 
places and times. Lah Lia, though she appears meek and demure on the outside, is 
more than up to the task, making her another likable, strong-willed, resilient YA 
heroine with admirable fighting skills set against formidable odds. As in the first 
September 2013 • 23
volume, interstitial passages provide history and context for the peoples that Lah 
Lia encounters and intrigue readers with thought-provoking glimpses of the changes 
that technology can bring about (and may yet in the human world as well). Lah 
Lia is a compelling character that readers will be glad to see developed and given 
equal time with Tucker Feye; their meeting at the end sets the stage for a conclu-
sion that is sure to be as harrowing and action-packed as the first two books.  KC 
hAydu, Corey Ann OCD Love Story. Simon Pulse, 2013 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5732-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5734-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 8-12
Bea first meets Beck at a school dance, and she’s delighted with their meet-cute 
(she helps him get a grip when he starts having a panic attack after the power goes 
out). They meet again, much to her horror, when he turns up in the group therapy 
session her therapist insists she join. Bea’s fine with helping Beck with his anxiet-
ies, even resignedly enabling him as he compulsively hits the gym and washes his 
hands (always in sets of eight), but she’s not ready to admit to herself, let alone to 
him, that her compulsions drive her life too. She organizes her life (all sharp objects 
put away) and her driving (30 miles per hour max) to make sure she couldn’t hurt 
anybody, and she obsessively, stalkerishly, documents the activities of a couple who 
share her therapist. Bea is a completely endearing original, and the book manages 
to subtly steer her narration through denial of her condition to acceptance with-
out ever losing her essential charisma; her set of compulsions is particularly apt 
for illustrating how easy it can be to defensively rationalize problematic behavior 
(safety is important, right?). While her relationship with Beck is touching, it’s her 
relationship with her long-term best friend, Lisha, that offers the most complex 
commentary: Lisha loves Bea to pieces, but she’s fed up with a friendship that’s 
dominated by Bea’s compulsions and unhappy about the level of stigma that an 
alliance with Bea means embracing. Bea remains witty, affecting, and ferociously 
individual throughout, and readers will delight to know her as they understand 
her—and possibly themselves—better.  DS 
hiLL, KirKPAtriCK Bo at Ballard Creek; illus. by LeUyen Pham. Holt, 
2013 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9351-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Young Bo is not quite old enough for school yet, but there’s still plenty to do in and 
around her small Alaskan mining community. Her two fathers, Jack (an African-
American cook/blacksmith) and Arvid (a Swedish blacksmith/tailor), make an 
unconventional but loving family for Bo, abandoned as a baby by her dance-hall 
mother, Mean Millie. Bo helps Jack in the cookhouse, taking care of the miners who 
come in for meals, plays with her best friend, Oscar, an Eskimo boy from a nearby 
native village, and visits with the residents of her surprisingly diverse community. 
Occasional excitements—a bear, sickness, an airplane, a bulldozer, an abandoned 
small boy—might seem tame by today’s standards, but Hill’s clear, lively narration 
and the fascinating details of everyday life in 1920s rural Alaska will engage the 
same kids who are thrilled by the Laura Ingalls Wilder books. There’s a bit more grit 
here than in Ingalls’ work, with occasional profanity and some veiled references to 
24 • the bulletin
the “good-time” dance-hall girls, but it works to add authentic flavor to the story. 
Bo’s two-father household, while unusual, comes across as entirely believable in 
this time and place, and the flexible definitions of “family” in Bo’s community 
will resonate with many modern readers. This would make a marvelous readaloud 
selection, but it would be equally successful as an independent read for middle 
grade historical fiction fans; either way, kids will enjoy their time in Ballard Creek. 
Final art not seen.  JH 
horowitz, dAve Twenty-Six Pirates; written and illus. by Dave Horow-
itz. Paulsen/Penguin, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25777-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 4-7 yrs
As in his Twenty-Six Princesses (BCCB 6/08), Horowitz presents twenty-six char-
acters, one for each letter of the alphabet, from “Pirate Arty. First to the party,” to 
“Pirate Zach. The final attack.” There are nasty pirates (“Pirate Brad. Born to be 
bad”) and not-so-nasty ones (“Pirate Doug. Needs a hug”), bold buccaneers (“Pirate 
Frank. Walks the plank”) and more timid ones (“Pirate Grant. Can’t”). The text lacks 
any substantial narrative, but it’s still an amusing and lively list, and pirate-loving 
youngsters may enjoy the multitude of variations on Horowitz’s piratical theme. 
Some of the compositions are clunky, but the cartoonish illustrations, created with 
construction paper, charcoal, colored pencils, “and a chicken feather or two,” are 
as bold and brash as their subject. Most spreads will carry well to a crowd, making 
this useful for storytimes and classroom readalouds. Particularly humorous are the 
froggy sidekicks featured on each page, whose pop-eyes and frequently worried 
mouths convey their concern and disapproval with the pirates’ wild antics. This 
would be useful as an addition to a pirate-themed storytime lineup or as part of an 
abecedary collection; it might also work as a read-alone title for reluctant primary-
grade readers.  JH
hourAn, Lori hAsKins Diary of a Worm: Teacher’s Pet; illus. by John Nez. Harp-
er/HarperCollins, 2013 32p (I Can Read!)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208705-8 $16.99 
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208704-1 $3.99  
Ad Gr. 2-3
This easy reader based on Cronin and Bliss’ Diary of a Worm (BCCB 10/03) fol-
lows the premise of the original, sharing the entries Worm writes in his diary that 
address the trials and tribulations of being a worm. In this offering, Worm is trying 
to come up with the perfect gift for his teacher’s birthday. Fortunately, his friends 
Fly and Spider are there to help, and “Fly spotted something with one of her zil-
lion eyes”—a perfectly rotten apple on the ground under a tree. Unfortunately, he 
forgets an accompanying card, but he manages to chomp out a “Happy Birthday” 
greeting on the side of the apple. The watercolor illustrations don’t have quite 
the fizz of Harry Bliss’ originals, but they offer some gentle humor, particularly 
in Worm’s changing expressions. The grass-level world is carefully realized, with 
lots of little details adding interest to the scenes. As is often the case when picture 
books are adapted into easy reader format, there isn’t much new here; the dynamics 
among characters, the humor, and the diary format are more or less repackaged 
with somewhat simpler text and more visual clues, and since the original title was 
perfectly suited for reading alone at the same age, this is less a re-aiming than an 
September 2013 • 25
extension. Still, Worm was entertaining the first time around and proves entertain-
ing once again in this format. Look for more entries in this series—Spider and Fly 
are certain to want their own shot at easy-reader fame.  HM 
hutChison, dot A Wounded Name. Carolrhoda Lab, 2013 314p
ISBN 978-1-4677-0887-6 $17.95  
R Gr. 9 up
In this update of Shakespeare’s Hamlet, the students and faculty of Elsinore Academy 
are reeling from the tragic death of their beloved headmaster. Sixteen-year-old Oph-
elia feels the loss keenly, as the elder Hamlet was more like a father to her than the 
overprotective but aloof Polonius, who fears that Ophelia’s ability to hear the bean 
sidhe and other spirits that roam the school’s estate will drive her mad. Ophelia’s 
intense relationship with Dane, the headmaster’s grieving son, grows increasingly 
toxic, particularly after the two see the ghost of Hamlet, who instructs Dane to take 
revenge on his uncle Claudius. Hutchinson doesn’t stray a step from the original 
plotline; despite the modern setting, this remains a Shakespearean world, especially 
for the women, as they are each defined and ruled by the whims of the men around 
them for better or for worse. The viewpoint of Ophelia, who narrates throughout, 
is particularly telling, as she reserves much of her sympathy and emotion for Dane 
but observes herself in coldly clinical terms: a bruise left by one of Dane’s many 
rages, for example, is not so much a source of pain but a “souvenir of fury and 
loss.” She nonetheless remains likable, and indeed, all the characters, even Dane and 
Claudius, have redeeming moments—something that makes Hutchinson’s ability 
to reveal how each of these people are complicit in their own misery an even more 
impressive feat. The language here is appropriately dramatic and ornate, although 
a few of the extended metaphors become a bit repetitive. This has obvious use as a 
supplemental material in a Shakespeare unit, but it is also a vividly told, painfully 
sad tragedy that will make readers take a second look at the Bard.  KQG
JinKs, CAtherine Saving Thanehaven. Egmont, 2013 375p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-274-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-284-3 $17.99 
 Ad Gr. 5-8
Noble the Slayer is yet again slogging through treacherous terrain in the great 
kingdom of Thanehaven when a scrawny kid named Rufus shows up and informs 
him that Noble could be in charge of his own destiny if he helps Rufus take down 
something called the operating system. Tired of blood and mayhem, Noble fol-
lows Rufus on what he believes to be an honorable quest—freeing other people 
(or unicorns, in one instance) trapped in other “programs,” as Rufus refers to 
them. Each time he saves someone, though, the world becomes more unstable, 
resulting in the violent chaos that Noble was trying to stave off. Brief glimpses 
into the world outside the computer screen clue readers into what’s going on: 
in the real world, Rufus has gotten mad at his best pal Mikey and has infected 
his computer with malware. The intriguing premise certainly makes for some 
amusing and imaginative scenarios, as when Noble meets a clothes-obsessed trio 
from Mikey’s sister’s fashion game, but it also backs the characters into a corner. 
Noble and his accrued set of virtual pals are by their very nature one-note, which 
makes it difficult to invest in the fight for independence that Noble eventually 
takes up as his own. The breakneck pace, with characters jumping from one game 
and even computer to another, may nonetheless compel readers, and gamers will 
26 • the bulletin
be particularly pleased with a few jargon-based jokes, so it may be worth keeping 
this on hand for gaming night.  KQG
KAdohAtA, CynthiA The Thing about Luck; illus. by Julia Kuo. Atheneum, 
2013 270p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-1882-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7467-3 $9.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Summer and her family have had a tough year of illnesses and 
accidents, and it’s not getting any easier. Summer’s parents have to go to Japan for 
a few months to care for dying relatives while Summer, her grandparents, and her 
challenging brother Jaz travel the country as “custom harvesters,” driving machin-
ery and cooking for the other workers. It’s tough work, especially when Summer’s 
grandmother, grandfather, and brother all get sick during the harvest; Summer 
comes through, however, driving the combine at night when they are asleep, and 
it appears the family may find some good fortune after all. This is an unusual slice 
of life, and the technical farming details show Kadohata has clearly done her re-
search on custom harvesting (which is essentially harvesting that is contracted out 
to independent harvesters). Summer and her family members are strong, unique 
characters—particularly her force-of-nature grandma, who is both comical and 
maddening—and Summer’s summer of growing up is both believable and touching. 
Kuo’s occasional line drawings, offered as sketches notes from Summer’s notebook, 
add interest and help clarify some of the harvesting information. Readers looking for 
a quiet but fascinating bit of family drama will find this particularly satisfying. JH
KormAn, gordon Hypnotize Me. Scholastic, 2013 [240p] (The Hypno-
tists)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-50322-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-50327-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Jax Opus is relieved to discover that there’s an explanation for the strange effect he 
seems to be having on others more frequently of late: hypnotic power runs in both 
sides of his family. A bizarre occurrence on a school field trip brings Jax to the at-
tention of Dr. Mako of the Sentia Institute, where hypnosis is studied seriously and 
Jax will be mentored to develop his abilities. It will come as no surprise to readers 
that Sentia shamelessly exploits its students, that Mako is a power-hungry villain 
with designs on mind-bending the next American president, and that Jax, with his 
unique talent for remote hypnosis, will be his unwilling tool. While Jax takes most 
of the book to figure out what readers will have long guessed, he eventually finds 
a way to save the rigged election and to defeat the lethal post-hypnotic suggestion 
Mako has implanted in Mr. and Mrs. Opus. Korman’s a bit slipshod with the rules 
for hypnosis (surely a command to vote for a candidate “the next time you operate 
the lever of a voting booth” won’t turn an election in the age of punch cards and 
touch screens), and many readers could find a simpler way to circumvent Mako’s 
devious directive to the Opuses than the risky strategy played out here. Nonethe-
less, Jax’s dilemma is equally fraught with thrills and hilarity, and his struggle to use 
his dubious gift ethically adds a touch of gravitas to this mad-scientist romp.  EB
September 2013 • 27
KruLL, KAthLeen Lives of the Scientists: Experiments, Explosions (and What the 
Neighbors Thought); illus. by Kathryn Hewitt. Harcourt, 2013 96p
ISBN 978-0-15-205909-5 $20.99  
R Gr. 4-8
Yes! Krull and Hewitt are back with another of those books, the eighth entry in 
their delightful Lives of . . . series (Lives of the Musicians, BCCB 4/93; Lives of Ex-
traordinary Women, BCCB 9/00). This time around, readers meet twenty scientists 
in eighteen compact entries (William and Caroline Herschel, James Watson and 
Francis Crick appear as teams), with a whimsically caricatured portrait and touch 
of spot art, courtesy of Hewitt. Scientists appear in chronological order and range 
across cultures from Zhang Heng, a Chinese scholar who devised an earthquake 
seismometer, and Ibn Sina, a Persian doctor who “considered medicine a science, 
not a craft, nor a matter of magic or evil spirits,” to programming-language devel-
oper Grace Hopper and waitress-turned-primate-expert Jane Goodall. Once again, 
each entry makes clear what its subject contributed to the field, but the emphasis 
is on humanizing persons of daunting accomplishment and stature with scraps of 
mildly naughty tittle-tattle tossed in wherever possible. Tippler Grace Hopper, for 
example, was arrested for disorderly conduct; Barbara McClintock frightened her 
genetics grad students; Ivan Pavlov sold bottles of canine gastric fluid as an appetite 
stimulant. Readers charmed by the gossipy style will transition easily to Krull’s 
longer works in the Giants of Science series; those who prefer their biographies in 
chatty little articles will have to wait and see what she comes up with next. How 
about Lives of the Mathematicians? Hint, hint.  EB
Kuehn, stePhAnie Charm & Strange. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2013 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-02194-6 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-02193-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
Sixteen-year-old Win, attending a boarding school in Vermont, believes his bouts 
of violence and inner torment are signs of a family trait: they have inner wolves, 
creatures into whom they may be able to transform. Flashbacks to his past, how-
ever, suggest a different story: young Drew, as he was then known, struggles in a 
dysfunctional and severe family, where his loyalties lie with his older brother and 
younger sister, who take their lives in a suicide pact. Distancing himself from the 
notorious tragedy and living under his middle name, Win is nonetheless unable 
to escape his past, and he must confront the truth about his father’s sexual abuse, 
which was the destructive force behind the suicides and the beastly force Win has 
literalized to a wolfish family nature. Kuen writes powerfully of Win’s torment and 
rage, and her use of a fantasy trope (reminiscent of Grant’s Uncle Vampire, BCCB 
11/93) as a way of conceiving the horror of child sexual abuse is effectively disturb-
ing. Despite the protagonist’s attempts to shut himself down, his narrative affect is 
intense and Victorianly emotional, steeped in howling fury, squalling resentment, 
and keening guilt in a way that serves as tribute to the degree of destruction he’s 
suffered. The book tries to do too much, however, with the quark motif of the 
title going nowhere, the character of a new girl, Jordan, never developing beyond a 
superfluous device, and an additional unnecessary horror in the villainy of a cousin. 
The suicides also lack the taut emotionality of the rest of the book, especially since 
Drew’s beloved little sister never becomes a dimensional character. Sexual abuse 
28 • the bulletin
at the hands of family is still an underexplored topic, though, especially for male 
victims, and this is a creative and dramatic exploration.  DS
LehrhAuPt, AdAm Warning: Do Not Open This Book!; illus. by Matthew For-
sythe. Wiseman/Simon, 2013 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3582-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3583-4 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Audiences are warned right away about about opening this picture book: “You 
don’t want to let the monkeys out.” The intrepid and curious, though, will forge 
on to find a single monkey poking his head in from the edge of the page—followed 
by a barrage of monkeys on the next, who muck everything up by fiddling with 
the text and splashing paint all over the illustrations. Continuing (and ignoring 
the narrator’s pleas to stop) leads to a slew of similarly invasive toucans and finally 
one very large and scary alligator. All hope seems to be lost until the narrator has 
an idea: “Only you can make things right. You should set a trap!” Once the trap, 
a banana, has been rigged, audiences can then slam the book shut with squeals of 
glee, keeping the mess of creatures stuck inside. This book follows in the tradition 
of The Monster at the End of This Book and Schwarz’s There Are Cats in This Book 
(BCCB 12/05) to combine metafiction, dry humor, and pure silliness to create a 
hilarious readaloud experience. Forsythe’s earth-toned, messy digital illustrations 
escalate along with the text, starting with warning signs against an austere white 
background but, as the critters get out of control, becoming full-bleed chaos. The 
art is also also reminiscent of a kid’s watercolor paintings, a feeling enhanced by 
the blob-shaped monkeys and wonky alligator—and the fact that the monkeys 
themselves draw the trees in the background. Kids following along will relish the 
exhilaration of breaking the rules as well as the simple but clever means of clean-
ing it all up. Expect the titular exhortation on this one to be thoroughly ignored 
again and again.  TA 
LePPAnen, deBBie Trick-or-Treat: A Happy Hunter’s Halloween; illus. by Tad 
Carpenter. Beach Lane/Simon, 2013 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3398-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3399-1 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
This collection of fifteen original Halloween-themed poems offers a playful variety 
of rhyming verses that mix longer descriptive pieces in with limericks and lists; the 
resulting collection is both entertaining and chock-full of crowd appeal. Humor 
abounds (“Can anybody tell me/ (if anybody knows)/ why skeletons aren’t freezing/ 
when they don’t wear any clothes?”), and the fear factor never reaches beyond play-
fully spooky, making it a great selection for the younger set. Poems from the point 
of view of ghosts, ghouls, and mummies are intermixed with tales about ordinary 
humans interacting with creatures of the night, and the varying perspectives add to 
the entertainment value. Carpenter’s high-contrast digital compositions are some-
what flat and slick, but they’re amusingly imbued with a retro graphic feel; most 
spreads are day-glo bright, with a multicultural cast of human/monsterly figures 
shining out against a dark purple nighttime. The occasional clunky rhyme makes 
a read-through mandatory before little listeners arrive for storytime, but overall the 
September 2013 • 29
poems scan smoothly, and they’ll be accessible to a crowd. Make sure to allow time 
for visiting ghosts and goblins to explore the details in the pages before heading 
out into the night.  HM
LevithAn, dAvid Two Boys Kissing. Knopf, 2013 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97112-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-93190-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97564-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9 up
The two boys of the title could be Harry and Craig, the former couple, now good 
friends, who decide to challenge the world record for kiss length in a publicly cap-
tured event. But the title could also refer to Peter and Neil, established boyfriends 
who still must negotiate the occasional obstacle; it could be Avery and Ryan, who 
meet and fall for each other at the gay prom and who are tentatively embarking on 
a relationship; it could be Cooper, pressed by his parents’ rejection to the brink of 
suicide and despising his online hookup for actually wanting a relationship with 
him. It’s also an iconic view of young gay men, an emblem of the possibility—and 
risk—inherent in the act of kissing, and a focus of the narrators, a Greek chorus 
of ghostly men who died of AIDS just as the cultural closet door was swinging 
open. As a result, this is both celebratory and elegiac, an Our Town mourning loss 
of the dead and marveling, longing for, and cheering the possibilities for the living; 
it’s the bittersweet counterpart to Levithan’s joyous Boy Meets Boy (BCCB 9/03), 
foregrounding the painful context that that book utopianly took off the field. 
While some of that context is undeniably adult centered, the generational focus 
conveys the cultural lines of descent, the social family, that these teens are heir to in 
way that identifies them as part of a larger, connected, invested group rather than 
the isolates they sometimes feel. That’s no surprise with Levithan, who’s always a 
tender poet of human connection; in addition to the link between the lost and the 
present, the book rejoices in the bonds between the living: the friends and family 
who support Craig and Harry, the sister who pushes Neil’s parents to acknowledge 
who their son is, and even the rejecting parents who embrace a nearly lost Cooper 
with gratitude and relief. The cast is multicultural, multi-experiential, and queer 
on various axes (Avery is a transman), offering multiple points of entry for readers 
seeking identification. There’s much to discuss here about identity, about social 
media, about community—and it would be a particularly stellar choice for a multi-
generational LGTBQ-focused book club.  DS
Levy, deBBie Imperfect Spiral. Walker, 2013 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3441-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3442-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
A panic attack at her bat mitzvah shakes Danielle’s confidence to the core, so she 
foregoes the opportunity to be a camp counselor and chooses the seemingly safer 
option of babysitting a five-year-old boy named Humphrey for her summer job. 
She and Humphrey develop a deeply caring friendship that sustains them both 
until one day, when walking home from the park, Humphrey darts into the road to 
retrieve a ball and is struck and killed by a car. The narrative starts with the incident 
and charts its aftermath, alternating between present circumstances and Danielle’s 
30 • the bulletin
memories of the time she spent with Humphrey. The present circumstances in-
clude the community’s reaction of calling for streetlights and sidewalks along the 
road and suggesting that teens need babysitting classes, but more insistently, the 
accident has incited resentment of people in the country illegally, since the driver 
of the car that hit Humphrey was a man who had long overstayed his student visa 
from fifteen years earlier. The book thus has all the complications of real life: while 
Danielle is entirely focused on grieving Humphrey, her friends and neighbors are 
pushing to involve her in their various causes; additionally, she is being drawn into 
a relationship with a boy who turns out to have more at stake in the incident than 
she knew. The chapters that focus on Humphrey are an homage to the capacity of 
young children to think deeply interesting thoughts, while the sections that focus 
on the present day develop Danielle as a young woman whose family dynamics 
could either hold her back or propel her forward, depending on her choices. The 
immigration angle is depicted as a genuine debate rather than simplistic sidetaking, 
and there are threads throughout that explore the painful, messy, but sometimes 
quite wonderful nature of relationships. Readers will laugh and cry, but perhaps 
most importantly, they will think their way through important personal and social 
issues as they grieve along with Danielle.  KC
LieBermAn, AJ The Silver Six; illus. by Darren Rawlings. Graphix/Scholastic, 
2013 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-37097-4 $22.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-37098-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
In the near future, an overpopulated world is at the mercy of Craven Industries, 
a company with the sole means of mining Earth’s only remaining energy source. 
Young Phoebe finds herself forced into an orphanage, where she meets five other kids 
whose parents, like Phoebe’s, were all scientists and were all killed in a mysterious 
accident on a Craven space shuttle. Craven’s evil CEO is, of course, responsible, 
as Phoebe’s folks were on the verge of discovering a new renewable energy source 
before their deaths and left clues to their discovery with their children—clues the 
kids must now piece together as they travel to a moon, narrowly escape Craven’s 
henchmen, and negotiate their new friendship dynamic. This science fiction 
graphic novel suffers from a lack of both consistent pacing and characterization, 
particularly in the actions of the villain’s assistant (whose shock at being asked to 
kill the children—after he’s been chasing them with a laser gun—seems completely 
out of character). Phoebe and her pals, though, are charmingly likable, and their 
resourcefulness in a few tight situations has a rebellious MacGyver-like quality that 
keeps the adventure thrilling without being truly threatening. Oversized heads (faces 
sometimes blank and expressionless) and action lines populate Rawlings’ cartoony 
illustrations; the sequential paneling and helpful visuals manage to strike a nice bal-
ance with the text to make this an easy introduction to graphic novels, particularly 
for those youngsters who like a happy ending to world-saving adventures.  KQG 
Lindsey, mAry Ashes on the Waves. Philomel, 2013 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-399-15939-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
The people of Dòchas, a small island off the coast of Maine, hold fast to the 
September 2013 • 31
traditions of their Celtic ancestors, and their beliefs sustain the supernatural 
Otherworlders that inhabit the area. Liam MacGregor knows that the islanders’ 
beliefs also tend to make them closed-minded; his traumatic birth eighteen years 
ago, which left his mother dead, also left him with a paralyzed arm that marks 
him as demon spawn in the eyes of his fellow townsmen. His only joy has been 
his memories of his childhood friend Anna Leighton, the daughter of wealthy 
vacationers, and when she returns to the island after a ten-year absence, the two 
fall in love almost immediately. The Otherworlders, however, aren’t particularly 
fond of human happiness, and they make a wager to determine if mortal love can 
withstand any obstacle, including death. Inspired by Poe’s classic poem Annabel Lee, 
this gothic tale is dramatic and romantic, and it will be entirely irresistible to those 
teens drawn to stories of doomed love. Liam’s narration leans toward hyperbole at 
times, but both his palpable loneliness and his total enchantment with Anna echo 
Poe. Anna, on the other hand, is a thoroughly modern girl, and her confidence and 
no-nonsense attitude provide a nice counter to Liam’s more gloomy charm, making 
their relationship surprisingly playful at times. Elements of Celtic lore are skillfully 
woven in, recalling other tales of tragic loves, and the Otherworlders themselves are 
a mysterious, fickle bunch whose actions only heighten the significance of Anna 
and Liam’s relationship and its us-against-the-world romance. The ending is either 
bittersweet or entirely heartbreaking depending on interpretation—either way, 
the Otherworlders get what they wanted all along, and readers will likely need a 
hanky or two.  KQG 
Liu, JuLiA Gus, the Dinosaur Bus; tr. by Jamie White; illus. by Bei Lynn. Hough-
ton, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-547-90573-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Never mind a mundane yellow schoolbus—the way to really travel to school is 
aboard Gus, a huge green apatosaurus-like dinosaur, who carries kids to school in 
style (“The children who live in apartments don’t even need to walk downstairs. 
They hop out their windows and slide down to their seats”). Unfortunately, even 
the most careful dinosaur bus can cause some problems with overpasses and tele-
phone lines, and eventually the principal shuts down the reptilian ride. Despite the 
reassurance of his passengers, a mortified Gus weeps in the gym—and his dinosaur 
tears flood the place, creating a pool for the school and giving Gus a new career as 
a waterslide. Liu’s evocative present-tense text in this Taiwanese import is rich with 
scene-setting detail yet also simple and confiding in its descriptions, hitting all those 
details that make this a perfect child-sized dinosaur fantasy (“Along his route, people 
leave him snacks. Like two tons of french fries”). Vigorous black pencil provides 
the backbone of the illustrations, with linework that recalls Neal Layton’s childlike 
squiggles in The Mammoth Academy (BCCB 10/08). Smooth or smoothly striated, 
crisp-edged panels of color in the limited palette look more like digital art than the 
stated watercolor, but the overall effect is one of child-made and crayon-colored 
artwork. Pea-green Gus dominates the spreads, counterpointed by touches of slate 
and coral and knee-high crowds of kids in well-balanced compositions. After meet-
ing Gus, kids will greet the morning minivan with a sigh of disappointment.  DS 
32 • the bulletin
London, ALex Proxy. Philomel, 2013 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25776-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
When spoiled, wealthy children need to be punished, their proxies take their place, 
in payment for debts accrued during miserable lives of poverty in the outskirts of 
Mountain City (a futuristic Denver). As the proxy for perennial bad boy Knox 
Brindle, sixteen-year-old Sydney Carton has endured his fair share of abuse, but 
now Knox has killed an innocent girl and Syd is expected to take the punishment, 
including the lengthy prison sentence. Instead, Sydney escapes, and eventually Knox 
changes sides and makes himself a hostage to aid the getaway. On the run together, 
the two boys dodge security forces, mercenary bandits, dangerous animals, and 
rebels out to exploit them. What neither realizes, however, is that Syd’s blood hides a 
secret that could be the key to bringing the whole social system crashing down, and 
people are willing to do anything to get it. A science fiction adventure that packs 
an emotional punch, this novel pairs well-crafted storytelling with solid character 
development. The true power here lies less in the sometimes slight world-building 
than in the story’s philosophical underpinnings and the personalities of the main 
characters. The narrative manages to redeem the seemingly irredeemable and to 
cast the abused as more than a victim, at the same time creating a gay action hero 
whose sexuality is only one facet of his character. While the novel draws heavily 
from the historical precedent of whipping boys and the moral journey at the heart 
of Dickens’ A Tale of Two Cities, readers unfamiliar with the historical and literary 
contexts will still appreciate the story’s deeper implications. Additionally, they will be 
drawn into a poignant story of friendship and self-sacrifice, with a impressive ending 
without a clear resolution that will leave them anxious for planned sequels.  AM
LooK, Lenore Brush of the Gods; illus. by Meilo So. Schwartz & Wade, 
2013 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97001-6 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87001-9 $17.99  
R 7-9 yrs
This picture-book blend of fantasy and biography tells the legend of Tang Dynasty 
painter Wu Daozi. Creative from the start, he draws imaginative scenes when he’s 
supposed to be dutifully copying the teacher during calligraphy class. After Wu 
hones his artistic skills, he finds he possesses a miraculous talent: what he paints 
looks so real that it actually becomes real, so his “birds fluttered away. His horses 
galloped into the mountains. Even his carriages rolled down the street and straight 
out of town.” Finally the emperor directs him to paint an entire wall of the place in 
a great masterpiece; after years of labor, the artist presents his magnificent vision, a 
breathtaking landscape. To the astonishment of the crowd, he then paints himself 
a doorway, walks through it, and disappears into his own painting. Look breathes 
life into this legend, balancing the biographical trajectory with a bit of fancy in her 
subject’s enticing abilities that waver between embodied metaphor and supernatural 
abilities. So’s art, mixed media that runs from delicate pencil lines to soft, dappled 
watercolor, creates rhythm from the repeated figures and landscape elements, ramp-
ing up the energy as increasingly large crowds follow Daozi’s art. While the scenes 
aren’t quite as inviting as the textual hyperbole suggests, the contemporary, vividly 
colored, and informal style contrasts fascinatingly with the reveal of Daozi’s final 
painting, an intricately drawn double-page spread landscape, tinted only with a 
September 2013 • 33
gentle sky-blue wash, that echoes his surviving works. This would be a logical place 
to start for talking about (and Googling images of) early Chinese art, and it could 
also be a provocative partner to another title about illustrations coming alive, such 
as Collins’ Doodleday (BCCB 6/11).  DS
LóPez, diAnA Ask My Mood Ring How I Feel. Little, 2013 324p
ISBN 978-0-316-20996-0 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 6-9
Eighth grade was supposed to be about ruling middle school and drawing the at-
tention of all the right boys, but Chia finds a different priority when her mother 
is diagnosed with breast cancer. After the family travels from their San Antonio 
home to the shrine of La Virgen de San Juan del Valle to pray and to make prome-
sas, pledges in the name of their prayers, Chia vows that she will get 500 people 
to sponsor her in the 5k Race for the Cure. In the meantime, her family is strug-
gling under the strain, and Chia’s fed up with her brainy younger sister, Carmen, 
who’s sailing through sixth grade while Chia struggles with her own work. The 
family story is the strongest thread here, with Chia’s father overfocused on trying 
to pad the world for his wife as his daughters flail under the strain and his toddler 
son grows needier; an additional subplot about the support Chia receives from an 
old pal who might like to be more is also well done. Characterization, though, is 
generally weak and shallow, with Chia’s friends largely flat and her sister more of 
a device to convey information about cancer and its treatment than a real person 
(especially since her anxiety-ridden compulsions are never dealt with in the book). 
Additionally, the book provides little perspective on Chia’s sponsorship efforts or 
indeed her mother’s future. The book therefore isn’t a deep exploration of anything, 
but Chia’s a relatable character, and her story offers use as an accessible treatment 
of an intimidating subject.  DS
LuBAr, dAvid Extremities: Stories of Death, Murder, and Revenge; illus. by Jim 
Kay. Tor, 2013 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7653-3460-2 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4299-1460-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Lubar takes a dramatic shift in tone from his popular Weenies series (Invasion of 
the Road Weenies, BCCB 12/05, etc.) with this offering of thirteen gruesome stories 
(most previously published but in journals or adult collections) that are not, as 
the author’s foreword is clearly aware, for the skittish. In one story, a teenaged boy 
meticulously plans the murder of his abusive father, but the devil’s in the details, 
and the boy ends up losing not one parent but both. In others, a homeless man 
exacts his revenge on a group of thugs; two friends must outwit a shapeshifter in 
Chinatown; a high-schooler does nothing as a nerdy classmate drowns in a reservoir 
and later finds that the town’s water supply is out to get him. The stories vary in 
length from just a few pages to around thirty, and Lubar utilizes the short-story 
form wisely, ending the briefer tales with terrifyingly abrupt conclusions (like when 
a runaway is torn in two by trains) while allowing the longer stories to linger with 
unanswered questions. The tone remains macabre throughout the collection, with 
even a seemingly lighthearted romance taking a turn toward the dark. While most 
of the tales contain a supernatural element, it’s really the characters here that are 
chilling: each protagonist is at least amoral, if not truly wicked, and it is often a 
34 • the bulletin
character’s indifference, greed, lust, or envy that propels the story toward certain 
doom. This is an obvious sell to horror fans looking for a quick fix beyond the 
obvious Stephen King, but it might also serve as discussion fodder or as a useful 
example of short-story writing.  KQG
LuBAr, dAvid Stranger Things; illus. by Matt Loveridge. Branches/Scholastic, 
2013 [96p] (Looniverse)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-49601-8 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-49602-5 $4.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-49685-8 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 2-4
Third-grader Ed has always considered himself the most average, boring kid in his 
family, school, and town—and he’s okay with that. When he finds a coin in the 
grass engraved with the words “STRANGE, STRANGER,” though, weird things 
start happening: His sister (who’s always played with her food) starts making 
mashed-potato sculptures that come to life, and a little neighborhood kid develops 
a peculiar strength that allows him to lift up bigger kids—and himself. Ed enlists 
the help of curio-shop owner Mr. Sage to figure out what’s going on, and he finds 
out that he’s been entrusted with the burden of making sure the coin passes to the 
Stranger, or else all of the strangeness will leave the world. After being confronted 
by friends and family because of the unusual events that occur when he’s around, 
Ed realizes that he is the Stranger, the person who “makes things stranger,” and he 
is now the center of the Looniverse. This transitional chapter book is the start of a 
series, and it gets off to a slow start—Ed’s plight in figuring out who the Stranger 
is never feels urgent enough to maintain an engaging plot, and the mixing of 
the merely bizarre (Ed’s brother writes down a thousand words in exchange for 
a picture) with the outright preposterous (Ed’s sister dances through the living 
room with hundreds of mice and a soda-straw flute after he reads her the story 
of the Pied Piper) muddles what exactly the book means by “strange.” Still, Ed’s 
straightforward explanation and earnest questioning make him likable enough as 
a narrator in spite of his seriousness and self-consciousness, and the text is an ac-
cessible exploration of the wacky side of the world. Upbeat, light-hearted sketches 
help lighten the chapter length—Ed is particularly ingratiating with his spindly 
arms and legs, mop of hair, and bemused expressions. Readers with a taste for the 
peculiar will likely want to look forward to what lies ahead of these first tentative 
steps into the Looniverse.  TA
LunettA, demitriA In the After. HarperTeen, 2013 [480p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-210545-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-210547-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-12
In the three years since vicious man-eating aliens attacked Earth, teenaged Amy 
has been able to survive thanks to her house’s secure electric fencing and rainwater 
plumbing. Her parents are missing, likely dead, but Amy finds company in Baby, 
a toddler she rescues on one of her many scavenging trips into the city. When a 
violent mob of survivors attack their house, Amy and Baby leave their refuge and 
eventually make their way to New Hope, a survivor community that at first seems 
idyllic—until Amy starts asking the wrong questions and ends up angering the 
September 2013 • 35
compound’s leaders. Much like Bick’s Ashes (BCCB 10/11), this post-apocalyptic 
tale follows its female protagonist from the pulse-pounding, visceral thrills of 
surviving monsters to the less active, but no less frightening challenge of living in 
a society that has traded freedom for safety and order. The pacing is near perfect, 
with breathtaking chase scenes and encounters with Them balanced against quiet, 
subdued moments as Amy reflects on all she has lost and attempts to figure out 
if she has anything to live for. The dual narrative structure of the second of the 
book’s three parts is perhaps most compelling: Amy’s narration switches back and 
forth between her attempts to fit in at New Hope and her experiences in a psych 
ward, and readers are suddenly unsure of what, if anything, is real about her story. 
The revelation of secrets is organic enough to make it seem more essential and less 
gimmicky, particularly as it becomes clear that They are not the only evil Amy has 
to contend with. Just when readers thought they’ve seen every which way the world 
could end, Lunetta breathes new life into the genre.  KQG
mAChALe, d. J. SYLO. Razorbill, 2013 [416p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-665-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
The laid-back life style on Pemberwick Island, off the coast of Maine, suits fourteen-
year-old Tucker just fine: he’s got a few friends, an undemanding spot on the football 
team, and some extra cash helping out his dad and the local lobstermen. In this first 
installment of a trilogy, Pemberwick’s peace is shattered by several mysterious deaths 
of otherwise healthy residents, the appearance of a dealer in performance-enhancing 
crystals, and the sudden occupation of the island by a U.S. military organization 
called SYLO, ostensibly there to quarantine the islanders while the CDC isolates 
an unnamed contagion. Many of the islanders, including Tucker and his buddies 
Quinn and Tori, aren’t falling for this explanation, mostly due to the suspicious 
combination of severed mainland communication, the incarceration of seemingly 
blameless citizens, the dearth of actual quarantine procedures, and the eerie black 
spacecraft that zoom over Pemberwick. After a group of rebel islanders, including 
Tori’s father, are killed by SYLO, the teens stage a daring escape by boat to try to 
summon help from the mainland, but, as the cliffhanger ending demonstrates, 
the East Coast has plenty of problems of its own. MacHale is off to a powerhouse 
start in this well-paced thriller. Taking the time in his ample page count to estab-
lish islander relationships and the state of normal on Pemberwick pays off when 
the action kicks in, and readers are not only entertained by the pyrotechnics but 
emotionally invested in the characters and their quirky piece of home turf. The 
reveal of SYLO and its enemy arrives with a bang at the last minute, leaving read-
ers stranded with the teens in Portland, Maine and primed for the next title.  EB
mAhy, mArgAret The Green Bath; illus. by Steven Kellogg. Levine/Scholastic, 
2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-545-20667-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
While it was a pea-green boat that carried Lear’s “The Owl and the Pussycat,” 
it’s a giant, boxy, pea-green claw-foot bathtub that carries the protagonist in this 
fanciful picture-book tale. When young Sammy grudgingly gets into the tub (a 
new flea-market purchase), the bath springs into life, bounding across the yard and 
36 • the bulletin
towards the ocean, taking Sammy along for the ride. The two meet mermaids, a 
friendly sea serpent, and a boatload of pirates who are quite taken with the porce-
lain implement and would like to have it for themselves. The boy and bath defend 
themselves valiantly with a barrage of bubbles, though, managing to make it home 
safely with a treasure chest filled with loot. Mahy has delivered a charming tale 
that hangs on the edge of reality (Sammy actually has gold in tow when his mom 
barges in, but did that bathtub really giggle when the water goes down the drain?), 
and her text reaches that level of alliteration that’s delightful rather than tiresome, 
rolling off the tongue smoothly as the tale unfolds (“The buccaneers had swords, 
but Sammy bewildered them with bubbles and baffled them with soapsuds”). The 
illustrations, which alternate between full-spread/full-bleed scenes and panel art, 
are classic Kellogg—the sea serpent is reminiscent of Jerry and Jimmy’s boa in The 
Day Jimmy’s Boa Ate the Wash—and they’re often strongly tinted with green from the 
delicately lined sea. The tub sports a cheerful grin under huge round eyes, making 
it a friendly companion for such swashbuckling adventures. Pull this one out for a 
storytime about bathtime adventures—just don’t forget the soap.  TA 
mCCArry, sArAh All Our Pretty Songs. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2013 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-04088-6 $18.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-250-02708-5 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-02709-2 $7.12
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
This sensually rich, richly sensual urban fairy tale channels Weetzie Bat (BCCB 
2/89) as its unnamed narrator and her friend Aurora move through the music and 
party scene in the Pacific Northwest. Their entrée is Aurora’s dead father, a wildly 
successful punk musician who lived hard and died young, and though Aurora has 
never wanted for money, she is desperately in need of parental love and attention, 
as her mother has disappeared into her addiction. The narrator and her mother 
become Aurora’s surrogate family, but it isn’t enough, so when Aurora meets an 
enigmatic stranger, Minos, who promises her he can take her to her father, she is 
hooked. The narrator hooks her own enigmatic stranger, Jack, a gifted musician 
who mesmerizes everyone when he plays. Since people are always more attracted 
to Aurora, she is heartbroken but not surprised when Jack and Aurora go with 
Minos to LA, leaving her behind. Unable to shake a feeling of dread where Minos 
is concerned, the narrator goes to LA herself, where she can no longer deny what she 
suspects—that Minos is a minion of hell itself, and it’s up to her to play Orpheus 
to Aurora’s Eurydice. The decadent glamour of this world as the narrator portrays 
it hardly needs a hell to haunt it, but McCarry takes the plunge anyway, painting 
word pictures that rival a Hieronymus Bosch painting in their manic intensity. 
The narrator is an adept foil for this world of overstimulated angst and unwise 
compromise; she is practical and mean, and while she readily embraces the heat 
of her feelings for and with Jack, she doesn’t lose focus: “I’m not the kind of girl 
they’re looking for in hell. I’m not pretty; I don’t play instruments; half the time 
I can barely draw. But I’m the girl they’ll never forget, because I’m the girl who’ll 
win.” So while she may be channeling the whimsy of Block, there’s a touch of recent 
butt-kicking heroines in there as well, making her an appealing guide through a 
terrifying but seductive landscape.  KC
September 2013 • 37
mCghee, ALison The Case of the Missing Donut; illus. by Isabel Roxas. Dial, 
2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3925-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
The sheriff (small boy) and his deputy (scruffy dog) have a mission: “to bring a 
dozen donuts safely home.” On the way home, concern leads the sheriff to check 
the contents, and upon finding one donut is “a little smushed,” he does what we 
would all do—he neatens things up until there’s no donut left. Much to his baffle-
ment, however, everybody he meets along the city street seems to know his shameful 
secret (“How was that donut?” asks a neighbor); once he arrives home, his parents 
immediately know the truth as well, and when the boy looks in the mirror he sees 
why: a telltale powdered-sugar ring around his mouth. McGhee, co-author of the 
Bink and Gollie titles, has an enjoyably stagey flair to her text that will make it a 
readaloud treat (“Phew. All was well in donut world”), and many youngsters will 
understand the temptation and the responsibility of transporting such precious 
cargo. The digital art balances a big-eyed cartoonish sensibility with delicate linework 
and muted complex colors. The revealing powdered-sugar marks could be a little 
more visible, but the figures are a treat, with the protagonist a pint-sized, big-hatted 
sheriff and the canine deputy offering some stealthily skeptical expressions. This 
is a stylish Western-lite picture book with an enjoyable twang, and viewers will 
develop a powerful hankering for their own box of treats.  DS 
mCnAmArA, mArgAret The Apple Orchard Riddle; illus. by G. Brian 
Karas. Schwartz & Wade, 2013 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95744-4 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84744-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
When Mr. Tiffin takes his class to the apple orchard for a field trip, he throws a 
riddle out to his students to solve during the day: “Show me a little red house with 
no windows and no door, but with a star inside.” The audience joins the class in 
learning about several varieties of apples and how the ripening schedule allows the 
orchard to yield a crop over two seasons; the correct way to pick an apple; how 
apples are pressed into cider; how apples are commercially sorted for eating fresh or 
processing into other foods. As the kids poke around the orchard, they continually 
test observations against Mr. Tiffin’s riddle. Hmmm, the barn is red, has no windows, 
but has a door; the tractor is red, has no windows or doors, but has no star inside. 
It finally falls to Tara, a dilly-dallying daydreamer, whom the class smartypants de-
scribes as “The lights are on, but nobody’s home,” to solve the riddle. Tara notices 
that the apple she’s been gnawing deep into the core has five little seeds, and she 
has the spatial sense to imagine cutting the apple horizontally to reveal the “star” 
shape inside. Thus McNamara pulls off the double trick of an informative book 
about commercial apple cultivation, and a sensitive lesson on learning differences. 
As always, Karas’ paint and pencil smudge kiddie cast is diverse, adorable, and 
believable, and the focus on trees and machinery clarifies several apple-processing 
activities. With its solid storyline and additional “Apple Orchard Facts,” this will 
make a wonderful prelude to autumn trips to the orchard.  EB
38 • the bulletin
mCnAmArA, mArgAret The Fairy Bell Sisters: Sylva and the Fairy Ball; illus. by 
Julia Denos. Balzer + Bray, 2013 109p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222802-4 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222801-7 $4.99 
 R Gr. 2-3
Most fairy fans have heard of Tinker Bell, but fewer folks know about Tink’s pas-
sel of little sisters, all living on Sheepskerry Island, where this year’s Fairy Ball will 
be hosted by Queen Mab. At just seven fairy years, poor Sylva isn’t old enough to 
go, but when her other sisters head to the ball, Sylva overhears trolls heading that 
way and flies off to try to save the day. She does just that, managing to save Queen 
Mab’s magical Narwhal’s Tusk from the nasty trolls, and a grateful queen Mab 
welcomes Sylva to stay for the rest of the ball. Although this first series installment 
is a bit contrived, it’s a breath of fresh air for fairy lovers looking for a change from 
Daisy Meadows’ many fairy series. McNamara’s writing is clear and engaging, with 
amusing asides to the reader: “If you would like to hear about perfect little fairies 
and the perfect things they do, please go find another book. If you would like to 
hear about a brave little fairy who can also be rather naughty and get in very big 
trouble with her sisters, just turn the page.” Frequent soft-focus, monochromatic 
illustrations add to the book’s attractiveness, with enchantingly detailed pictures of 
the young fairies and their milieu. Share this with fans of Meadows’ series or the 
Disney’s Pixie Hollow; while older primary graders will be able to read this on their 
own, younger fairy fans would undoubtedly enjoy it as a readaloud.  JH
metCALf, dAwn Indelible. Harlequin Teen, 2013 [384p] (The Twixt)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-373-21073-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Choosing to dance away her worries about her latest family drama at a local club, 
seventeen-year-old Joy Malone instead manages to gain an entirely new set of 
problems when a guy attacks her face with a knife, leaving her mostly uninjured 
but with a strange flashing sensation in her sight. Now she’s seeing all sorts of weird 
creatures and worse yet, they’re talking to her, demanding that she take messages 
to someone named Ink. Hot club guy is, of course, Ink, and his attack was a failed 
attempt to rid Joy of her ability to see the Folk; instead, he’s accidentally marked 
her as his leyman, his lover and assistant. She’s got to play the part, too, because his 
failure also means certain death for both Ink and Joy unless Joy can convince the 
powers that be in the fey world that Ink’s actions were purposeful. A knife attack 
that eventually leads to romance between the two parties is only one of many unbe-
lievable plot points here, and even readers who readily suspend disbelief for the fey 
Folk and other such supernatural happenings will find their credulity stretched by 
the countless contrivances that must occur to move the action forward. Thankfully, 
the prose is more successful than the plotting, and Metcalf imaginatively employs 
metaphor as she describes the various beasts and creatures Joy meets. The subplot 
regarding Joy’s family life and her older brother’s coming out is somewhat super-
fluous, but secondary characters, particularly Joy’s best friend and Ink’s partner in 
crime, are delightfully witty. Black (Valiant, BCCB 10/05) and Marr (Wicked Lovely, 
BCCB 7/07) still hold the standard for urban fantasy involving the fey, but fans of 
romances with broody guys may nonetheless want to check this realm out.  KQG 
September 2013 • 39
metzger, Lois A Trick of the Light. Balzer + Bray, 2013 194p
ISBN 978-0-06-213308-3 $17.99 
 R Gr. 7-10
When Mike is fifteen, something changes in his life: driven by an inner voice, 
he begins to focus on self-discipline, on purifying himself. He drifts away from 
his good friend Tamio and starts hanging out with Amber, who shares and abets 
Mike’s zeal and teaches him how to control what he eats to control his body and 
his life. As Mike’s parents dive into their own dramas in the face of their failed 
marriage, Mike’s warped focus on self-perfection leads him deeper into dangerous 
and self-punishing anorexia. The use of Mike’s commanding inner voice as narrator 
slightly misframes the situation, but it provides a chilling and distanced narration 
that effectively conveys the seductive strength of such an impulse. The book also 
clearly and compellingly constructs the disease as a control disorder that operates 
through eating rather than a food problem, and the hints about Amber’s underlying 
disease are initially doled out with some subtlety (though those in the know may 
catch her devotion to her friend Anna). While the book makes the point that this is 
more commonly a female disorder by making Mike the sole male in his residential 
treatment center, Metzger wisely underplays the “boys can get this too” message; 
the focus is effectively on his journey rather than any accompanying social state-
ment. As a result, the book manages a rare feat, making Mike’s dilemma easy to 
relate to without making it attractive, and readers will sympathize with Mike and 
find a new understanding of his problem.  DS
miChALAK, JAmie Joe and Sparky Go to School; illus. by Frank Remkiewicz. Can-
dlewick, 2013 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6278-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 1-3
In this easy reader, Joe the giraffe and Sparky the turtle (Joe and Sparky Get New 
Wheels, BCCB 4/09) investigate a visiting school bus and end up unintentionally 
riding it back to the students’ school, where the nearsighted teacher fails to note 
that her pupils now include a giraffe and a turtle. Poor Joe, desperate to earn a star 
from the teacher, is especially distressed that he is anatomically unable to follow 
directives to raise or wash his hands. The animal duo’s misunderstandings about 
this new environment also lead to funny situations: upon entering the boys’ rest 
room, they are puzzled by the lack of places to “rest” and by the “tiny pond” that 
disappears and reappears when Joe presses a button. The ending is slightly flat 
(the two walk back to the zoo, Sparky falls asleep on his rock, and Joe looks out 
at the world), but the preceding pages more than make up for any twinges of dis-
satisfaction over the end. The vocabulary is within range for primary-graders who 
are above the level of Elephant and Piggie but not quite ready for lengthier chapter 
books; the book’s humor, ably emphasized by Remkiewicz’s comic watercolor and 
prismacolor pencil illustrations, makes this a joyous readaloud as well. The art is 
bright and buoyant, and kids will get a kick out of the animal pair’s antics, whether 
they’re eating the math manipulatives (peas) or playing with the toilet. Share this 
in a school-themed storytime, or hand it to young readers looking for a gigglingly 
good read.  JH
40 • the bulletin
miLgrim, dAvid Some Monsters Are Different; written and illus. by David Mil-
grim. Holt, 2013 40p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9519-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 3-5 yrs
This celebration of individuality features an assortment of digitally rendered ink 
and pastel monster children identified by characteristic (“Some monsters are afraid. 
Some are not. Some monsters will eat anything. Some are picky”) as they participate 
in an array of activities familiar to the preschool set. There is something decidedly 
Todd Parr–esque in the all-encompassing language of the narrative and, as in Parr’s 
work, the potentially heavy-handed message is lightened by the simple phrases and 
abundant visual humor. Milgrim is particularly successful in incorporating person-
able, character-enhancing detail into the compositions, so that the gigantic monster 
fears a worm while the small monster readily picks it up, and the picky eater not 
only prefers pizza but insists on picking the tiny green bits off of it. The narrative 
ends with a celebratory exclamation (“All monsters are absolutely, positively, com-
pletely, perfectly wonderful . . . just the way they are!”) that pairs perfectly with the 
penultimate illustration, a motley assortment of boldly tinted monsters gathered 
in a group portrait and smiling out from the page with toothy grins. While this is 
more of a gallery than a story, there is plenty of fun in the images to carry the tale, 
and the message about individuality promises plenty of use.  HM 
miLLer-LAChmAnn, Lyn Rogue. Paulsen/Penguin, 2013 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16225-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 6-9
Though fiercely intelligent when it comes to school subjects, Kiara Thornton-Del-
gado has enormous difficulty keeping her temper, and in consequence, her friends. 
Consulting her one true pal, Mr. Internet, Kiara diagnoses herself with Asperger’s 
syndrome, and her mami’s departure to pursue her music career in Montreal makes 
Kiara feel not only defective but unloved. Expelled from school for bashing a girl’s 
nose with a lunch tray, she tries once again to make friends with a new next-door 
neighbor, Chad, only to find that he is using her to run dangerous errands for his 
meth-cooking parents. He’s also a talented BMX rider, though, so Kiara uses her 
video-production skills as a way in for both her and Chad to the small community 
of bikers who know her through her older brothers. Things appear to be looking 
up for Kiara until a tragic day when Chad gets dangerously drunk and nearly loses 
everything, but the aftermath marks a turning point in which both Kiara and Chad 
are able to get the help they need. While the issues here are challenging—child 
abuse, illegal drug activity, underage drinking—Kiara’s perspective and the hopeful 
outcome keep the narrative on target for a junior-high age group; Kiara is sharp 
enough to know right from wrong, but her overwhelming motive of wanting a friend 
at any cost muddles her decision-making processes in a realistic way. The only clues 
to both her (and the author’s) Asperger’s are a sometimes overly straightforward and 
indiscriminate attention to detail in the writing, as well as allusions to past behavior 
problems such as tantrums, language loss, and a currently flourishing obsessive 
attachment to the X-Men (especially Rogue, hence the title); because Kiara is not 
officially diagnosed, her improvised methods of coping add a unique perspective 
to the portrayals of young people on the spectrum. Readers will find themselves 
September 2013 • 41
relating to, empathizing with, and ultimately cheering for this unexpected heroine 
who proves in the end, despite her difficulties, to be a true and wise friend.  KC 
miLLs, CLAudiA Kelsey Green, Reading Queen; illus. by Rob Shepperson. Fer-
guson/Farrar, 2013 [128p] (Franklin School Friends)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-374-37485-3 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-374-37488-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Since third-grader Kelsey loves reading more than anything, she’s thrilled when 
her principal announces a school-wide reading contest and she’s determined to 
lead her class to victory (“Mrs. Molina’s class had as good as won the pizza party, 
thanks to Kelsey Green, reading queen”). Kelsey’s also got her eye on the individual 
reading honors, but she knows she’ll have stiff competition from Simon Ellis, her 
classmate and fellow reading buff. Mills’ portrait of Kelsey is affectionate but nu-
anced, credibly depicting Kelsey’s competitive streak (which drives her to read the 
shortest books possible merely to up her total) and developmental struggles with 
empathy (she fails to understand her friends’ lack of interest in reading, and she’s 
initially incensed at a classmate’s failure to rack up titles). It’s typical Mills, in fact, 
to sensitively reveal a high performer’s flaws and give her a chance to address them, 
and that growth is achieved in particularly cheering fashion here, with Kelsey’s 
suspicion of Simon evaporating when it’s clear that he also loves The Secret Garden, 
and her frustration with the struggling classmate turning into genuine assistance. 
There’s some subtle interrogation of the effects of such competitive reading, too, 
making this an excellent book for discussion on several levels. Mostly, though, it’s 
a keenly observed, robustly written examination of the way our strengths can also 
be our weaknesses, and it may make reading kids think a little more deeply about 
their own achievements. Future installments involving other Franklin School kids 
are planned, so readers can look forward to seeing Kelsey again.  DS 
montgomery, sy The Tapir Scientist; illus. with photographs by Nic Bish-
op. Houghton, 2013 80p (Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 978-0-547-81548-0 $18.99  
R Gr. 4-8
The indefatigable pairing of author Montgomery and photographer Bishop now 
heads to southwestern Brazil, where biologist Pati Medici and her crew study the 
indigenous lowland tapir amid the wildness of the Patanal wetlands. Montgomery is 
always good at conveying how laborious biological work can be, and that challenge 
is a strong focus here as Medici and her crew sprint into thorn-encrusted bushes, 
sit motionless for hours while being attacked by mosquitoes, and philosophically 
accept the layer of ticks their clothing accrues, all while getting more near-misses 
and false successes than actual tapir viewings. The book therefore offers a clear-
eyed picture of the challenges and the joys of pioneering fieldwork, and the long 
wait for the actual tapir encounters allows readers to understand the field crew’s 
excitement when they manage to tag and study some new animals. The book also 
discusses the PR problem that tapirs, a lesser-known animal, face, while providing 
a tribute to the environmentally minded youngsters in Brazil and elsewhere who’ve 
gotten involved with the tapir’s cause. The region itself is a strong focus as well, 
with many of Bishop’s photographs documenting other local fauna. With its dense 
text and small print, this is definitely aimed at older readers of the Scientists in the 
42 • the bulletin
Field series, but there’s plenty of information to inform and inspire budding field 
scientists. The book includes maps, a list of books and websites for more informa-
tion, and an index.  DS
morALes, yuyi Niño Wrestles the World; illus. by Yuyi Morales. Porter/Roaring 
Brook, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-604-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 3, for review. 
murrAy, LAurA The Gingerbread Man Loose on the Fire Truck; illus. by Mike 
Lowery. Putnam, 2013 [28p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25779-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
In this follow-up to The Gingerbread Man Loose in the School, the Gingerbread 
Man joins the class on a field trip to the fire station. After he is accidently jostled 
from the safety of a backpack and finds himself face to face with Spot, the fire dog, 
things start to go awry (“Spot sniffed at my face, taking one sticky lick./ I needed 
a trick to get out of there quick!”). With Spot in hot pursuit, the Gingerbread 
Man races through the station, onto a truck, up the pole, into the dormitory, and 
through the kitchen. When the alarm sounds, he decides to jump back on the truck 
(“I’ll ride to the rescue,/ as fast as I can./ I want to help, too!/ I’m the Gingerbread 
Man!”) and ends up helping the firefighters put out the fire. Murray’s tale diverges 
from the cumulative format and repeated verse of the traditional tale in favor of a 
more linear rhymed story as the Gingerbread Man explores the station; the result 
is entertaining, with the Gingerbread Man’s chants effective in advancing the story. 
The writing is lively and the scansion precise, making the text is extremely readable 
from start to finish. Lowery’s illustrations feature warm hues encased by bold black 
outlines. Speech bubbles and panels are used throughout, lending a hybrid graphic 
novel/picture book feel to the story. Young listeners are certain to cheer for the 
Gingerbread Man’s successful firefighting venture as much as they enjoy watching 
him ride the fire hose “like a rodeo bull.” Sound the alarm; you’ll definitely want 
this one on your shelf before those October field trips to the fire station begin.  HM 
noyes, deBorAh Plague in the Mirror. Candlewick, 2013 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5980-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6356-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
May’s sense of stability shattered when her parents announced their split and de-
manded that she choose sides. Now May is wondering if the stress is also affecting 
her sanity when, while vacationing with friends in Italy, she discovers a wormhole 
that takes her to medieval Florence. There she meets Marco, a handsome painter 
who sparks her as-of-yet unawakened desire, and Christofana, May’s fourteenth-
century doppelganger, who is willing to do anything to escape the Black Death 
that has taken hold of the city. Christofana offers May a deal: change places with 
her, so May can spend a lifetime with Marco while Christofana takes May’s place 
in modern-day Florence. May’s intrigued but she’s also aware that risking her life 
September 2013 • 43
during a historic epidemic to pursue a relationship with a man she barely knows 
(and with whom she shares no common language) is unwise. There’s therefore 
little suspense regarding May’s ultimate fate, as readers will correctly gauge early on 
that May is too smart to choose romantic love over certain survival—despite the 
excellent sex she has with Marco. The real appeal here lies with the temperamental 
and chaotic Christofana; her bitter rage at being born during such a hopeless time 
is palpable, and the horrors of her world bring May’s more insignificant woes into 
sharp contrast. Laden with atmospheric details and bits of Italian history, this is 
most likely to find an audience among history buffs and armchair travelers.  KQG 
oCKLer, sArAh The Book of Broken Hearts. Simon Pulse, 2013 357p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3038-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3040-2 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
The Vargas boys are trouble with a capital T, a fact that Jude Hernandez knows all 
too well. Six years ago, Johnny Vargas broke off his engagement with Jude’s older 
sister, and all four of the Hernandez girls swore off Vargas men for good, a seri-
ous oath sealed with sisterly blood. Now Jude’s sisters are out of the house leading 
glamorous grownup lives, and she’s stuck the summer after her senior year watching 
their father slowly succumb to el Demonio—early onset Alzheimer’s. Jude is certain 
that if she can help her dad restore his old motorcycle, she can restore his memories 
as well; the only mechanic that can help them in their price range, however, is 
Emilio Vargas, one of the dread Vargas boys, who’s a whiz with the wrench and a 
heartbreaker with his eyes set on Jude. Ockler (Twenty Boy Summer, BCCB 9/09, 
Bittersweet, BCCB 4/12) has proven herself to be an expert with witty, romantic 
banter, and the chemistry between Jude and Emilio doesn’t disappoint. Their re-
lationship, however, is just one of many that Jude is trying to figure out, and her 
struggles to renegotiate her connection to her ailing father, reimagine the family 
dynamics among her bossy, overprotective sisters, and determine who she is amidst 
all the chaos gives emotional nuance to what would otherwise be a pretty standard 
romance. It also helps that Emilio is neither a bad boy nor a sensitive poet disguised 
in oil-stained jeans, but an average (if incredibly good-looking) guy struggling to 
stand outside of his own siblings’ shadows and dealing with a different type of loss. 
With its dimensional treatment of human dynamics, the book effectively reminds 
readers that heartbreak doesn’t fall solely in the realm of romantic love and that 
love, in any form, may always be a risk, but it is often one worth taking.  KQG
ohorA, zAChAriAh No Fits, Nilson!; written and illus. by Zachariah 
OHora. Dial, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3852-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Nilson, a big blue ape, and Amelia, a dark-haired little girl, “do everything together.” 
Nilson, however, has a bit of a short fuse, and in the face of frustration, he often 
throws a tantrum that’s “so big, they BOTH get a time-out.” When they’re out and 
about, Amelia and her mother see the signs of his growing frustration, promising 
him banana ice cream at the end of their journey; after Nilson gets the last banana 
flavor from the ice cream truck, however, it’s Amelia who loses her cool. The use 
of a fantasy critter, pet, or toy as a narrative emotional proxy isn’t new, but this is 
a solid iteration of the concept (the final page reveals the underlying truth, that 
44 • the bulletin
Nilson is a beloved soft toy). The present-tense narration is wise about tantrum 
triggers (someone else having a banana when you want one too), and there’s vivid 
immediacy as it depicts the seesaw between control and meltdown as a dialogue 
between Amelia and Nilson. OHora’s acrylic illustrations evince a crispness of 
finish, smoothness of color, and strength of black line that suggests particularly 
lively woodcuts, and a streamlined retro palette, with an emphasis on teal (Nilson) 
and gold and olive (backgrounds) enhances the graphic strength. This could be an 
interesting counterpart to Bang’s When Sophie Gets Angry . . . Really, Really Angry 
(BCCB 4/99) or just a way for youngsters to get a little perspective on their own 
frustrations.  DS
PAquette, Ammi-JoAn Ghost in the House; illus. by Adam Record. Candlewick, 
2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5529-7 $15.99 
 R 3-5 yrs
In this cumulative rhyming story, a ghost host goes on to meet four unusual 
friends: a groaning mummy, a growling monster, a click-clacking skeleton, and a 
shrieking witch. Finally, the five creepy characters encounter the scariest creature 
of all: a red-headed, wide-eyed human boy in pajamas who unwittingly frightens 
them all away. Paquette’s rhyme scheme is slightly unusual, with shifts between 
internal line rhymes and end rhymes, but it’s but solid and lilting; once mastered, 
the cadence is both catchy and appealing, and the sound effects make it a natural 
winner for readalouds. Record creates digital scenes wherein deep, dark tones of 
black, gray, and brown are offset by playful splashes of periwinkle and mustard 
that perfectly match the a-little-but-not-too-scary tone of the tale. There is a lot of 
contrast and texture in the digital art, with shadow effects around the crisp figures 
suggesting collage-type layering, the monster’s golden stripes subtly dappled with 
aqua, and the mummy’s wraps possessing a burlap-like grain. While the ending is 
a bit anticlimactic, this is a solid offering for preschoolers who prefer friendly over 
frightening at their October storytimes.  HM 
PAquette, A. J. Paradox. Random House, 2013 240p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96962-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86962-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98438-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Emerging from her space capsule on a barren alien planet, sixteen-year-old Ana 
Ortez has no memory of who she is or how she came to be there. A brief exploration 
of her surroundings reveals the presence of a gigantic wormlike creature with rows 
of pointed teeth and a fellow explorer, Todd, who claims to have no memory as 
well. Ana and Todd make their way across the rough terrain in search of a colony or 
other signs of life, along the way trying to piece together what’s happening. As the 
monstrous worm closes in and the timers on their wrists tick down to zero, Ana and 
Todd grow closer to each other, but soon Ana begins to realize that Todd may know 
more than admits and that what she’s experiencing may not even be reality. This 
novel eschews overly descriptive prose and relies instead on the character’s actions to 
slowly reveal the layers of secrets surrounding Ana’s quest. Despite occasional clues 
in the form of news reports interspersed between chapters, readers’ knowledge of 
the mystery is limited to what Ana herself knows, so those who like to puzzle out 
September 2013 • 45
the truth on their own will find themselves intrigued by Ana’s journey. The story’s 
premise and short length limit the possibility for thorough character development, 
but Ana still manages to emerge as a strong, resourceful fighter, a perfect balance 
for the more intellectually driven Todd. SF fans looking for a brief but intense 
read will find themselves devouring this inventive stand-alone survival story.  AM
PeCK, riChArd The Mouse with the Question Mark Tail; illus. by Kelly Mur-
phy. Dial, 2013 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3838-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galley  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Nameless and parentless young Mouse Minor ekes out a living in the Royal Mews 
at Buckingham Palace until he is accidentally spied in his clothing by one of Queen 
Victoria’s granddaughters. He’s barely recovered from that ignominious incident 
when he’s caught by the Queen’s Yeomice of the Guard, but they allow him to join 
their ranks; eventually he encounters Queen Victoria, who reveals to him that the 
Queen of Mice may be able to answer Mouse Minor’s questions about his origins. 
In the end, it is Mouse Minor’s curiously shaped tail (it naturally curls into a ques-
tion mark) that gives the Queen of Mice the proof she needs of his royal parentage. 
As in his companion novel, Secrets at Sea (BCCB 12/11), Peck creates a pleasantly 
detailed, cozy Victorian mouse world. There’s some of Stuart Little’s appeal to 
Mouse Minor’s exploits, and the kids who revel in historical fiction and/or squeal 
over animals wearing clothing will find this the most enjoyable. Unfortunately, an 
overly mannered approach to Mouse Minor’s narration both slows the novel’s pace 
and renders him somewhat tedious as a character. Still, fans of the previous book 
(and older fans of Rosemary Wells’ mousy Following Grandfather, BCCB 12/12) 
may well be entertained by Mouse Minor’s escapades, and Murphy’s occasional 
soft-edged monochromatic illustrations add considerable charm.  JH 
PerL, eriCA s. Aces Wild. Knopf, 2013 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97104-4 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-93172-6 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97547-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
Following their debut in When Life Gives You O.J. (BCCB 9/11), eleven-year-old 
Zelly Fried and her irrepressible, Yiddish-speaking, quote-spouting, retired judge 
of a grandfather, Ace, are back. After working hard to get a dog, Zelly finds yet 
another challenge in training the boisterous new puppy, named Ace after her 
grandpa. She’s also still adjusting to her new home in Vermont, and her pal Allie 
convinces her that the best way to make more friends is to have a sleepover. Zelly’s 
parents refuse to allow the event, however, until Ace is properly trained, a daunting 
prospect. Zelly’s middle-grade friendship angst, her embarrassment at her larger-
than-life grandfather, and her gentle flashes of grief for her late grandmother are 
deftly and believably expressed. Ace himself is a charming (if at times frustrating) 
scene-stealer, whose Yiddish-laced dialogue is effectively printed in all caps: “LOVE 
TO STAY AND CHAT,’ he said, ‘BUT MERENGUE WAITS FOR NO MAN. 
HASTA LA VISTA, SHALOM, AND GOOD NIGHT.’” Perl is additionally adept 
at naturally incorporating elements of the characters’ Jewish faith while keeping 
Zelly’s broader experiences firmly on the foreground. The writing is smart, funny, 
46 • the bulletin
and perceptive, and it lends itself to reading aloud; readers who meet Zelly and 
the two Aces in these pages won’t soon forget them. Notes on puppy training and 
a Yiddish glossary are included.  JH
PheLAn, mAtt Bluffton: My Summers with Buster; written and illus. by Matt 
Phelan. Candlewick, 2013 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5079-7 $22.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
In the pre–air conditioning days of the early twentieth century, when theaters 
were too sweltering to draw a summer crowd, a gang of vaudevillians, including 
the Keaton family act, retired to Bluffton, Michigan for summer holidays by the 
lake. In this graphic novel, Phelan imagines a friendship between the son of a lo-
cal hardware-store owner, beguiled by the adventurous lives of the troupers, and 
young Buster Keaton, quietly longing for the peace and stability of a permanent 
home. Phelan supplies the salient details of Keaton’s childhood for readers who are 
unlikely to know him and gently debunks the glamour of the child star’s life: Buster 
has no formal schooling, must constantly deceive child labor monitors regarding 
his age, and must stoically endure the physical hardships of the family’s “knock-
about” act. Narrator Henry’s restless ambition is treated with equal compassion 
and respect, and although his solo juggling act in the local talent show results in 
epic failure and a broken arm, the nonjudgmental reaction of family and friends 
helps him recover quickly from his embarrassment. Indeed, although Keaton is 
the marquee draw for this title, Henry claims the leading role in what turns out 
to be a thoughtful Bildungsroman. The leisurely pace of long summer days and 
changing seasons over a three-year span is augmented by successions of gracefully 
rendered wordless frames that slow the action and keep the focus on the narrator’s 
development. A note on Buster Keaton’s career is appended, and the final copy will 
feature full-color illustrations.  EB 
PinKney, AndreA dAvis Martin & Mahalia: His Words, Her Song; illus. by Brian 
Pinkney. Little, 2013 40p
ISBN 978-0-316-07013-3 $17.99  
R 7-10 yrs
This picture-book tribute to the civil rights movement focuses on two voices that 
stirred listeners to action: the preacher’s oratory of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and 
the powerful contralto of gospel singer Mahalia Jackson. Rather than presenting 
standard biographical background, author Pinkney discusses in her own rhythmic 
prose the effect these two voices had on their listeners: “Martin’s voice had a force 
all its own. . . . Steady as a train pressing forward,” while “Mahalia’s voice was brass 
and butter. Strong and smooth at the same time.” The two voices famously rang 
out in counterpoint at the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, with 
Mahalia Jackson settling the crowd with the soulful “I’ve Been ’Buked” immediately 
before Dr. King delivered his “I Have a Dream” speech. Brian Pinkney’s watercolor 
illustrations are rendered in clear, springtime hues replete with optimism; phrases 
from speeches, songs, signage, and exhortation wind across and through stylized 
scenes from the movement and the March. End matter includes historical notes, 
a timeline, a bibliography, and a Mahalia Jackson discography. Readers seeking 
material to expand Shane Evans’ poignant We March (BCCB 1/12) will find a 
worthy match here.  EB
September 2013 • 47
PLeCAs, Jennifer Olive’s Perfect World: A Friendship Story; written and illus. by 
Jennifer Plecas. Philomel, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25287-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
“In Olive’s perfect world, it was Olive and Emily, friends from the beginning doing 
everything together, and friends forever.” All that changes when Emily starts spend-
ing more and more time with Eva; Olive painfully watches as Emily and Eva sign 
up for ballet lessons together, start matching their outfits, and even come up with a 
cute nickname for themselves (the Sparkle-Es). Olive yearns for her “perfect world,” 
a place where friendship is not dictated by dance routines and matching clothes, 
the place she and Emily used to reside comfortably, and her sadness increases as 
Emily and Eva appear to grow closer and closer. Fortunately, the new girl is not a 
bad character at all, and when Olive confesses her insecurities to the girls, the three 
of them are able to find some common ground for their trio. Plecas approaches this 
familiar theme with a tender hand and a whole lot of compassion; Olive’s feelings of 
sorrow come across with great sincerity in the narrative, and her struggles with self-
confidence as a result of the shifting friendship dynamic are thoughtfully executed 
(“It was starting to feel like Emily and Eva were the real friends and Olive was just 
. . . plain Olive”). The characters, anthropomorphized cats, are warmly composed 
in pale pastels, each cat a different color and with different patterning in her fur. 
The facial expressions and body language, while simple, carry a lot of emotional 
weight, and young viewers browsing the illustrations would easily be able to follow 
the shifting dynamics from the visual cues. Themes of inclusion, friendship, and 
showing kindness to others are all present in the story, making this a great choice 
for classroom communities or family readalouds.  HM
PLourde, Lynn You’re Wearing THAT to School?!; illus. by Sue Cornelison. Dis-
ney Hyperion, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-5510-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Vivacious hippo Penelope is excited about starting school, but her older mouse pal, 
Tiny, thinks she needs to curb some of her natural tendencies: he wants Penelope to 
dress low-key, take a boring lunch, and bring a rock rather than a stuffed “baby” toy 
for show-and-tell. When the first day of school comes, though, a fearless Penelope 
is decked out in her sparkly rainbow attire, with a big picnic lunch, and her favorite 
stuffed hippo for show-and-tell—and has a great first day without sacrificing her 
unique tastes. Sure, this is kind of messagey, but the message is a worthy one, and it’s 
a good model to present to kids who are just starting school themselves. Penelope’s 
avant-garde choices will certainly appeal to kids who think feather boas go with 
everything, while Tiny’s concern is handled with tenderness and compassion—he 
really believes he’s looking out for his friend, not trying to crush her spirit. Clear 
writing, lively dialogue, and a solid story structure enhance this title’s readaloud 
value as well. Cornelison’s slightly soft-focus illustrations are strongly composed, 
with Penelope’s size and verve making her dominate most of the spreads. “Tips for 
a Happy Hippo First Day of School” offer a few good additional thoughts. Share 
this before or during the first day of school for an entertaining discussion prompt 
about individuality.  JH 
48 • the bulletin
Potter, eLLen Otis Dooda: Strange but True; illus. by David Heatley. Feiwel, 
2013 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-250-01176-3 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
When Otis Dooda moves with his family from a small town to New York City, he’s 
not quite sure what’s going to happen, but he certainly doesn’t expect to be cursed 
by the kid who lives in the droopy-leaved plant in his new building’s lobby (“Before 
the next full moon,” the boy intones, “you will break all your bones”). With only 
three days before the threat’s due to come true, Otis befriends neighbors Perry (who 
keeps a farting pony disguised as a dog in his apartment), Boris (a rather unlik-
able name-caller) and Cat (whose Vietnamese mother named Cat’s siblings Linus, 
Lucy, and Hobbes), who help him formulate a plan to put The Kibosh on Potted 
Plant Guy. One bizarre situation leads to another, and after helping his mom train 
the building’s dogs using soy wieners and being shot out of a cannon into a vat of 
marshmallow fluff, Otis realizes that maybe Potted Plant Guy just wants to be left 
alone—and also that the curse just referred to the dog bones in his pocket. Potter 
departs from her typical melancholy-tinged storyline here to instead capitalize on 
her also-signature zaniness, mixing the just plain goofy with a bit of gross humor 
that’s genuinely effective. Beyond Otis’s surprise realization, there’s little substance 
in this book, but Otis is a relatable guy with perhaps unconventional—but believ-
able—conflict with his family and a winning amount of nerdiness (he’s rather fond 
of Pokémon cards and Legos). The text appears in big, easy-to-read font, and it’s 
riddled with thick-lined, doodle-esque black-and-white drawings, complete with 
some speech bubbles, that add to the book’s pell-mell flavor and comedic tone. 
Hand this one to kids who need something in between Captain Underpants and 
Kinney’s Diary of a Wimpy Kid (BCCB 6/07).  TA
reed, Amy Over You. Simon Pulse, 2013 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5696-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5698-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 10-12
Teen hipsters Max and Sadie have been inseparable friends for years, but their 
friendship has fallen into a pattern that Max has begun to find oppressive: Sadie 
goes wild and does reckless things, while Max stays in control and mops up the 
messes. Sadie’s father finally decides to send Sadie to live with her mother at her 
utopian community in rural Nebraska, and of course Max goes with her. While 
there, Sadie gets mono and Max finds herself with quality alone time for the first 
time in her life, a respite that results in her letting her own inner wild child come 
out to play while fully realizing her resentment about the way everyone, herself 
included, panders to selfish, needy Sadie. Reed charts her character arc through 
a subtle shift in Max’s narrative voice from a direct internal address to Sadie to a 
more inward-focused monologue as Max leaves Sadie behind both physically and 
emotionally. Max’s pain is thoroughly aestheticized, from a stunningly lush depic-
tion of a mushroom trip to an equally beautifully written account of her suicide 
attempt through drowning. By staying wholly within Max’s cloistered perspective, 
the book misses any psychologically insightful point it might have made about 
the dynamics of relationships; Max calls out every character’s narcissistic foibles 
and imperfections but her own, refusing any recognition of her own culpability in 
September 2013 • 49
the way her relationships have evolved. She judges but is unwilling to accept any 
judgment, rejects and mocks both Christianity and New Age spirituality while 
wanting credit for her own failed attempts to be everyone’s savior, and instead 
seeks understanding and insight through an appeal to the Greek myths with their 
wholly dysfunctional gods. The novel is more artfully written than authentic and 
insightful, but readers may appreciate the coils of the emo labyrinth.  KC 
reynoLds, AAron Carnivores; illus. by Dan Santat. Chronicle, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-0-8118-6690-3 $16.99  
R 5-7 yrs
A trio of apex predators, a lion, a great white shark, and a timber wolf, form a sup-
port group to develop strategies to cope with the fact that their neighbors don’t 
like them. They take a crack at vegetarianism, but greens don’t agree with the lion 
and the shark, while the wolf notices that “every single berry bush seemed to have 
a bunny inside.” Another successful carnivore, a great horned owl, suggests they 
simply give up the angst and accept themselves for the meat eaters that they are. 
They take his advice, and, wouldn’t you know it, the owl is not only wise but “also 
DELICIOUS.” Reynolds could have pocketed the laugh and quit right there, but 
struggles on for several more pages before the final gag—the wolf and the lion 
reading a sushi cookbook while the nervous shark looks on. The low-cal plotting 
is tastier for kids who read Reynolds’ bio blurb on the jacket flap, documenting his 
own epic fail at vegetarianism; his comic cri de coeur is delightfully supported by 
Santat’s mixed-media pictures, with their Disneyesque hues and composition and 
the savory tidbits tucked into the spreads. The shark, forced onto land to attend 
his support group, is particularly winsome in his transparent diver’s helmet full of 
water. This may not rise to main course, but it could be a tasty appetizer at a food 
themed story time.  EB 
rose, deBorAh Lee Jimmy the Joey: The True Story of an Amazing Koala Rescue; 
written by Deborah Lee Rose and Susan Kelly; illus. with photographs by Susan 
Kelly. National Geographic, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-1-4263-1371-4 $16.95  
Ad Gr. 2-3 
Rescued from the side of the road, a six-month-old koala is taken via Koala Ambu-
lance to Port Macquarie Koala Hospital. Here he is placed in the home of a trained 
volunteer who names him Jimmy and who cares for him until he is old enough to 
join the other, bigger koalas in the hospital’s tree yard. As he grows, Jimmy learns 
to eat eucalyptus leaves, climb trees, and generally charm everyone he meets; 
when he is old enough, he is released back into the wild. The text glosses over a 
few crucial facts: the fate of Jimmy’s mother in the roadside accident that begins 
his journey is never explained, nor is the reason that hospital volunteers cease to 
feed or hug Jimmy after he begins making grown-up koala sounds made explicit. 
The photos are clear and attractive, and they’re generally well-positioned against 
the muted oranges, blues, greens, and tans of the backgrounds (inspired by the 
multicolored hues of eucalyptus bark). Unfortunately, readers will have to settle for 
descriptions rather than photos of newborn joeys and of some of the more comical 
moments mentioned in the text (Jimmy climbing to the top of people’s heads or 
touching noses to greet them). Koala-loving kids will still find enjoyment in the 
rescue storyline, the crisp and simple text, and the numerous photos of adorable, 
fuzzy Jimmy. A map identifying wild koala habitats, notes about Jimmy and about 
50 • the bulletin
koalas in general, a photographer’s note, and lists of suggestions for further reading, 
places to see koalas, and ways to help koalas are included.  JH
rosenstoCK, BArB 
Thomas Jefferson Builds a Library; illus. by John 
O’Brien. Calkins Creek/Highlights, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-1-59078-932-2 $16.95  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Jefferson’s well-documented obsession with books—reading, recommending, lend-
ing, gifting, and collecting—gets the picture-book treatment in this chatty biography 
that describes the journey of Jefferson’s collection from private stash to the basis 
of the Library of Congress. A host of tributes and episodes testify to Jefferson’s 
bibliophilia, but the chaotic organization of the material garbles the narration. 
One typeface clearly bears the weight of the tale, with bright red italic lettering 
interjecting Rosenstock’s breathless little asides. Open books pop up as insets, which 
could be an effective device if they did not so frequently carry material required to 
understand the main narration. John O’Brien’s signature line and watercolor figures 
are as witty and clever as ever (a testimonial that Jefferson could consult an array 
of twenty books at once finds TJ swinging over the books on a trapeze), and their 
lively animation is always a humorous foil to the zombie-like emptiness of their 
eyes. Don’t blink, or you’ll miss the aside that notes the collection ultimately sold 
for pennies on the dollar. Other pertinent information about LOC is shelved in 
the final notes, along with a selected adult bibliography and quotation sources.  EB
rusCh, eLizABeth Eruption!: Volcanoes and the Science of Saving Lives; illus. with 
photographs by Tom Uhlman et al. Houghton, 2013 76p (Scientists in the 
Field)
ISBN 978-0-547-50350-9 $18.99  
R Gr. 5-9
This Scientists in the Field entry focuses on the work of the Volcano Disaster As-
sistance Program (VDAP), a cadre of scientists within the U.S. Geological Survey 
that trains international vulcanologists and seismologists in monitoring techniques, 
and joins them (by invitation only) with assistance and advice during a crisis. Rusch’s 
admirably organized title begins with the tragic story of the pre-VDAP eruption 
of Nevado del Ruiz in Colombia in 1985, in which some 23,000 lives were lost. 
Drawing on their experience with the eruption of Mount St. Helens, a team of 
American scientists determines to make an organized effort to share what they’ve 
learned about how to install monitoring apparatus in remote and potentially lethal 
locations. As scientists from other nations arrive and share their own experiences, the 
total knowledge base broadens, making it clear this is truly an international effort. 
This title’s culminating event, which Rusch and Uhlman witnessed and documented 
in 2010, is the eruption of Mount Merapi in Indonesia. VDAP-trained Indonesian 
scientists ran this show, with some remote back-up from VDAP (already commit-
ted at other hotspots) and with coordinated satellite data from the international 
community. Timely evacuations saved most, if not all, lives, and in the aftermath 
of the explosion VDAP returned to Mount Merapi to learn from their Indonesian 
colleagues unique features of this eruption. Rusch treats with particular respect the 
decisions of those who chose not to evacuate, and the reasons why people make 
their livelihoods alongside a volcano that continually threatens their lives. Images 
of destruction may initially draw the casual browser, but far more impressive is 
the balance of vivid photographs that bring the international scientists into the 
limelight. A glossary, chapter notes, bibliography, and index are included.  EB
September 2013 • 51
russon, Penni Only Ever Always. Delacorte, 2013 [176p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99119-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74352-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81668-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Rupert Brooke’s poem “Doubt” makes a fitting epigraph for this story of two girls 
working through grief and loneliness on their way to hope and new beginnings. 
Thirteen-year-old Claire is reluctantly sorting through her old toys in preparation 
for the birth of a new cousin to her beloved uncle Charlie when she comes across 
the music box he gave her when she was born. She drifts off to sleep in the wake 
of memories and finds herself dreaming about a girl named Clara, whose world 
is post-apocalyptic and who lives by collecting broken bits of things to sell while 
trying to avoid the gang bosses who collect people to use for their own purposes. 
Clara makes a dangerous deal that allows her to cross over into Claire’s realm to steal 
some life-saving medicine for her friend, and while there she steals Claire’s music 
box; when Charlie dies, Claire’s grief drives her deeper into Clara’s world, where 
Clara is nursing a grief of her own as her friend dies and she is taken prisoner by 
one of the gang bosses. Making sense of the myriad connections and transpositions 
between Claire’s and Clara’s world requires a reliance on intuition more than logic; 
fortunately, Australian author Russon’s richly poetic language encourages just such 
a reliance. The second and third-person narration of Claire’s sections draws readers 
into her inner world as something slightly more than spectator, while Clara’s street-
inflected Aussie dialect invokes a sense of walking through a strange world with 
an intimate guide. The sadness of their broken circumstances is mitigated by their 
shared strength to bear life’s inevitable losses. Give this to fans of David Almond 
who see magic behind the veil of the ordinary.  KC 
ryAn, PAm muñoz Tony Baloney: School Rules; illus. by Edwin Fothering-
ham. Scholastic, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-545-48166-3 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 1-2
Macaroni penguin Tony Baloney, from the picture book Tony Baloney, is back in 
this easy reader about Tony’s school debut. Tony has a bit of trouble following his 
teacher’s rules, as he blurts out answers, tags his pal a little too hard at recess, and 
runs in the cafeteria, resulting in a dropped lunch tray. When a tumbled block 
tower engulfs his buddy, Tony wavers about whether or not to interrupt Mrs. 
Gamboney (“No interruptions, if you please, except for the B emergencies,” which 
are “bathroom,” “bandage,” or “belly-upset”), but decides that it is a B emergency: 
“Bob is buried beneath the blocks!” Tony’s outburst not only leads to a humorous 
class expansion of the emergency contingencies to include such things as “baboons 
on bicycles” and “banana bombs” but also earns him the title of “Friendship 
Ambassador,” much to his (and his stuffed toy Dandelion’s) delight. This will be 
welcomed teachers who want to instigate discussion about class or school rules with 
an enjoyably non-didactic text. Tony is an amiable little fellow, and his dialogue 
back-and-forth with Dandelion is gently amusing. Some of the text is on the higher 
end of the easy-reader spectrum, but this could be easily read aloud to preschoolers 
and kindergarteners, who will likely most relate to Tony. Fotheringham’s cheery 
digital illustrations feature lots of black, white, and grays for the penguin cast of 
characters, punched up with plenty of candy-colored hues.  JH
52 • the bulletin
sChmid, PAuL Oliver and His Alligator; written and illus. by Paul Schmid. Dis-
ney Hyperion, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-1-4231-7437-0 $15.99 
 R 3-5 yrs
Little Oliver is so nervous about starting school that he takes along an obliging 
alligator, “just in case things got rough.” The boy is quickly overwhelmed at school 
when “a lady who wasn’t his mom” asks him his name, so he tells the alligator, 
“Munch, munch!” and down the alligator’s hatch goes the teacher. When a fellow 
classmate introduces herself, Oliver wants to reply but can only manage, “Munch, 
munch!” and the girl goes the way of the teacher. This process is repeated with the 
remaining students until Oliver is alone with his (now extremely rotund) reptile. 
“School is maybe kind of a little boring,” thinks Oliver, until he realizes that it’s 
happily going on without him, inside the alligator. With a final “Munch, munch!” 
Oliver joins his class, and the final spread shows him apparently not inside the 
alligator at all, but running to join his classmates at play. (A small picture on the 
closing verso reveals the alligator, a stuffed toy, tucked into Oliver’s bed.) This is 
an entertaining guide to the topic of school anxiety, and many children may feel 
empowered by the thought of a protective alligator pal who can simply swallow 
up any slightly scary obstacles. Schmid’s simple, succinct text perfectly partners 
with his modestly elegant art, in which carefully composed pastel pencil drawings 
are colored digitally using a minimal palette of soft pastels. Share this in the days 
leading up to the start of school or in those first few days in the classroom.  JH
sChwArz, viviAne The Sleepwalkers; written and illus. by Viviane Schwarz. Can-
dlewick, 2013 94p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6230-1 $9.99 
 R Gr. 3-5
Plagued by nightmares? Fear not, sleepy reader, a peaceful rest awaits you now 
that the Sleepwalkers are here to banish those pesky bad dreams for good. First, 
however, they have to undergo a major staffing change in this whimsical graphic 
novel, as the three incumbent Walkers (a goat, a ram, and a bison) yearn to take 
a rest themselves and recruit Bonno, a large but timid bear (formerly a blanket); 
Amali, an overeager sock monkey; and Sophia, a crow-like creature with a pen-nib 
head. The three must overcome their fears and insecurities to tackle the fears and 
insecurities of snoozing children, rescuing dreamers from N.I.P. (Naked in Public) 
scenarios, dreamscapes overrun with giant rats, and never-ending falls through the 
ether. The cheerful chaos of the plot structure and the illustrations provide cheerful 
buoyancy, and though the sequencing of the panels gets a bit confusing at times, 
the ultimate effect is that of a strange but enjoyable dream. The sketchy art, with 
its vaguely formed figures and sudden shifts in detail and scope, perfectly echoes 
the nebulous space of the inner mind, and youngsters with particularly active 
imaginations will find this a celebratory home for their fantastical whimsies. Fitful 
sleepers everywhere will be relieved that Bonno and pals are working to keep the 
nightmares at bay.  KQG 
September 2013 • 53
seeger, LAurA vACCAro Bully; written and illus. by Laura Vaccaro Seeger. Por-
ter/Roaring Brook, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-630-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
The opening pages give the briefest of backstories for this literal “bull-y,” as a brown 
bull slinks away after being rejected by a bigger bull. When approached with an 
offer to play by some smaller critters, the brown bull lashes out in turn: he yells 
“CHICKEN!” at the chicken and “SLOW POKE!” at the turtle, tells the bee to 
“BUZZ OFF!” and informs the skunk, “YOU STINK!” With each nasty shout, the 
bull and his words grow larger in size on the page until only one hoof and the edge 
of his face are visible. When he hollers “BUTT OUT!” at the goat, the goat sets him 
straight, huffing “BULLY!” at the bull before marching off. This retort causes the 
bull to regroup—and to shrink in size—until, prostrate on the ground, he offers 
a tearful “Sorry . . .Wanna play?” to his friends, who respond with “OK,” and the 
animals head off together happily. Though oversimplified (and overhopeful), the 
story is also very age-appropriate, and the way the bull’s increasing size mirrors his 
increasingly rude posturing makes the power aspect of bullying concrete for a young 
audience. The illustrations use simple compositions with smooth, basic colors fill-
ing thickly lined figures and minimal background (beige with a handcrafted paper 
texture and a simple gray fence), keeping the focus staunchly on the words and 
actions of the bull. Adults, and some kids, may think the bull’s friends let him off 
too easily, but the breakdown of the lesson into its simplest elements (anger, apol-
ogy, forgiveness) may make it a useful template for young children navigating the 
tricky territory where emotions and relationships intersect. This will be a valuable 
discussion tool for families, schools, and libraries.  JH
shustermAn, neAL Ship Out of Luck. Dutton, 2013 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42226-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 6-9
Antsy Bonano, the wisecracking eighth-grade Brooklynite from The Schwa Was 
Here (BCCB 12/04) and Antsy Does Time, is back for an adventure on the high 
seas. Old Man Crawley, the crotchety shut-in who owns Antsy’s father’s restaurant, 
has invited (coerced) Antsy and his family to join him on a cruise for his eighti-
eth birthday on the Plethora of the Deep. Aboard the ship, Antsy is drawn in by 
Tilde, a petty thief whom he first assumes is a stowaway but later discovers to be 
the daughter of the Plethora’s captain. Tilde drags Antsy along in her escapades, 
including a harrowing journey through a slum in Jamaica where she reveals the 
real reasons for her thievery: she’s the mastermind of an operation that smuggles 
immigrants out of her hometown, Cozumel, into Miami. She asks for Antsy’s help 
and gets it, but when they’re caught on video sneaking nine refugees aboard, Antsy 
takes the fall for both of them, resulting in an international media frenzy. Antsy is 
again a remarkably likable narrator despite his smart-aleck ways, combining clever 
quips with genuine but bumbling solidarity with the people he cares about. The 
plot gets a little ahead of itself by the end, with one too many pieces falling too 
niftily into place, but the story, an effective exploration of what happens when we 
let ourselves get carried away by the people around us, is alternately hilarious and 
thought-provoking. Shusterman deftly circumvents questions about the ethics of 
54 • the bulletin
undocumented immigration by instead foregrounding more accessible questions 
of why Antsy—or anyone—does any of the harebrained things he does, rather than 
whether he should have done them. Obviously a treat for those who’ve been taken 
in by Antsy’s antics in the past, this is a rollicking summer read that’s also more 
contemplative than most.  TA 
siLver, eve Rush. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2013 364p (The Game)
ISBN 978-0-06-219213-4 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 9-12
On the day of her death, sixteen-year-old Miki Jones is recruited by forces unseen to 
fight alien invaders under the guise of a complex game simulation. In return, she’ll 
be given a chance to continue her life as if she’d never died, as long as she survives 
her missions. Complicating her attempt to put the pieces of her new life together 
is team-leader Jackson, who knows more than he’s willing to admit and harbors a 
terrible secret of his own. As they endure a series of deadly battles together, Miki 
finds herself drawn to her mysterious teammate and discovers in turn that he is 
willing to break the rules and risk everything, including the lives of their team and 
the future of the world, to keep her alive. Burdened by an overly complex premise 
that requires multiple narrative breaks for exposition, this science fiction adventure 
still manages to be fairly absorbing overall. The fight scenes offer unrelenting, pulse-
quickening action, and Miki’s personal struggle with her own need for control, 
even as she finds herself in an uncontrollable situation, provides the novel with an 
intriguing emotional core. Unfortunately, the impact of the novel is impaired by 
its awkward attempts to build suspense around the characters’ backstory, and the 
romance between Miki and Jackson unfolds along overly familiar lines, leaving it 
frustratingly predictable. Readers looking for a life-or-death action story with a 
great fight scenes and a steamy romantic subplot are better served by Fine’s recent 
Sanctum (BCCB 12/12), but those who find themselves drawn to Miki and Jackson’s 
trials will be glad to hear this is the first of a planned series.  AM
sLoAn, hoLLy goLdBerg Counting by 7s. Dial, 2013 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3855-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-8
Losing your parents once is bad enough, but Willow Chance is unlucky enough 
to experience such a bereavement twice, losing her birth parents when she was 
adopted in her infancy and her beloved adoptive parents when they’re killed in a 
car crash shortly after Willow starts at her new middle school. The gifted, eccentric, 
and somewhat obsessive Willow has no obvious place to stay until a foster home is 
found for her; she therefore ends up making a home of convenience with school-
mate Mai Nguyen, Mai’s sullen older brother Quang-ha, and their hard-working 
mother Pattie in a situation made possible by the school counselor, the inept Dell 
Duke, who’s coerced by Pattie into covering for them with the authorities. What 
is initially an arrangement of desperation turns into a new life for the Nguyens 
and for Dell as well as for Willow, but Willow knows that it must all come to an 
end when her social worker finally manages to find her a foster placement. There 
are echoes of Horvath’s Everything on a Waffle (BCCB 3/01) in this quirky story of 
life after tragedy, but it’s still a deeply original tale; Willow’s narration effectively 
conveys both her outlier tendencies, with her fierce focus on scientific details of 
botany and her love of the number seven, and the utter, flooding grief she suffers 
September 2013 • 55
in the wake of her loss. Characterization is sharp yet joyful, with Willow and Mai 
bonding over not only their racial outsiderhood (Willow is mixed race and Mai 
Vietnamese) but also their ability to take charge of a situation or an inept adult, 
while the secondary cast is also afforded nuance and development. Generous-sized 
print and compact chapters mean the story moves more quickly than its length 
suggests, and when Willow finally puts down new roots both figuratively and liter-
ally (she renovates a garden at their apartment complex), readers will rejoice.  DS 
snow, CAroL Bubble World. Holt, 2013 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9571-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Life in Bubble World could not be more perfect for sixteen-year-old Freesia Sum-
mers. She lives in a mansion on a tropical island with her adoring family, gorgeous 
friends, and an endless closet of fashionable clothes; even school itself is optional. 
What seems too good to be true is: Bubble World is a virtual existence, and Freesia is 
in fact Francine Somers, a socially awkward teen with an emotionally distant family, 
no friends, and unfashionable looks. Freesia struggles to accept that her seemingly 
perfect life is nothing more than an elaborate virtual reality, a sham version of the 
nation’s new online education system. When she discovers the conspiracy behind 
Bubble World’s progressive image and learns that excessive time in virtual space is 
actually endangering the lives of her friends there, she starts to wonder if real life, 
even with all its flaws, might be worth a try after all. What could have made for 
compelling science fiction, extrapolating as it does from contemporary trends in 
parenting, education, and consumerism, emerges here instead as a heavy-handed 
indictment of overindulging in technology. The novel is redeemed somewhat by 
a truly endearing main character whose struggle to come to terms with shifting 
realities is authentically realized. Her personal journey to discover her true self and 
understand what it means to connect with people provides the novel with a much-
needed emotional core and gives readers a story to invest in, even as its technopho-
bic agenda might alienate them. Readers looking for a thought-provoking story 
about these same issues are still better off with Anderson’s Feed (BCCB 11/02) or 
Westerfeld’s Uglies (BCCB 2/05), but those looking for a lightweight entry point 
into the genre will likely enjoy a frothy trip to Bubble World.  AM 
stein, dAvid ezrA Dinosaur Kisses; written and illus. by David Ezra Stein. Can-
dlewick, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6104-5 $15.99 
 R 3-5 yrs
Dinah the dinosaur hatches from her egg and immediately begins trying out her 
pudgy body: “She tried this . . . STOMP! and that . . . CHOMP!” When she wit-
nesses a kiss between two smaller critters, she decides to mimic that as well, but 
she has just a wee bit of trouble controlling her actions, and ends up whomping, 
chomping, and stomping her intended kiss recipients. “This time, if I’m really, 
really careful and only use my lips . . . then, I can do it!” she vows, but she ends 
up mistakenly eating the next little guy (“‘Whoops,’ said Dinah. ‘Not good’”). 
When another baby dino hatches, Dinah tries out her chomping, stomping, and 
whomping versions of kissing on it; the baby happily returns Dinah’s physicality, 
stomp for stomp, and the two finally dissolve into giggles. Stein’s pithy, amusing 
narration is adroitly coupled with his humorous illustrations; the pen and ink, 
56 • the bulletin
watercolor, charcoal, and crayon illustrations are bold and childlike, with stocky, 
boxy earth-toned dinosaurs cavorting around with all the vigor—and sonorous 
exclamations—of a Batman fight scene. The large, blocky black font will visually 
carry the text to a crowd as well as to individuals; the short, simple, action-centered 
sentences will hold the attention of even the restless preschool crowd, who will also 
find the various situations hilarious, and doubtless (to the chagrin of nearby adults) 
want to imitate Dinah’s moves. Pop this in a dino-themed storytime or enjoy on its 
own, but perhaps preface it with a reminder of the “no biting” rule.  JH
stern, reBeCCA, ed. Breakfast on Mars and 37 Other Delectable Essays; ed. by 
Rebecca Stern and Brad Wolfe. Roaring Brook, 2013 [224p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-737-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-9
The essay form gets short shrift in published children’s literature, but it remains the 
assignment of choice (and of audible groans) in schools. This collection is meant 
to offer exemplary models that demonstrate that essays generated by common 
prompts can be uncommonly entertaining, and it succeeds admirably at that task. 
Included here are personal, persuasive, informative, literary, and graphic essays 
written by writers such as Scott Westerfeld and Rita Williams-Garcia in response 
to such prompts as “Should schools and libraries be allowed to ban books?”, “Re-
search an unusual animal,” “What is your favorite place and why?”, with the bulk 
of the essays favoring the personal narrative. Despite being highly readable and 
entertaining, the essays are not consistently high-quality representations of the form; 
while some are tightly constructed gems, others meander in their focus, while still 
others do not use standard citation practices when they should, one even suffering 
from misattribution of an uncited quotation. As an antidote to the five-paragraph 
theme, then, the essays here will be an inspiration; as a teaching aid, some offer 
more fodder for critique than modeling, but deciding which are worthy of which 
could be a useful exercise in its own right.  KC 
stewArt, meLissA No Monkeys, No Chocolate; written by Melissa Stewart and 
Allen Young; illus. by Nicole Wong. Charlesbridge, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-1-58089-287-2 $16.95  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Rain-forest monkeys like to nosh on a nice cocoa pod, but it’s the goo surrounding 
the cocoa beans that appeals, not the beans themselves, which they spit onto the 
ground. Happily for chocolate lovers, discarded beans seed a new cocoa tree, thus 
keeping cocoa-loving primates of all ilk satisfied. Here Stewart traces the journey 
to chocolate treats in reverse, starting with cocoa beans, which develop in pods, 
which “can’t form without flowers,” which can’t bloom without leaves, etc., all the 
way back to the monkeys that scatter the beans that produce the trees. It’s initially 
an elegant framework, with each step explained in a couple of short, accessible 
paragraphs. However, the narrative gets tangled several times when insects come 
into play and explanations lengthen to fully explain the process. By the time the role 
of midges in flower pollenization is covered, or the role of coffin flies in controlling 
leaf cutter ant predation, the momentum is broken. Wong’s watercolor illustrations, 
much in the style of Let’s Read and Find Out Science series books, offer detailed 
close-ups of important stages of cocoa development and of the critters that various 
aid or impede its growth. The cartoon bookworms kibitzing in each recto corner 
September 2013 • 57
supply additional levity but are also somewhat distracting. This title covers the 
same ground as Adrian Forsyth’s How Monkeys Make Chocolate; however, with its 
shorter page count and lower reading level, No Monkeys could be a good alternate 
for use in many classrooms.  EB 
suLLivAn, tArA Golden Boy. Putnam, 2013 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16112-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 7-10
To be an albino in certain parts of modern-day Tanzania is a dangerous thing: a 
relatively new superstition holds that the body parts of albinos, including hair, legs, 
and skin, bring luck. More dangerous, though, is that the trade in these things brings 
money, and lots of it, to unscrupulous hunters and wagangas. As an albino, Habo is 
painfully aware of his difference, which makes him unable to work in the hot sun 
and to see with clarity, but he is unaware of his danger until his family moves to 
Mwanza, where the police turn a blind eye to the killing and maiming of albinos. 
Pursued by a hunter his family met along the way, Habo escapes to Dar es Salaam, 
where he is taken in and tutored by a blind sculptor whom he tried to rob. Habo 
hides his albinism from Kweli at first, but as the two form a friendship, he realizes 
that Kweli is the sort of person who can see beyond superficialities to the person 
within. In addition to exposing a despicable practice, Habo’s story is an especially 
well-crafted tale of acceptance and the power of friendship and family in the face 
of adversity. Sullivan is sensitive to the communitarian values of Tanzanian culture, 
depicting with admirable subtlety the ways her various characters, good and bad, 
scared and heroic, live out their relationships to family, belief, cultural tradition, 
and greed. Kweli’s and Habo’s sculptures are both metaphor and vehicle for Habo’s 
coming of age; readers will be captivated and inspired by Habo’s story as well as 
horrified by the practice that endangers his life. Resources for information and 
activism are included, as is a glossary of the Kiswahili terms used in the book.  KC
thomson, sArAh L. 
Ancient Animals: Terror Bird; illus. by Andrew 
Plant. Charlesbridge, 2013 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-398-5 $12.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-399-2 $5.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-610-4 $6.99  
Ad Gr. 1-3
“A large one could be as tall as a basketball hoop. It could swallow a dog in one gulp. 
No bird has ever been bigger.” Meet the terror birds, flightless apex predators that 
once feasted on their Cenozoic neighbors in South America and now posthumously 
delight primary students cutting their own teeth on easy readers. This debut entry 
in a new Ancient Animals series mainly highlights size and predation, with a nod 
to migration to North America, relegating even the name of the featured bird, 
Kelenken guillermoi, to a sentence on the title page verso. No mention is made of 
the fossil discoveries that inform our understanding of terror birds, an omission 
that fans of extinct beasties are sure to notice. There is, however, lots of menace 
and carrion in Plant’s paintings, and fine print labels are frequently included to 
indicate examples of terror birds’ prey. A half-dozen flightless birds, both extant 
and extinct, are featured with brief bullet-pointed data, and although they are not 
drawn to a common scale, they do offer points of comparison with the terror bird. 
A bibliography of books, videos, and websites is also included.  EB
58 • the bulletin
verniCK, Audrey Bogart and Vinnie: A Completely Made-Up Story of True Friend-
ship; illus. by Henry Cole. Walker, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2822-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-3
Vinnie, a “crazy-happy dog,” is cluelessly and gleefully lost when he darts into the 
Wildlands Preserve. Once in the park, Vinnie joyously greets every wild animal 
he sees, including Bogart, a contentedly solitary rhino. After initial annoyance, 
long-suffering Bogart bemusedly tolerates Vinnie’s presence in a relationship that’s 
celebrated as an inspiring interspecies friendship by the Wildlands staff and main-
stream media. Finally, Vinnie’s family finds their lost pooch, and to ensure all the 
friends get to stay together, they take all the animals back to stay with them, where 
“everyone was happy. Except the neighbors.” Vernick, author of Brothers at Bat 
(BCCB 6/12), takes a sly poke here at the popularity of animal-friendship stories, 
and kids with pesky siblings will likely see something of themselves in Bogart and 
Vinnie’s relationship (“Vhey had formed the kind of family where one member 
loves the other and one wants nothing more than to be left alone”). The ending 
loses a bit of steam, but the manically eager Vinnie (“I love you! I’m Vinnie! Hi!”) 
is a giggleworthy protagonist throughout. Cole’s illustrations, a luminous mix of 
acrylic paints, ink, and colored pencil, are classically cartoonish, usually broken 
into fast-moving panels thick with speech-balloon dialogue (mostly from goofy, 
enthusiastic Vinnie). Keen eyes will appreciate the subtle indications in Bogart’s 
facial expressions that he’s just waiting for all this to go away. The comic-style ap-
proach and sustained irreverence will make this appealing to kids just beginning 
to discover that books know how to be sarcastic too.  DS
wAggoner, susAn Neptune’s Tears. Holt, 2013 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9677-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Seventeen-year-old Zee has been reared by historical re-enactors whose focus is on 
the 1960s and ’70s hippie era, now some two hundred years in the past. When 
aliens arrive, her father thinks they herald the dawning of the Age of Aquarius, but 
they turn out to be a big disappointment, seeking only to study art and literature 
rather than reveal technologies that will ensure endless energy, space travel and 
world peace. Zee, however, falls in love with a visiting alien, but he’s a mystery; 
while he seems to love her, he can’t imagine a future with her, and the story he tells 
her about why they can’t be together turns out to mask a devastating truth. Zee is 
also a trained empath, who can discern internal injuries and help people with pain 
management; now she discovers additional powers as a diviner, which would make 
her essential in a world where she could intuit the next moves of the anarchists who 
continually develop new weapons of mass destruction. This is a surprisingly fresh 
twist on the paranormal-boyfriend genre; Zee has her own seemingly paranormal 
gifts, but they seem more sci-fi than supernatural, and her concerns for the status 
of her relationship are balanced by the excitement of her blossoming career. (In 
particular, her relationship with a patient who is dying after a rich, full life helps 
keep her focused on what’s important.) With terrorist attacks, trips to exotic loca-
tions, and mysterious obstacles interrupting and ultimately intensifying the path 
of true love, the plotting is cinema-ready; combine that with likable characters and 
September 2013 • 59
a reasonable page count and you have a handy recommendation for romance and/
or sci-fi fans who may be reluctant readers.  KC 
weLLington, moniCA Colors for Zena; written and illus. by Monica Welling-
ton. Dial, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3743-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 4-7 yrs
This picture book embeds a lesson in primary and secondary colors into a simple 
narrative. When Zena wakes up in a monochromatic house, she wonders where all 
the colors have gone. And boy, does she find out: in the next spread, she and her 
dog encounter a world of yellow, in the next a world of red, and in the subsequent 
spread, orange, the mixture of the two previous hues. Then they encounter a blue 
spread followed by a yellow spread, followed by—you guessed it—green, and so 
on. Each time the primary colors mix, the resulting secondary color is announced 
by something of that color (“‘I am yellow and red mixed together,’ roars the lion”), 
thus delivering the lesson directly and accessibly. The concept is somewhat forced, 
and the accompanying text is slight and overexclamatory. Zena is an enjoyable 
figure, though, somewhat reminiscent of Dora the Explorer with her bobbed hair, 
her penchant for adventure, and her constant declarations of enthusiasm (“Red is 
exciting!” “Magnificent!” “Fantastic!”). The gouache illustrations have a tidy regu-
larity that suggests digital art or even fabric art; each scene wisely counters the key 
color with black and gray tones, and as the progression continues, escapees from 
earlier spreads join Zena and add some color variety. The book closes with Zena and 
her new many-colored friends collaborating on a many-colored painting, and the 
resulting composition is chock full of colors encountered along the way, providing 
listeners with a final opportunity to review the color concepts presented. A succinct 
explanation of the color wheel and some suggested activities for experimenting 
with color are included.  HM
whiPPLe, nAtALie Transparent. HarperTeen, 2013 [368p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212016-8 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212017-5 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
In this alternate version of contemporary reality, a drug that was developed during 
the Cold War has caused mutations that appear more like superpowers—super-
human strength, impenetrable skin, mind control, etc. When the government 
banned Radiasure, the criminal syndicates took over the highly profitable trade. 
Fiona’s father, who has the power of mind control, is the head of one of the major 
syndicates, so when Fiona is born invisible, he sees a world of possibilities opening 
up to him. Between his wife’s telekinesis and his daughter’s invisibility, he should 
be unstoppable, but instead his wife continually tries to resist the overtaking of her 
mind and eventually escapes from her husband. Now Fiona and her mother are 
hiding in a small town in Arizona, where Fiona finds herself for the first time in a 
community of people who understand what it’s like to be outcast because of their 
abilities. Initially distrustful, she slowly warms to their genuine offers of friendship 
from the hospitable Latino community, and she even finds herself falling for one 
of the guys, only to have her idyll threatened by the return of her father. Fiona’s 
invisibility and her father’s insistence that she join the family business against her 
60 • the bulletin
wishes are exaggerations of common problems of the teenage years, so readers will 
relate to Fiona’s desire to be seen, valued, and loved for herself rather than what 
she is worth as a commodity to others. The people she meets are an amiable puppy 
pile of siblings and friends with imaginative superpowers who ultimately stage an 
energetic takedown of the bad guy, making them excellent comrades and enjoyable 
literary company. Readers looking for a romantic action/adventure with a fresh and 
engaging X-men–ish sci-fi twist will find it here.  KC 
whitney, dAisy When You Were Here. Little, 2013 257p
ISBN 978-0-316-20974-8 $17.99 
Ad Gr. 8-12
After Danny’s mother dies of cancer, he’s pretty much alone: his father was killed six 
years ago, his sister, adopted from China, is living in China and estranged from the 
family, and the girl he loves, Holland, broke up with him when she went away to 
college. After an impromptu scorched-earth valedictorian speech at his graduation 
(“Fuck high school. Fuck everyone. I’m outta here”), Danny heads off to Japan, his 
family’s second home and the place where his mother received much of her treatment 
over the years. Once there he bonds with Kana, the strong-minded daughter of the 
apartment caretaker, and learns more about his mother and her time there—and 
also a secret about Holland that changes Danny’s life. The book enticingly combines 
violin-worthy levels of loss with Danny’s vigor and solid testosterone levels (he’s 
maintaining a friends-with-benefits arrangement with a young medical resident, in 
fact), while Danny’s stay in Tokyo is replete with local color and interesting scenery. 
The story is thoroughly riddled with improbability at several stages, however, and 
Kana’s rather a manic pixie cliché, albeit a platonic friend one, and her character 
otherwise is vague, emphasizing emotions over authentic personality. There’s still 
pleasure in the Hallmark-y blend of tragedy and travelogue, and a grieving hottie 
will always draw fans keen to comfort his handsome wounded soul.  DS
wiLLems, mo A Big Guy Took My Ball!; written and illus. by Mo Wil-
lems. 58p (Elephant and Piggie)
ISBN 978-1-4231-7491-2 $8.99  
R Gr. K-2
When a big guy takes a ball Piggie found, she appeals to her much bigger friend 
Gerald for redress. Normally timid Gerald, stung by the injustice, is happy to 
mount up and ride to the rescue, but he gets more than he bargained for when the 
big guy turns out to be a whale, literally, who dwarfs the quickly unemboldened 
Gerald. Fortunately, Gerald and Piggie pool their creative talents to make room 
for everyone, and harmony is restored. Willems has once again found the sweet 
spot where humor and situational familiarity meet cognitive capacity; here he in-
troduces perspective through a very familiar playground experience. Introducing 
comparatives through illustration, font size, and the introduction of the –er word 
ending, he carves out both physical and moral space in the negotiation of the way 
size matters. The ball and Gerald are big to Piggie, but not to the ball’s owner; 
being big seems to hold all the advantages to our heroes, while being small has 
more allure for the lonely whale. The ability to see through the eyes of someone 
who thinks differently than you is an essential developmental leap that’s crucial 
for empathy, and Willems takes it even one step further in creating a game that 
requires the advantages of both big guys and small guys for its success. The pictures 
will keep ’em laughing, and the concepts will keep ’em learning, so we say, please, 
Mr. Willems, keep ’em coming.  KC 
September 2013 • 61
wiLLiAms-gArCiA, ritA P.S. Be Eleven. Amistad/HarperCollins, 2013 274p
ISBN 978-0-06-193862-7 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-8
After coming back from a summer in Oakland with her Black Panther mother (in 
One Crazy Summer, BCCB 2/10), eleven-year-old Delphine is glad to be home, 
but she soon finds that she’s not the only one who changed over the past months. 
Her beloved father has found himself a serious lady friend, Miss Marva Hendrix, 
while Mr. Mwila, an exchange teacher from Zambia, is challenging Delphine’s 
sixth-grade class with old-school rigor and high expectations. As Delphine negoti-
ates these challenges over the school year, she corresponds with her mother, who 
sends flinty, poetic guidance to her daughter, with the befuddling encouragement 
to “be eleven.” Delphine’s narration again creates a captivating portrait of both the 
age and her age, where she and her sisters go crazy for the Jackson Five, her beloved 
uncle returns from Vietnam with a drug problem, and her abiding concern is the 
class’ spring dance; her voice is smart-preteen authentic in its blend of shallowness 
and thoughtfulness. Characterization is strong throughout, with Delphine’s father’s 
girlfriend (and eventual new wife) particularly interesting: her introduction to the 
group throws off the family dynamics, often in good ways (she dethrones Delphine 
from being the “responsible one” among her sisters, and challenges Delphine’s father 
and brother on their sexism). Overall, it’s a perceptive picture of Delphine’s contin-
ued and sometimes painful growth against a vivid period backdrop. It’s therefore 
a natural for sharing with family with their own memories of the era, and fans of 
Delphine’s first outing will delight in her return.  DS
yAnCey, riCK The 5th Wave. Putnam, 2013 [480p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16241-1 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 9-12
Eking out survival in the wake of the fourth wave of an alien invasion that has 
wiped out most of the earth’s population, sixteen-year-old Cassie is simply glad to 
have her father and brother with her in the refugee camp. She’s forced to run for 
her life, though, when the military arrives on a seeming rescue mission and kills her 
father and abducts her brother. Critically wounded by a Silencer, an alien hunter 
disguised as a human, she is saved from the brink of death by a mysterious fellow 
survivor, Evan Walker. Cassie falls in love with Evan, until she discovers a terrible 
secret that could doom them both. At the same time, Cassie’s longtime crush Ben 
Parish has also survived the fourth wave and has been taken in by the local military 
base, where he is trained to fight in the coming alien war. When Ben uncovers the 
truth behind the base’s mission, however, he has to free himself and decide how 
many of his fellow humans he can save. An intriguing reimagining of the alien inva-
sion story that is reminiscent of Stephenie Meyer’s The Host, this novel will draw 
readers in with its intense, emotionally wrought narrative and leave them thinking 
about its deeper implications long after they are finished. The overall impact lessens 
somewhat when the focus moves away from Cassie’s perspective, but Cassie still 
carries the novel: a captivating heroine, she’s part hardcore, M16-wielding fighter 
willing to do anything to rescue her brother, part teenage girl indulging in flashbacks 
to a simpler time and wishing that she didn’t have to be responsible for anything. 
Ultimately a page-turner that is at times heart-wrenching, tough, and tender, this 
multi-threaded first volume in a series is a solid summertime thrill.  AM
62 • the bulletin
yoLen, JAne The Hostage Prince; by Jane Yolen and Adam Stemple. Viking, 
2013 [256p] (The Seelie Wars)
ISBN 978-0-670-01434-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
The long-simmering war between the Unseelie and the Seelie fey has been kept 
at bay since the exchange of young princes between the royal families seven years 
ago. Prince Aspen, a Seelie, has never quite taken to the messy chaos of the Un-
seelie court, and when his only confidante informs him that war has finally been 
declared—in spite of the hostage princes—Aspen decides to flee before he is killed. 
Meanwhile, Snail, a midwife’s apprentice, accidentally angers the queen and finds 
herself on route to the dungeons, where she discovers Aspen mid-escape, saving his 
life from an angry ogre and joining him in his flight. The two journey across an 
ever-shifting no-man’s land to reach the Seelie court, only to discover that Aspen’s 
father refuses to protect the prince. The exposition and set up of the book’s first 
half is helped along by the dual focus on Snail and Aspen’s differing experiences 
in the Unseelie world, setting a steady pace until the action really gets going as the 
pair escape toothy mermaids, hungry (and pregnant) trolls, and bounty hunters. 
Brassy and smart, Snail is far more likable than the mostly whiny Aspen, and her 
perspective allows readers to understand that there is nothing particularly noble 
about this war—it is a petty skirmish between royal families that will likely end 
up hurting people like Snail without ever really affecting the actual courts. What 
begins as a typical fantasy quest therefore actually turns out to be a rather thoughtful 
look at conflict, loyalty, and courage, and the discussion sparked here will hopefully 
continue with the proposed sequels.  KQG 
September 2013 • 63
wiLLems, mo Don’t Pigeonhole Me!; written and illus. by Mo Willems. Disney 
Editions, 2013  288p
ISBN 978-1-4231-4436-6 $40.00
With an engaging, conversational style, wisecracking illustrator Willems invites 
readers into the inner workings of his artistic process as he reflects upon the last 
twenty years of sketches, scribbles, and doodles. As a starving artist living in New 
York, Willems began drawing cartoons for a ’zine in 1993, eventually putting 
his sketches together in a special edition, the first Mo Willems Sketchbook. The 
single-panel, editorial-like cartoons that make up that early publication and its 
subsequent iterations are presented here, along with more narratively structured 
sketches, several of which eventually led to some of Willems’ best hits, including 
Don’t Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus (BCCB 5/03) and Leonardo, the Terrible Monster 
(BCCB 11/05). Overall, though, the material here is aimed at an older audience; 
the tendency toward mischief and naughtiness that threads through so many of 
Willems’ children’s book is given free, adult-oriented rein in this particular format 
and his characteristic cleverness is on display alongside a penchant for dark comedy 
and existential contemplation (and a drunken bunny). Eric Carle provides a brief, 
amiable foreword, while somewhat adulatory quotes from various authors, illustra-
tors, and celebrities introduce each chapter. The oversized pages and clean, focused 
layout keep the viewer’s attention on the art, mostly black and white sketches that 
range from frenetically cartoony to solemnly abstract. While this has potential cur-
ricular use in a high school or college art class, its main audience will be interested 
adults; it would certainly make a fine gift book for those parents who match their 
children in their enthusiasm for the antics of Elephant and Piggie.  KQG
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
64  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Kuehn
Accidents–fiction: Levy
Adventure: Anderson; Arm-
strong; Benway; Clark; Cliff; 
Columbus; Frankel; Gratton; 
Hautman; Jinks; Korman; Lieber-
man; London; Lunetta; Mahy; 
Yancey
Africa–fiction: Crowder
African Americans–fiction: Balliett; 
Williams-Garcia
African Americans: Pinkney
Agriculture: Mcnamara Apple; 
Stewart
AIdS–fiction: Levithan
Alaska–fiction: Hill
Albinism–fiction: Sullivan
Aliens–fiction: Lunetta; Waggoner
ALPHABet BooKS: Boldt; 
Horowitz
Animals: Montgomery; thomson
Animals–fiction: Peck
Animals–stories: Lehrhaupt; reyn-
olds; Seeger
AntHoLoGIeS: Stern
Anxiety–stories: Schmid
Appearance–fiction: Metzger; Sul-
livan
Art: daywalt; Wellington
Art and artists–stories: Look
Asperger’s syndrome–fiction: Miller-
Lachmann
Astronomy: Goodman 
Aviation: Cummins
Babies–stories: Bennett
Baths–stories: Mahy
BedtIMe StorIeS: Gravett
Behavior–fiction: ryan 
Behavior–stories: durand; oHora; 
Seeger; Stein 
BIoGrAPHIeS: Cummins; Krull; 
Pinkney
Biology: Montgomery; rose
Books and reading: rosenstock
Books and reading–fiction: Colum-
bus; Mills
Books and reading–stories: Gay
Bowling–stories: durand
Brothers and sisters–stories: Bennett; 
Gay; Morales
Bullying–fiction: Baskin 
Bullying–stories: Seeger
Careers: Montgomery
China–stories: Look
Civil rights movement: Pinkney
Colors: Wellington
Competition–fiction: Mills
ConCePt BooKS: Boldt; 
Goldstone; Milgrim; Wellington; 
Willems
Conspiracies–fiction: Korman
CountInG BooKS: Boldt
Crime and criminals–fiction: daugh-
erty; dubosarsky; Hutchison; 
Korman; Lieberman; MacHale
Curses–fiction: Potter
death–fiction: Levy
dinosaurs–stories: Liu; Stein
disabilities–fiction: Bingham; 
Haskell
dogs–fiction: Perl; vernick
dragons–fiction: Haskell
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
SepTemBer 2013  •  65
dragons–stories: Gravett
dreams–fiction: Schwarz
droughts–fiction: Crowder
dystopias–fiction: Lunetta; Yancey
eating disorders–fiction: Anony-
mous; Metzger
emotions–stories: oHora
england–fiction: Castor; Peck
ePIStoLArY FICtIon: daywalt
Ethics and values: Anderson; Bing-
ham; Levy; London; noyes; reed; 
Shusterman; Snow; Yolen
extinction: thomson
Fairies–fiction: Mcnamara Fairy; 
Yolen
Faith–fiction: López
Families–fiction: Armstrong; Balliett; 
dessen; Farrant; Hill; Kadohata; 
Kuehn; López; ockler; Whipple; 
Whitney; Williams-Garcia 
FAntASY: Anderson; Armstrong; 
Columbus; Gratton; Haskell; 
Lubar Stranger; Mahy; Metcalf; 
Schwarz; Yolen
Farms–fiction: Kadohata
Farms–stories: elliot
Fate–fiction: ellis
Fathers–fiction: Crossan; ockler
Fathers–stories: durand
Firefighters–stories: Murray
Food and eating: Stewart
Food and eating–fiction: Anony-
mous; Metzger
Food and eating–stories: McGhee; 
Mcnamara Apple; reynolds
Foster care–fiction: Sloan
Friends–fiction: Anonymous; 
dowell; Gansworth; McCarry; 
Metzger; Michalak; Miller-Lach-
mann; Mills; Phelan; reed; ryan; 
Shusterman; vernick; Willems
Friends–stories: Plecas; Plourde 
Future–fiction: Frankel; London; 
Waggoner
Games and gaming–fiction: Jinks; 
Silver
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Levithan; 
London
Ghosts–poetry: Cyrus 
Ghosts–stories: Paquette Ghost
Gods–fiction: Gratton
Grandparents–fiction: Perl
GrAPHIC noveLS: Cliff; Lieber-
man; Phelan; Schwarz
Grief–fiction: Farrant; Levy; russon; 
Sloan; Whitney 
Halloween: Cyrus; Leppanen; Pa-
quette Ghost
Hippopotamus–fiction: vernick
HIStorICAL FICtIon: Castor; 
Cliff; dubosarsky; ellis; Frost; 
Gansworth; Hill; noyes; Phelan; 
Williams-Garcia
History, U.S.: Pinkney; rosenstock; 
Krull
Homelessness–fiction: Balliett
Horror: Lubar Extremities
HuMor: Bennett; Boldt; Clark; 
Cyrus; daywalt; durand; Gravett; 
Horowitz; Houran; Lehrhaupt; 
Liu; Lubar Stranger; Mahy; Mc-
Ghee; Morales; Potter; reynolds; 
Stein; vernick; Willems
Hypnotism–fiction: Korman
Identity–fiction: Kuehn; reed; Snow
Illness–fiction: López
Imagination–stories: oHora; Schmid
Immigrants–fiction: Crossan
Incas–fiction: ellis
Individuality–stories: Plourde
Islands–fiction: Lindsey; MacHale
Japan–fiction: Whitney
Japanese Americans–fiction: Kado-
hata 
Jews–fiction: Perl
Journals–fiction: Anonymous; 
Houran
Kisses–stories: Stein
Koalas: rose 
Labor–fiction: Kadohata
Language arts: Stern
Latinos–fiction: López; Miller-Lach-
mann; ockler
Legends: Look
Libraries: rosenstock
Literature, American: Lindsey
Literature, English: Hutchison; 
London; Stern
66  •  The BulleTin
Maps–stories: elliot
Mathematics: Goldstone
Mice–fiction: Peck
Monkeys: Stewart
Monsters–stories: Milgrim
Mothers–fiction: López; Williams-
Garcia 
Moving–fiction: Potter
Music and musicians–fiction: dow-
ell; McCarry; russon
MYSterIeS: Balliett; daugherty; 
dubosarsky; MacHale
Mythology, classical: McCarry
Mythology, Norse: Armstrong; 
Gratton
native Americans–fiction: Frost; 
Gansworth
natural disasters: rusch
Nature study: Montgomery; rose; 
Stewart 
obsessive-compulsive disorder–fic-
tion: Haydu
orphans–fiction: Sloan 
Paleontology: thomson
Persecution–fiction: Sullivan
Pigs–stories: elliot
Pirates–stories: Horowitz
Plagues–fiction: noyes
PoetrY: Cyrus; Leppanen
Presidents: rosenstock
Probability: Goldstone
Reading aloud: Hill; Mcnamara 
Fairy
Reading, beginning: Willems
Reading, easy: Houran; Lubar 
Stranger; Mcnamara Fairy; Mi-
chalak; Mills; ryan
Reading, reluctant: Potter; rose
refugees–fiction: Shusterman
relationships–fiction: Baskin; Bing-
ham; dessen; dowell; Hautman; 
Haydu; Hutchison; Levithan; 
Sloan 
relationships–stories: Plecas
rHYMInG StorIeS: Murray; 
Paquette Ghost
riddles–stories: Mcnamara Apple
romance–fiction: Benway; dessen; 
Gratton; Haydu; Lindsey; Met-
calf; ockler; Silver; Waggoner; 
Whipple; Yancey
royalty–fiction: Castor; daugherty; 
Haskell; Peck
School–fiction: Baskin; dowell; 
dubosarsky; Michalak
School–stories: Mcnamara Apple; 
Murray; Plourde; Schmid
Science and scientists: Montgomery; 
rusch
SCIenCe FICtIon: Clark; 
Frankel; Hautman; Jinks; Lieber-
man; London; Paquette Paradox; 
russon; Silver; Snow; Waggoner; 
Whipple; Yancey
Science: Goodman; Krull; Stewart
Secrets–fiction: Whitney
SHort StorIeS: Lubar Extremi-
ties
Sisters–fiction: Farrant; Williams-
Garcia
Sleep–fiction: Schwarz
Space travel: Goodman 
Space travel–fiction: Paquette Para-
dox
Spies–fiction: Benway
Stepparents–fiction: Williams-Garcia
Storytime: Lehrhaupt; Leppanen; 
Morales; Plecas; Stein
Superheroes–fiction: Anderson; 
Lindsey; Metcalf; Yancey
SurvIvAL StorIeS: Crowder; 
Paquette Paradox
SuSPenSe: daugherty; MacHale
tanzania–fiction: Sullivan
time travel–fiction: noyes
transportation–stories: Liu 
verSe noveLS: Crossan; Frost
virtual reality–fiction: Snow
volcanoes: rusch
voyages and travel–fiction: Gratton; 
Shusterman; Whitney; Yolen
War of 1812–fiction: Frost
War–fiction: Yolen
Women’s studies: Cummins
World cultures: Sullivan
Worms–fiction: Houran
Wrestling–fiction: Morales
Zoos–fiction: vernick
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
exploring literature 
for children.
David L. Russell, Ferris sTaTe UniversiTy; Karin E. 
Westman and Naomi J. Wood, Kansas sTaTe UniversiTy, 
Editors 
The Lion and the Unicorn, an international theme- and 
genre-centered journal, is committed to a serious, 
ongoing discussion of literature for children. The 
journal’s coverage includes the state of the publishing 
industry, regional authors, comparative studies of 
significant books and genres, new developments 
in theory, the art of illustration, the mass media, 
and popular culture. It is especially noted for its 
interviews with authors, editors, and other important 
contributors to the field, as well as its outstanding 
book review section. 
Published three times a year in January, April, and September. 
Volume 37 (2013). ISSN 0147-2593; E-ISSN 1080-6563.
the lion and the unicorn
a criTical joUrnal oF children’s liTeraTUre
annUal individUal sUbscripTions
$40.00 (print); $45.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbscripTions
$125.00 (print); $135.00 (online);  
$175.00 (print & online)
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, 
E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
