ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
/
i:
;-I
Hoofbeats, Claws
& Rippled Fins
Creature Poems
'- 
"These 14 poems, inspired by artist Stephen Alcorn's masterful
woodcuts, celebrate animals in all their bizarre shapes and fierce
wildness. From the bouncy, rhymed couplets of Lillian Fisher's
'Camel' to the single line of contemplative free verse in Tony
Johnston's 'Iquana,' the poems range widely in style and tone....
A rich and satisfying collection that will be used widely across the
curriculum."-Starred review / ALA Booklist
"Featuring new work by such favorites as Karla Kuskin, Ralph
Fletcher, Janet S. Wong, and Alice Shertle, this collection forms a
unique whole. Fans of any of the fine poets [found here] will find
plenty to enjoy." -School Library Journal
"Alcorn's powerful visual imagery underpins and binds together this
striking tribute to the grandeur of nature's creatures." -The Horn Book
Ages 8 up. $15.95 Tr (0-688-17942-8); $15.89 Lb (0-688-17943-6)
HBrpHr.ofl'AbMldren'sBBoB
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
July/August 2002
Vol. 55 No. 11
&
A LOOK INSIDE
393 THE BIG PICTURE
This Land Was Madefor You and Me: The Life & Songs of Woody Guthrie
by Elizabeth Partridge
394 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
398 
* Say Yes by Audrey Couloumbis
406 * We're Going on a Picnic! written and illus. by Pat Hutchins
413 
* The Emperor's SilentArmy: Terracotta Warriors ofAncient China by Jane
O'Connor
417 * The Four Ugly Cats in Apartment 3D by Marilyn Sachs; illus. by
Rosanne Litzinger
426 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
428 
ANNUAL AUTHOR AND TITLE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (MD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Jeannette M. Hulick, Reviewer (JMH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Sabrina Austin
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus
Reprint Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300
North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/pubofflbccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2002 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover art: jacket art by Lane Smith; photograph of Woody Guthrie by Al Aumuller, courtesy of the
Library of Congress. Used by permission of Viking Children's Books.
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 393
THE BIG PICTURE
This Land Was Made for You and Me: The Life &
Songs of Woody Guthrie
by Elizabeth Partridge
Woody Guthrie wandered tirelessly through America and lent his voice and music
to the causes of the downtrodden people he met, but he was no angel. In celebrat-
ing his legacy, many biographers have chosen to take an adulatory path and ignore
Guthrie's darker side. Not so with this volume, which presents an unflinchingly
accurate portrait of a rambling and unpredictable man whose amazingly prolific
output and true genius for creating memorable songs earned him a place in Ameri-
can music history, despite his tendency to crash on friend's couches until the wel-
come had long soured.
Partridge's succinct and quick-shifting prose captures the disjointed
rhythms of the events in Guthrie's complex life, from his childhood in the depths
of the Dust Bowl and the Depression under the dubious protection of a mother
who was slowly succumbing to Huntington's disease, to his several failed mar-
riages, which were not helped by his lifelong propensity to disappear for lengthy
intervals with no warning. A creative energy propelled him through life, leaving
those around him amazed and often baffled by his wandering attention. The
author crafts her descriptions to reflect the rapidity and wildness of Guthrie's tal-
ent: "He brimmed with brilliant schemes and wild ideas. He drew constantly, put
out a newsletter about what he and his friends were doing, and always had stacks of
library books around. At any moment he would start talking about his latest
interest. Whenever he had a little money he'd buy a notepad and jot down words
to a song."
In addition to a panoply of archival photographs, which add realism to
this engrossing story of a life, the book includes carefully selected quotes from
songs, acquaintances, and documents to punctuate the story with authenticating
detail without detracting from the momentum of the narrative. Comments from
friends, particularly Guthrie's close friend Pete Seeger, offer interesting insights
into the positive and negative effects of Guthrie's restless energy on those around
him. After watching Guthrie wander off from his young wife and three children,
leaving them no means of support, Seeger asked, "Is that the price of genius?... Is
it worth paying?" Seeger saw both sides of Guthrie, though, and marveled at his
prolific output: "Lord, Lord, he turned out song after song!"
Partridge also sheds light on the vagaries of popularity, showing how
close Guthrie came to falling into obscurity, not once but many times throughout
his life. His brief commercial successes always crumbled, as did most of his rela-
tionships with fellow artists (and all of his romantic relationships). In addition,
Guthrie's behavior grew more outrageous as he grew older; he and his friends
blamed his consumption of alcohol, until doctors diagnosed him, at age forty-two,
394 
* THE BULLETIN
with Huntington's disease, the same degenerative neurological disorder that had
sent his own mother to an asylum. Then, in a final twist in a life full of winding
roads, while Guthrie was deteriorating dramatically in a hospital room, folk music
became the genre of a generation, and Guthrie became known as one of the endur-
ing creators of modern folk music. Long after he had ceased to be able to commu-
nicate or move a muscle voluntarily, his son Arlo Guthrie and old friend Pete
Seeger would bring their guitars to the hospital to sing duets: "Woody could no
longer applaud, but his eyes shone with tears."
This accurate and honest portrait of Woody Guthrie does not soften his
edges, but it shows in engrossing details the constant, unstoppable tide of creation
that carried him through life, and it offers a sense of the passion that drove this
brilliant songwriter to become one of the most important musicians in the history
of our nation. To round out the volume, there are general source notes and end-
notes, a bibliography, and an index. (Imprint information appears on p. 415.)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ASHLEY, BERNARD 
Little Soldier. Scholastic, 2002 
230p
ISBN 0-439-22424-1 
$16.95 
R Gr. 8-12
After soldiers of the dominant Yusulu clan massacred his Kibu family, Kaninda
joined the rebel forces for the express purpose of killing Yusulus. The atrocities
Kaninda witnessed in Lasai, his fictional African homeland, are described in itali-
cized flashbacks sandwiched between accounts of his present life in gritty south
London, where he was taken after being "rescued," first by the Red Cross and then
by a woman whose Salvation Army-style ministry took responsibility for six young
refugees. Thinking of himself as a prisoner of war, Kaninda lives with Captain
Betty, her quiet husband, and thirteen-year-old Laura (who provides the novel's
other major perspective), waiting for a chance to hop an Africa-bound freighter
and get back to the fighting. Soon, however, he gets pulled into a "stupid war"
between gangs based in neighboring housing projects, a war "all about risk and the
thrill of it, where hatred and violence gave some purpose for their lives. It was for
that-and for the pride of the tribe." This is a touch programmatic and slightly
sentimental (especially in its treatment of female characters, such as Laura), but it's
nonetheless plausibly constructed and approachably written. Because Kaninda
uses in London many of the survival skills he developed in war-torn Lasai, the
novel effectively emphasizes the similarities between his new and his old environ-
ments, making some thought-provoking parallels, and the final message of hope is
certainly a welcome one. A note describes the author's inspiration and research.
FK
AUCH, MAY JANE 
Ashes ofRoses. 
Holt, 2002 
250p
ISBN 0-8050-6686-1 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-9
America's golden door only admits part of the Nolan family; baby Joseph is diag-
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 
395
nosed with trachoma by Ellis Island examiners, and Da must take him back to
Ireland, leaving his wife and three daughters in the care of his brother. There's
only a half-hearted welcome from Uncle Patrick and his cool, thoroughly assimi-
lated wife, and soon Ma and little Bridget catch the first steamer home. Seven-
teen-year-old Rose and her younger sister Maureen are determined to make it in
America, and, after a false start in a sweatshop, Rose finds them both lodgings in
the apartment of a Jewish immigrant and his teenage daughter, Gussie, a seam-
stress and union activist. Gussie helps Rose land a promising position with her
own employers, and if adolescent readers don't immediately recognize the signifi-
cance of the Triangle Shirtwaist Company, they soon will. Just as Rose makes
friends and draws her first paycheck, she's caught in the infamous fire of 1911 and
barely escapes with her life. Scenes at Ellis Island capture the intense pressure and
split-second decision of a family torn apart the moment its hopes are highest, and
the Triangle workrooms are so carefully described early on that the crush and
pandemonium of the laborers' panicked flight is nearly palpable. Auch skillfully
condenses sweeping themes of American immigrant experience into Rose's story;
readers ready to migrate from series historical fiction should find it riveting. EB
BRIMNER, LARRY DANE 
The Littlest Wolf by Larry Dane Brimner; illus. by Jose
Aruego and Ariane Dewey. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029040-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029039-0 
$15.95 
R 4-6 yrs
Poor Little Wolf doesn't feel he's up to the standard of his brothers and sisters, so
he's hiding behind the oak tree while his sibs are out frolicking. When Big Gray
checks on his woebegone pup, he hears a litany of anxiety ("Frankie says that I do
not roll in a straight line.... Ana says I'm a slowpoke.... Will I ever pounce as
high as Tyler?"). The wise parent responds to his pup's whines by addressing not
only his pup's present capabilities ("Straight lines can be a bother") and their right-
ness ("You run like a soft breeze . . . That is just as it should be") but also the
certainty of greater skills to come ("High pounces come later"). Though the un-
derlying acorn/oak metaphor lacks the bolstering specificity of the rest of the text
and leaves the end slightly weak, the text is reassuring and enjoyably humorous,
especially in Little Wolfs puppyish demonstrations of his shortcomings ("Before
the little wolf had gotten very far, his run had become a galumph. And soon after,
it was just a toddle"). Aruego and Dewey's illustrations give Little Wolf his rueful
due: the wayward lines have an expressive energy reminiscent of Sandra Boynton,
and the comic effects (Little Wolf leaves a cartoonish wake when he runs) and
clever compositions (an upside-down little Wolf, just finished with his rolling dem-
onstration, continues his t8te-e-tete with Big Gray) don't detract from the sympa-
thy of their portrayal of the put-upon little guy. All youngsters feel outstripped by
somebody, so Little Wolfs plight will be widely recognized, and Big Gray's confi-
dence will be welcome everywhere. DS
BRUTSCHY, JENNIFER 
Just One More Story; illus. by Cat Bowman Smith. 
Orchard,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-439-31767-3 
$16.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Young Austin loves life on the road with his mother and father's band ("They
called themselves The Swamp Snakes. Dad played the fiddle, Mom sang country-
western, and Austin banged the tambourine"). Even though "every week was a
different town ... every night in their trailer was exactly the same": Austin settles
396 
* 
THE BULLETIN
into bed with his stuffed animals and his dad comes in and tells him a story-just
one, no matter how much Austin begs. When the family visits at Uncle Roy's two-
story house, Austin successfully negotiates for two stories; when Dad wins a fiddle
contest and they check into a fancy eleven-story San Antonio hotel-well, you get
the picture. This unusual depiction of family life on the road will have a lot of
romantic appeal for young listeners, and the cozy minimalism of the trailer (and
the absence of formalized schooling) is sure to give them wanderlust. A strong
sense of momentum, built while the family travels from place to place, is anchored
by the nightly bedtime ritual. Smith's watercolors are breezy and lighthearted; she
comically squeezes the scenes inside the family trailer into appropriately tight frames,
while rendering the dance hall and road sequences in more spacious spreads. The
warm-toned family has individual personality yet also a broad range of ethnic pos-
sibility that will allow many kids to see their own families reflected in the charac-
ters. Images from Dad's retold folktales appear in balloons, giving additional clues
to the tales' identities, and a good librarian will be able to answer listeners' requests
for the stories that Austin's daddy told him. JMD
CAREY, JANET LEE 
Wenny Has Wings. 
Atheneum, 2002 
[240p]
ISBN 0-689-84294-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
When a runaway truck hits eleven-year-old Will and his seven-year-old sister,
Wenny, they both die; Will, however, is revived at the hospital, while Wenny is
gone forever. After he wakes up, Will begins to write letters to Wenny, chronicling
his parents' agony and his own anger and bewilderment, things he's reluctant to
utter out loud ("How the air in the house feels like it weighs a thousand pounds,
how I'm mad at Mom and Dad for being so sad, how you totally screwed up my
life by dying"). Once home, he's taken with the idea of investigating an infamous
tunnel in a nearby park, thinking that because his near-death experience took him
into a tunnel, he may be able to contact Wenny there. Especially in light of Will's
survivor guilt, this is poignant subject matter, and the additional aspect of Will's
revival adds an unusual component of spiritual exploration. The family's near-
dissolution, with the surviving child virtually ignored in the face of parental grief,
is touching and credible, and there's intimacy in the square, diary-esque trim size.
This isn't quite up to the standard of recent sibling-death dramas such as Wallace-
Brodeur's Blue Eyes Better (BCCB 3/02), however: Will's near-death experience is
never really satisfactorily explored (and the notion that his return to life and Wenny's
permanent departure were individual choices is a strange but undispelled one),
sentimentality occasionally obscures the raw edges of grief, and the book's pacing
is often ponderous, slowed by repetition and by reiteration of already-clear mes-
sages. There's nonetheless some compelling drama here, and readers will be moved
by Will's struggle with survival. DS
CHENEY, LYNNE 
America: A Patriotic Primer; illus. by Robin Preiss
Glasser. 
Simon, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-689-85192-8 
$16.95 
M 
5-8 yrs
Here each letter of the alphabet represents a document, statesman, or nebulous
concept ("F is for Freedom and the Flag we fly"; "R is for the Rights we are guaran-
teed") that taps the cathartic pride and spirit usually relegated to the Fourth of
July. A marching band (nearly all white) entertains the flag-waving crowd (nearly
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 397
all white) beneath a boxed "Patriotism" P (where children sell lemonade for the
Red Cross); a bannered quote from John Adams proclaims, "Our obligations to
our country never cease but with our lives." In this vision, America the Beautiful
is a fait accompli rather than a messy, challenging work in progress, and the glori-
ous struggles-for independence, for suffrage, for racial equality-all lie in the
past. The celebration is exuberant but shallow: contemporary heroes and hero-
ines are generic or non-controversial ("elected officials," I. M. Pei, a grandfatherly
veteran-white-sharing photos with pajama'd tykes), and biographical detail is
consigned to appended notes; the alphabetic format strains to unite the disjointed
narrative. Glasser's cramped line-and-watercolor pastiches depict a nation of smiles
(from the satisfied grin of Navajo code talkers, to laughing immigrants approach-
ing Ellis Island), where "Main Street, U.S.A." is cozily lined with church, temple,
mission, and mosque, and everyone snuggles under a common blanket of prosper-
ity. Nonetheless, Cheney's expressed hope that her opus "will most often be read
and discussed by parents and children together" suggests a use that many adults
may welcome, and families whose patter is generally limited to homework assign-
ments and practice schedules could find a springboard for more substantive dia-
logue here. EB
CONNELLY, NEIL 
St. Michael's Scales. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2002 
309p
ISBN 0-439-19445-8 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 8-10
Keegan Flannery blames himself for his mother's emotional breakdown, for the
suicide of a classmate (which he witnessed but did not prevent), and most of all for
the infant death of his twin brother, Michael. Festering guilt gradually becomes
firm conviction that Michael demands atonement, and Keegan believes that tak-
ing his own life on his sixteenth birthday is the only way to set his family's world
back in balance. While carefully planning his final release, Keegan accepts a chal-
lenge to participate on his high school's wrestling team, and he welcomes the un-
relenting, pounding pain as cleansing penance for his crimes. As the punishing
sport strengthens his undersized body, he begins to connect tenuously with boys
on the team, to hope for a rapprochement with his distant, silently grieving father,
and to discover some compelling reason to ignore Michael's voice and grasp life
again. Tension steadily escalates as chapter headings mark the countdown, Michael's
voice becomes more urgent, and Keegan's plans for his demise become ever more
detailed. Connelly, however, keeps a glimmer of hope alight throughout and de-
livers a resolution that is not only welcome but credible and humane. EB
COONEY, CAROLINE B. 
Goddess of Yesterday. 
Delacorte, 2002 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90051-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72945-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 6-9
Six-year-old Anaxandra doesn't realize that Nicander, the cheerful king who car-
ries her on his shoulder to his ship, will be holding her as hostage against her
chieftain father's gold while she serves as companion to Callisto, Nicander's daugh-
ter. When Nicander's island is overrun by pirates in search of riches, all perish but
the now twelve-year-old Anaxandra, who is found by Menelaus, king of Sparta.
Aware of her precarious status, Anaxandra assumes the identity of the Princess
Callisto and journeys to Spara for a dangerous meeting with Menelaus' wife, the
legendary Helen. There's plenty of historical adventure here: Anaxandra wit-
398 
* 
THE BULLETIN
nesses the coming of Paris to Sparta, Helen's betrayal of her husband and her
people, and the opening battles of the Trojan War. Strong characterizations help
make the action plausible and the plot cohesive, with Anaxandra herself intelligent
and stubborn, only partially resigned to the fate the gods have ordained for her.
The emotional relationships that link the characters-from Helen and Paris to
Andromache and Hector-add further momentum. Fast-paced and smoothly
written, this is one book to put at the top of your summer reading list. An exten-
sive afterword provides some historical and literary context. JMD
COOPER, SUSAN 
Frog; illus. by Jane Browne. 
McElderry, 2002 
[26p]
ISBN 0-689-84302-X 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Unlike the rest of his family, Little Joe can't swim: "His brother and sister swam
like fishes. His mom swam like a powerboat. But Little Joe just didn't get it."
When a little green frog hops into the pool and causes all sorts of consternation
amongst Joe's family members ("They all splashed about like crazy people, trying
to catch Frog"), only Little Joe stays quiet, watching. After everyone leaves, a
careful Little Joe lifts a very tired, very scared Frog out of the pool, telling him,
"Go home, Frog. Go home where it's safe." Frog hops back to his pond, and
Little Joe hops into the pool, where, with strong kicks of his legs, he swims across
"just like Frog." The writing is bland and the story's message somewhat puzzling,
but the low-key suspense is effective. Though the human figures are stiff and
literal, the watercolor illustrations offer a splashy mix of blue water and white tile
set in a green grassy yard brightened throughout by sunny skies. Listeners anxious
over Frog's fate will appreciate both of Joe's unheralded accomplishments. JMD
COULOUMBIS, AUDREY 
Say Yes. 
Putnam, 2002 
200p
ISBN 0-399-23390-3 
$16.99 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Casey's life spins out of control the day her stepmother, Sylvia,
fails to come home, and Casey realizes that Sylvia, who's been Casey's only parent
since the death of her father, has taken off with her boyfriend (no fan of Casey,
who dislikes him in return). She's determined to keep Sylvia's absence a secret,
carry on daily life in their New York apartment, and retain her belief that her
stepmother will return. Fortunately, she's abetted by the superintendent's teen-
aged foster son, who at first has his own agenda (he convinces Casey to steal an old
lady's money) but who then finds a friend in her and a refuge in her apartment
from his foster father's abuse. While there's an obvious survival-story appeal to the
plot, more important is the story of family and forgiveness and the finding of both;
Casey's narration is tremulous and heartfelt yet realistically understated as she
struggles to cope both with her situation and with the tremendous betrayal of her
caretaker. There's also life and genuine originality in the rest of the cast: Paulie,
the super's foster son, who first seems to be a tough guy but then proves a genuine
ally who envies Casey the faith she retains in familial possibilities; Fran, Sylvia's
pragmatic mother, a des ex machina with Lord & Taylor shopping bags who
turns up to save Casey from the super and the law; even Sylvia herself, warm-
hearted, loving, and deeply regretful of having succumbed out of desperation to
weakness. Ultimately, there's something of Hamilton's Sweet Whispers, Brother
Rush here in the message of moving past terrible mistakes to find strength in one's
family bonds. DS
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 399
CRANDELL, RACHEL 
Hands of the Maya: Villagers at Work and Play; illus. with
photographs by Rachel Crandell. 
Holt, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6687-X 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In this photoessay examining a day in the life of a modern-day Maya village in
Belize, the succinct text introduces individuals from the village by first name and
describes the task in which each villager is engaged ("Each morning, Dominica
and the other women take the family's laundry to the creek. Dominica gives the
hammock a thorough scrub on the flat washing stone"). Each spread features a
color snapshot of the villager on the left, paired with a full-page, closeup photo of
his or her hands engaged in the mentioned task (such as weaving huipils, cooking
tor-tillas, sowing maize, playing musical instruments, etc.) on the right. There are
some evocative concrete details of daily life, and the hands focus is an intriguing
and appropriate one for a village still dependent on manual labor. The text is
superficial, however, somewhat romanticizing Maya life, and the author under-
plays the constant, backbreaking work of finding daily sustenance with few mod-
ern conveniences. The photographs are sharp and vivid, but there's a travel-brochure
air to some of the pictures of happy villagers and smiling children. The concentra-
tion on folk art-related tasks and the importance of family and community instead
of on the hardships of daily life is an understandable choice for this audience,
however, and this will be a serviceable introduction to a very old culture's contem-
porary life. A note from the author describing her experiences with the Maya
opens the book; a map and brief glossary are included. JMD
CREECH, SHARON 
Ruby Holler. Cotler/HarperCollins, 2002 
310p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027733-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-0527732-7 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 4-7
When older couple Sairy and Tiller Morey decide to leave their rural home and go
on separate vacations, they seek traveling companions in the form of thirteen-year-
old orphan twins Dallas and Florida Carter. Mr. and Mrs. Trepid, the unfit man-
agers of the Boxton Creek Home for Children, are only too glad to get Dallas and
Florida (whom they call "trouble twins") off their hands, and Mr. Trepid sees an
opportunity to get rich off the wealthy Moreys, who have piles of money (earned
from selling their folk-art woodcarvings) buried on their property. Dreamy Dallas
and feisty Florida are initially suspicious of the amiable couple's warm overtures;
eventually, though, they find themselves settling into life in Ruby Holler as they
wait for the vacations to begin, while Tiller and Sairy realize how much they've
missed having children around the place. A near-disastrous trial run for the canoe-
ing and hiking excursions briefly leaves the twins' future with the Moreys in doubt,
but a fairy-tale ending finds greedy Mr. Trepid served his just deserts and Dallas
and Florida assured of a happy home with Tiller and Sairy. There's an appealing
folkloric tinge to this novel, from the forest setting, to the characters (kind and
wise elders, orphan twins, a greedy villain) to a pair of possibly magical birds (one
gold, one silver) who reappear throughout the book. Reluctant readers may also
appreciate the very short chapters (some are no more than two pages in length) and
the easygoing dialogue. Creech spends a bit too much time describing the thoughts
and feelings of the adults, and the setup, the folksy dialogue, and the rustic atmo-
sphere occasionally seem a bit forced, but orphan and folktale fans (and adult
readers-aloud) will likely find this just as satisfying as Tiller and Sairy's "getting-
over-being-an-orphan triple-chocolate cookies." JMH
400 
* THE BULLETIN
DARLING, KATHY 
The Elephant Hospital; illus. with photographs by Tara
Darling. 
Millbrook, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-7613-1723-6 $23.90 
R Gr. 2-5
The mother-daughter team from Chameleons on Location (BCCB 5/97) and other
zoological nonfiction here combines anecdotal text and apt photographs for a visit
to a hospital that serves some of the over 4000 domesticated Asian elephants in
Thailand. Ten very brief chapters-most just a few pages, including photographs-
focus on case studies: two chapters, for example, divide the story of Songkran, a
runt (weighing only 100 pounds) whose leg was injured during birth (a series of
sharp photographs details the daunting tasks of putting a splint and, later, a cast on
the squirmy calf). After a brief introduction and four chapters on mothers and
babies, the book devotes three chapters to elephants injured during logging acci-
dents, then moves onto a discussion of the hospital and its efforts, both veterinary
and financial. The volume's usefulness as a reference work is limited by its some-
what random organization, but there's a multitude of factual pachyderm tidbits
(did you know that elephants can kick forward, backward, or sideways?), some
insight into an interesting project, and a gallery of irresistible baby elephant photo-
graphs. A brief index (and an invitation to join the "Friends of the Asian El-
ephant") is appended. FK
DE HAAN, LINDA 
King & King; written and illus. by Linda de Haan and Stern
Nijland. 
Tricycle, 2002 
32p
ISBN 1-58246-061-2 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
A long-term queen thinks it's time to abdicate in favor of her son, the crown
prince, so she's determined to marry him off ("You're getting married and that's
all there is to it!"). Though the reluctant crown prince (who's "never cared much
for princesses") eventually accedes to his mother's wishes, the parade of hopeful
princesses is disappointing until the arrival of Princess Madeleine-accompanied
by her handsome brother, Prince Lee. The two princes fall instantly into fairy-tale
love and they're married in a lovely ceremony, resulting in satisfaction for all ("The
two princes are known as King and King, the queen finally has some time for
herself, and everyone lives happily ever after"). While this Dutch import is pointed,
it's nonetheless high-spirited and light-hearted, with entertaining folkloric details
and a satisfying structure. Nijland's mixed-media art combines painterly brush
strokes, texture-heavy collage, and a multitude of figures in quivery childish line;
the result is a joyously informal pageantry, occasionally crowded but more often
enticingly packed, and eminently suitable to this fanciful kingdom where even the
rejected princesses happily attend the royal wedding. This is a sweet and festive
tale that will appeal not only to audiences with a thematic interest but also to
youngsters fond of romance and celebration. DS
DEMAREST, CHRIS L. 
Smokejumpers One to Ten; written and illus. by Chris L.
Demarest. 
McElderry, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84120-5 
$17.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Counting up to ten and down again in rhyme, Demarest traces the activities of
parachuting firefighters from the moment One bolt of lightning strikes a tree,
through the fire report, the muster and drop of personnel and cargo, fire control,
and the jumpers' return to base with Zero new fires spotted. Gaudy full-page and
double-spread paintings are stilted and ungainly, but they do impart the momen-
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 401
tum of urgent but orderly activity, and a pair of line-captioned drawings detail the
smokejumpers' parachuting and ground regalia. The counting format, however,
is often forced: one would hope that an emergency dispatcher would pick up the
phone on fewer than Three rings, and enumerating Five prop blades on the air-
plane adds no pertinent information. Even more problematic is the lack of expla-
nation for the smokejumpers' ground activities: although it should be obvious to
most adults that they are clearing a fire break, the strategy is never clarified within
the text. A cloud of lurid pink "slurry," dropped from another low-flying aircraft,
is also undefined. 
A dense, three-page author's note has the real scoop, but the
presentation will soar over the heads of children drawn to a counting book; parents
had better read the afterward first and brace themselves for a slew of questions. EB
FIERSTEIN, HARVEY 
The Sissy Duckling; illus. by Henry Cole. 
Simon, 2002 
4 0p
ISBN 0-689-83566-3 
$16.00 
M 
6-9 yrs
Elmer the duckling doesn't enjoy the same pleasures as the other boy ducklings:
"They boxed while Elmer baked. When they built forts, Elmer made sand castles.
They had a football game, and Elmer put on a puppet show." This doesn't much
trouble the happy-go-lucky Elmer, but stern Papa Duck insists that Elmer try to
be more like the other boys-with disastrous results. Papa changes his tune, how-
ever, when he's injured by a hunter's bullet and survives the winter only because of
Elmer's tender care. The text (based on an animated special) is undoubtedly well
meant, but it's laden with problems that make it unsuccessful as literature and
unlikely to help the kids it's apparently trying to assist. As with many thematically
pioneering titles, this is grimly didactic and old-fashioned in every other way, with
contrivance abounding (Fierstein has to demonize the other ducks to make Elmer's
care of his father uniquely heroic, and every playground veteran will recognize the
unlikelihood of the bully's transformation into admiring friend); the obvious arti-
ficiality of the construct will quite likely make the story rebound against poor
Elmer and perhaps even against his classroom fellows. Cole's acrylic and colored-
pencil illustrations are a little slick, but they add a welcome dose of energy, making
Elmer a sunnily yellow cousin to Daffy with his comically dramatic expressiveness
and tufted head; unfortunately, the sly touches of campy humor (Elmer gleefully
cutting a string of pink paper ducks with hearts or pirouetting about the house in
his frilly apron as he dusts) are likelier to be appreciated by adults than young
audiences. This is a laudable effort, but a sympathetic talk with a supportive adult
is more likely to help than this strained fable. DS
FISHER, CAROLYN 
A Twisted Tale; written and illus. by Carolyn Fisher. 
Knopf,
2002 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91540-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81540-6 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
When a tornado hits Bailey Tarbell's farm ("The wind howled like a prom queen
steppin' on a cow patty"), the twister twists all the poor livestock around ("The
duck chewed its cud. The chickens wallowed in the mud"). Determined to re-
store the critters to normality, Bailey seeks help from a vet ("It's plumb peculiar!"
says the good doctor), attempts to model proper animal behavior, consults a psy-
chologist, and takes a shot at hypnosis. All of her efforts at assistance are in vain
until she realizes she needs to undo what's done with a good countertwist, and a
trip on the carnival's Twister ride proves just the medicine to right the discom-
402 
* THE BULLETIN
bobulated beasts. We've heard this story before and a bit more concisely, but
Fisher's creative rurality of phrase (and young Bailey's inventiveness in the face of
the helplessness of her parents) will definitely tickle youngsters' funnybones. The
illustrative compositions are more unfocused than gloriously chaotic, but Fisher's
deliberately flattened figures with thick edging in lively hues evince a designerly
absurdity, and the fashionably multitextured backgrounds accentuate the contrast-
ing, slightly retro palette. Between a merry mess-up, a clever young heroine, and a
ride on the Twister there's plenty of entertainment here. DS
FISHER, VALORIE 
My Big Brother; written and illus. with photographs by Valorie
Fisher. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2002 
34p
ISBN 0-689-84327-5 
$14.95 
R 
2-4yrs
The baby narrator may be extraordinarily precocious to formulate his/her thoughts
so eloquently, but the adoring observations of preschooler "big brother" are the
perfect foil to Fisher's lovingly staged photographs. "This is my big brother" ac-
companies a photo from a rug-crawler's vantage point: "big brother" is a pair of
untied sneakers and slouchy red socks housing a bandage-embellished pair of shins.
"My big brother feeds me" renders the open-mouthed brother as a background
blur, while the food-laden yellow spoon fairly springs forward in sharp relief. A
game of peekaboo is played out in life-size close-ups, and the final spread ("and he
loves me"), in which the narrator is revealed as a reflection in a toy mirror, again
cleverly employs razor-sharp foreground focus to direct viewers' attention to the
main event. Clearly the siblings' relationship is a bit idealized, and "big brother"
seems to be an ever-available, ever-patient source of entertainment. What little
kid wouldn't want a big guy like this around, though? Family sharing of this title
might even nudge siblings in an amicable direction. EB
Fox, MEM 
The Magic Hat; illus. by Tricia Tusa. 
Harcourt, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201025-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
3-6yrs
A magic hat appears ("one fine day, from out of town, and without any warning at
all") and proceeds to wreak happy havoc with the townsfolk: every time it lands
on someone's head, he or she turns into an animal. The chaos is finally curtailed
by the appearance of a wizard, who retrieves his hat and turns everyone affected
back into themselves: "The toad, the baboon, the bear, and the 'roo,/ And of
course the giraffe (Oh, what a to-do!)/ Turned back into people, dazed and con-
fused,/ Watched by a crowd that was highly amused!" Tusa's line-and-watercolor
illustrations have a homely appeal: the colors are clean, her white space is skillfully
employed, and her characters' faces and body language have a cheerful eloquence
of expression. The story itself does not have quite enough wit to distract from the
unfortunate sing-song quality of the rhyming text, nor does the pace ever achieve
any noticeable momentum, since this is essentially a catalogue of transformation.
Still, there is a chuckle or two in the nonsense magic of Fox's tale, and a skillful
reader-aloud (with, perhaps, hats?) will be able to make this come alive in story-
time. JMD
FUQUA, JONATHON SCOTT 
Darby. Candlewick, 2002 
242p
ISBN 0-7636-1417-3 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Times are hard in rural South Carolina in 1926. Darby Carmichael's father is cash
poor despite owning a dry goods store and a farm, and the mill workers and the
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 403
black tenant farmers face even greater economic hardship. Inspired by her friend
Evette's tales of a journalist aunt, eight-year-old Darby begins to learn-and to
tell-the truth about her community by writing stories for the local newspaper.
Tensions increase when Darby, already flouting convention by her friendship with
African-American Evette, writes a column expressing her growing awareness of
race-based inequalities: "It started by saying how surprised I was to hear that black
people up North lived in nice neighborhoods and that some owned things like
houses and cars. Then I told how I thought it was strange because I'd never seen
such a thing. But it was true, and it seemed funny to me that it could be that way
somewhere else but not in Marlboro County." The newspaper editor initially
rejects the article as "inflammatory" (since, as Evette says, "It's mostly a secret that
blacks can be that way"), but after a crisis of conscience, he publishes the column
and, along with Darby's family, faces down the local representative of the KKK.
While the central plot is purposive (and the focus on the transformation of white
characters entirely conventional), the novel is thick with details of everyday life
culled, according to the author, from oral history interviews. In this context, Darby's
perspective on her friends, her fears, and her enjoyments offers readers a rich and
accessible experience of a minimally reconstructed South in which young white
girls are addressed respectfully as "Miss" but African-American adults seemingly
have only first names. FK
GEORGE, JEAN CRAIGHEAD 
CliffHanger; illus. by Wendell Minor. 
HarperCollins,
2002 
3 2 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000261-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000260-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
There's a storm coming in the Tetons, and Axel, whose father runs the rock-climbing
school, is distressed to hear that his dog, Grits, is stranded on the mountain. With
his father as support, Axel sets out to rescue Grits even as the storm rages; he
climbs up a vertical face to rescue the panicky pup, hangs on as the storm passes
directly overhead, and then engages in a daring free descent after his rope has been
used to lower his canine buddy. George fills her story with kid-alluring aspects-
a lost dog, a kid at ease on the rocks, a daring rescue, a supportive but very second-
ary parent-and there's more sheer physical action here than in most entry-level
narrations. There's also some contrivance, though (it's not really clear why Axel
wasn't keeping tighter tabs on his dog, and the storm seems like externally applied
suspense), and the text falls oddly silent at the climactic free climb. Minor's fig-
ures (both human and canine) are often strained and awkward, and his textural
dabs and strokes make the rock face look strangely furry. He makes ample use of
dramatic viewpoints on Axel's climb, though, allowing the rock and the sky to
dwarf the youngster as he dangles in midair or glues himself to the mountain face.
There are a lot of adventure-loving kids too young for Hatchet or even Petersen's
White Water (BCCB 6/97); this may be just the rugged outing they've been seek-
ing. DS
GILLIES, JUDI 
The Jumbo Vegetarian Cookbook; by Judi Gillies and Jennifer
Glossop; illus. by Louise Phillips. 
Kids Can, 2002
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55074-977-3 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4 up
Offering a large compendium of vegetarian favorites for kids, this cookbook will
be useful for both vegetarians and omnivorous young cooks hoping to explore new
404 
* THE BULLETIN
culinary realms. Although plenty of standard fare that would likely be in non-
vegetarian cookbooks (salads, bean soups, etc.) is included, the tremendous variety
of recipes more than makes up for this potential duplication. Recipes range from
simple to complex both in ingredients and process (as with all cookbooks for young
people, actual preparation of the recipes may require some adult help). Each recipe
is ranked by level of difficulty (from one to three stars), and preparation times and
serving sizes are clearly marked; in addition, recipes suitable for vegans (no eggs
and no dairy) are indicated with a broccoli sprig. Although this Canadian import
displays the metric measurements first, U.S. standard measurements are provided
immediately following the metric. Safety tips are included in the introduction,
along with brief information about vegetarian nutrition, staples of the vegetarian
kitchen, cooking terms, and utensils. Although this is probably more cookbook
than all but the most enthusiastic young vegetarian cooks would need to own,
libraries will want to have a copy or two of this valuable and well-crafted resource
on their shelves; young chefs will eat it up. KM
GRIFFIN, ADELE 
Witch Twins at Camp Bliss; illus. by Jacqueline
Rogers. 
Hyperion, 2002 
[128p]
ISBN 0-7868-0763-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
In this sequel to Witch Twins, identical twins Claire and Luna Bundkin are spend-
ing the summer at Camp Bliss, to Claire's delight and Luna's regret. To help the
reluctant Luna, the girls' grandmother has provided her with some Marigold Zest,
an "adventure enhancement" that should liven up any of Luna's activities. Before
Luna can avail herself of the material's magical properties, however, the vial goes
missing, and strange things begin to happen: a disliked counselor gets a bad case of
the clumsies, a campfire singalong gets chummier, even the food gets better. This
is basically your standard camp story-quiet camper (Luna) makes good, outgoing
camper (Claire) makes friends with rival-with a little spell thrown in here and
there. Rogers' spot art perks up the chapter openings, and Griffin (author of
Amandine, BCCB 10/01) slips the magic in with handily understated sleight of
plot that never overwhelms the action. The relationship between the sisters is part
support, part affection, and part exasperation; those readers in similar throes will
settle right in to this comfy bunk. JMD
HARTMAN, BOB 
The Wolf Who Cried Boy; illus. by Tim Raglin. 
Putnam,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23578-7 
$15.99 
R 
6-9 yrs
Never satisfied with the tasty meals his mother serves up (Lamburgers, Sloppy
Does, Chocolate Moose), Little Wolf is always complaining: "Why can't we have
Boy tonight? We never have Boy anymore!" After Father Wolf assures him that he
can have Boy for dinner if he finds one, Little Wolf then pretends to have seen a
boy all ready for the oven ("Boy! Boy! I've just seen a boy in the woods! If we
hurry, we can catch him!") and rejoices when the ensuing boy hunt spoils dinner
(the Wolves break out the snack food, having a quick supper of Chipmunks and
Dip). The parents Wolf catch on to Little Wolfs deception, however, so that
when he spots a troop of Boy Scouts ("Enough to fill our freezer and Auntie's
freezer, too!") his now-truthful cries of "Boy!" are, of course, met with stony indif-
ference. This is an amusing twist, and Hartman wisely doesn't stop there. The
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 405
story is further enhanced with comic dialogue (looking at the ruined Granny Smith
Pie, Father Wolf disappointedly observes that "Granny's gone all crusty and hard")
and details (the particularly mischievous scout who marches right through the
Wolves' den under Mother and Father Wolf's oblivious noses will make viewers
howl with laughter), and the borrowed structure works to good advantage. Raglin's
line-rich art employs hatching and crosshatching so generously and evenly that
there's a suggestion of wood engraving, but there's no stiffness, just controlled and
comedic polish in the bug-eyed, early American wolves with their traditional down-
home values and long, toothy snouts. These wolves will give Aesop a run for his
money. DS
HEAP, SUE 
What Shall We Play?; written and illus. by Sue Heap. 
Candlewick,
2002 
26p
ISBN 0-7636-1685-0 
$13.99 
3-6 yrs
Lily May wants to "play fairies," but her friends Matt and Martha prefer to play
other games of pretend instead. They imagine they are different kinds of trees,
cars, cats, and even "wibbly-wobbly Jell-O," until finally Lily May gets her wish
and the three friends play her favorite game. This is unfortunately short of ten-
sion, reading more like a catalogue of activities than a rollicking playtime story,
and there's not enough payoff to compensate for the lengthy build-up to Lily
May's desired pastime. Nonetheless, Heap's simple text effectively captures the
rhythm of young children's imaginative play. Mixed-media illustrations mimic
child-created art, combining paper collage (including shiny paper for fairy wings)
with crayon scribbles. Visual compositions are active without being too busy, and
the mixed-media effects add significant interest to the simple lines and shapes that
depict button-eyed children playing dress-up. Young audiences won't mind the
slight plot, particularly if they hear this story as an opener to a program of creative
dramatics or artistic activities. KM
HOWE, NORMA 
Blue Avenger and the Theory of Everything. Marcato/Cricket,
2002 
225p
ISBN 0-8126-2654-0 
$17.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Although the jury's still out on free will vs. determinism, Blue Avenger's third
adventure (see Blue Avenger Cracks the Code, BCCB 10/00 and The Adventures of
BlueAvenger, 3/99) leads him once again down the certain, if circuitous, path to a
righteous ending. This outing presents Blue with a challenge close to home and
heart: his true love Omaha Nebraska Brown has fallen on financial hard times that
could-gasp!-force her to move away. As Fate would have it, however (unless, of
course, you believe it wouldn't), the cosmic confluence of events offers Blue an
opportunity to earn the requisite few thousand dollars, provided he can withstand
the crushing temptation to beneficently affect a broader range of the needy by
earning a million instead. Along the way he grapples with a doughnut-shop fan-
cier/media mogul, his brother Josh's quest for a class project that involves corn-
starch, a license-plate censor, and his own fully requited (but unfortunately
overchaperoned) passion for Omaha. Howe reprises her previous freewheeling
performances, slashing with dramatic diversions and asides a host of bugaboos
from corporate sponsorships, to Internet naivete, to Accelerated Reader (barely
disguised as fictional KwikyRead). A few thrusts miss their mark: one thinly
developed subplot concerning Omaha's third breast (surgically removed long ago)
406 
* 
THE BULLETIN
is suggestive of the pointless titillation Howe can generally be counted on to skewer,
and another involving a sham suicide attempt is treated with levity which some
readers may find a tad overdone. Still, Howe continues to be an ebullient cheer-
leader for the thinking teen, and kids who carom nimbly between philosophy and
farce will cheer Blue's return. EB
HUTCHINS, PAT 
We're Going on a Picnic!; written and illus. by Pat
Hutchins. 
Greenwillow, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16800-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16799-3 
$15.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
Hen, Duck, and Goose decide to go on a picnic, filling their basket with berries
(for Hen), apples (for Goose), and pears (for Duck). Spontaneous picnics can be
hard to pull off, however: there's something wrong with every site they find,
nobody wants to be stuck carrying the heavy basket, and finally they're surprised
to find that they've wandered back home and never had their picnic at all. In
typical form, Hutchins has let her audience in on another fact that's going to be a
big surprise to the avian trio: a few hungry varmints have taken a shine to the
basket en route and one by one relieved it of its goodies. This doesn't have the taut
suspense of the classic Rosie's Walk, but instead there's a gleeful collusion between
audience and book (and perhaps audience and bright-eyed mouse, squirrel, and
rabbit) as the hapless fowl remain oblivious to the depredations on their food
supply; in itself, the text is neat and festive, employing lots of enjoyable repetition.
Hutchins' style is its usual blend of simple (in the straightforward outlines of forms
and figures) and decoratively complex (in the elaborate stitchery of lines that pro-
vide textures of fur and wings, in the close-coupled rhythm of stylized fruit-laden
trees), and the contrasting but slightly muted retro palette (with strong emphasis
on green, green everywhere) keeps the design from being overwhelming. The art
doesn't overplay the humorous bits, instead trusting its viewers' ability to get the
joke; the real visual humor lies in the disorganized and heedless picnickers, wan-
dering around in circles, missing what's under their beaks, and finally setting out
once again on a picnic clearly as doomed as the first. Kids will appreciate the
picnic, the dopey birds, and the chance to be know-it-alls. DS
INGOLD, JEANETTE 
The Big Burn. Harcourt, 2002 
[30 4 p]
ISBN 0-15-216470-7 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
As cool westerly winds fan the infamous 1910 wildfires into an inferno, home-
steader Celia and her niece Lizbeth agonize over whether to abandon their claim,
Buffalo Soldier Seth comes under the influence of a felonious comrade-at-arms,
and ranger Samuel and his younger brother Jarrett struggle to hold back the blaze
with a few hand tools and fierce determination. Ingold weaves the three fictional
tales into a carefully researched account of the fire itself as it makes its murderous
path through the Northwest, particularly the Coeur d'Alene Forest. The indi-
vidual dramas are meticulously staged, and their convergence at the fire's climactic
blow up is, if a bit heroicized, nonetheless credible. The conflagration and the
often ineffectual measures to combat it are even more exciting, ultimately upstag-
ing the lead characters, and readers will arrive at the final pages with a effortlessly
acquired cache of information on how fire travels and the strategies employed to
save land and life. Notes on the 1910 fires and modern wildfire-fighting tech-
niques and a bibliography are included. EB
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 407
ISADORA, 
RACHEL 
Peekaboo Morning; written and illus. by Rachel
Isadora. 
Putnam, 2002 
[26p]
ISBN 0-399-23602-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
1-3 yrs
A happy toddler peekaboos a morning away, spying on family ("Peekaboo! I see
... my daddy"), animals ("I see ... a bunny"), a toy ("I see ... my train") and
finally the viewer ("I see .. you!"). The text is inarguably listlike, failing to evince
the imagination of Ormerod's Peek-a-Boo (BCCB 2/98); it's certainly a toddler-
appealing list, however, and the suspenseful "I see... " page turns will allow young
viewers to guess or, more likely, provide their own alternative answer. While the
figures and expressions are sometimes stiffly drafted, there's evident warmth in the
extended African-American family, pleasure in the bucolic setting, and useful am-
biguity about the gender of the bouncy overalled toddler who could easily be boy
or girl. The pastels on dark paper are thick with textures, and there are some
entertaining viewpoints and perspectives (toddler peeking out from behind Daddy's
legs, Grandpa hiding behind a newspaper) that add extra spice to the peekaboo
game. Though it's on the earthbound side, there's enough sturdy connection with
genuine toddler experience that this could make for a satisfyingly playful lapsit.
DS
JOHNSON, PAUL BRETT, ad. Jack Outwits the Giants; ad. and illus. by Paul Brett
Johnson. 
McElderry, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83902-2 
$16.00 
R 7-10 yrs
Jack, that Everyboy adventurer, is caught in a storm and has the misfortune to end
up sheltering in the home of a two-headed giant and his wife. Sure as folktales
have villains, Jack's hosts plan on eating him for breakfast unless Jack can convince
them not to cook him. With sharp thinking, Jack wins his freedom by convincing
the couple that he can squeeze milk from rocks, divert a stream from its bed, and
even save his inhospitable hosts from the threat of the local sheriff. Johnson (re-
teller of Fearless Jack, BCCB 9/01) is a deft storyteller: his plotting is smooth, and
his text is peppered with likely turns of phrase that fall trippingly from the readal-
oud tongue. The acrylic paintings are not quite as skilled, however, lacking the
personality of the tale; the drafting is sometimes awkward and the figures are in-
consistently sized. The emphatic color contrasts (there's a particular reliance on
orange) are nonetheless galvanizing, and the giants are divertingly gruesome. The
strength of the text is enough to carry the day, and adults will carry this right into
the classroom for reading aloud and storytelling. An author's note gives some
cultural background on the Jack Tales, but no specific source citation is included.
JMD
LALLEY, PATRICK 9.11.01: Terrorists Attack the U.S. 
Raintree Steck-Vaughn,
2002 
48p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7398-6021-6 
$21.98 
R Gr. 3-6
WHEELER, JILL C. 
September 11, 2001: The Day That ChangedAmerica ABDO,
2002 
64 p 
illus. with photographs 
(War on Terrorism)
ISBN 1-57765-656-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
With questions still unanswered and issues yet unresolved, these two titles revisit
the attacks and try to offer the most accurate background that current intelligence
408 
* THE BULLETIN
and speculation allow. 9.11.01 attempts more comprehensive coverage, present-
ing a briefer description of the four hijacked flights but lengthier exploration of the
probable roles of Osama bin Laden and Muslim extremists in the attacks. Septem-
ber 11 leaves much of the contextual detail to other volumes within its War on
Terrorism series and concentrates instead on a narrower account of the day's roil-
ing cascade of events. Wheeler's effort, with its opening double spreads of fleeing
survivors and smoking rubble and its gallery of emotionally charged close-ups,
claims stronger visual appeal. Lalley's readers, on the other hand, are likelier to
come away with a better understanding of how ongoing Afghan politics figures
into the picture and how the domestic aftermath of the attacks includes not only
heroic clean-up efforts, but also the questionable curtailment of certain civil rights.
Each volume could use a bit of editorial polish-Wheeler talks about offices at the
"sight of impact" and passes on a few questionable tidbits as facts (never clearly
supporting her claim for a casualty figure exceeding 5,000, for instance); Lalley's
glossary suggests a mispronunciation for "ref-yuh-GEE" and completely omits all
Arabic terms included within the text. Still, both titles can justly claim their place
on the shelves as readers observe the first anniversary of our national tragedy. Each
title includes an index and a glossary; Lalley also appends a list of countries that
lost citizens in the attacks and a bibliography of further references, and Wheeler
includes a timeline. EB
LEWIS, J. PATRICK 
A World of Wonders: Geographic Travels in Verse and Rhyme;
illus. by Alison Jay. 
Dial, 2002 
34p
ISBN 0-8037-2579-5 
$16.99 
Ad 
8-10 yrs
This tour of geographical sites and concepts takes readers around the world in
poetry, with poems covering a variety of globally scattered topics, from famous
explorers (Columbus, Magellan) to geographic names (Sandwich Islands, the Red
Sea) to geological features (faults, caves). A few of the poems also teach concepts,
such as "Island Hopping," which defines archipelagoes, or "How to Tell Latitude
from Longitude," which offers a simple device for remembering the difference
between these two kinds of lines: "Lines of latitude/ Have a flatitude/ Longitudi-
nal lines/ Rise like porcupines." The subject matter will attract would-be travelers
and even more teachers, and there are some entries aptly tuned to young readers.
Most poems, however, assume previous knowledge of geography, using jokes and
puns that are likely to go over the heads of young readers without adult assistance.
Lewis' language is cluttered with choppy lines ("The Arctic is water all covered
with ice. / Antarctica? Land (frozen paradise)") and forced rhyme schemes, and the
verses are unfortunately afflicted with looming scansion traps that will require
careful negotiation during readalouds. Jay uses her signature craquelure textures
and sepia-toned palette for the images of travelers and for landscapes that resemble
old maps, making them slightly surreal and deftly complementing the poetic theme.
Despite its flaws, this collection could be useful as supplemental classroom mate-
rial for units dealing with geography. KM
MACHADO, ANA MARIA Me in the Middle; tr. by David Unger; illus. by Caroline
Merola. 
Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 2002 
110p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88899-463-X 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-88899-467-2 
$6.95 
Ad Gr. 3-5
When Bel finds a photograph of her great-grandmother Bea, she's immediately
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 
409
intrigued. Her fascination becomes even more intense when she begins to hear
Bea in her thoughts, talking and offering opinions on events in Bel's life (especially
Bel's relationship with Sergio, her "crush"). The addition of a third voice-that of
Bel's own great-granddaughter from the future-compels the plucky Bel to find
her own voice and her own way in the day-to-day decisions she must make. First
published in Brazil in 1982, this is an airy and humorous story; Bel's narration has
genuine charm, and her delighted and affectionate acceptance of her great-
grandmother's presence makes it easy for readers to go along with the idea.
Machado, recent winner of the Hans Christian Andersen award, sets up her premise
quickly and easily, plunging right into the happy events of Bel's life. The contriv-
ance becomes excessive with the addition of the third voice, however, and the
conclusion (Bel, her great-grandmother, and her great-granddaughter recognize
that they are all part of the braid of past, present, and future) is too heavily purpo-
sive for the otherwise breezy story. Middle-graders will still enjoy the setup, and
Bel and her relatives are a trio worth knowing. The springy lines of Merola's ink
illustrations evince the same high spirits as the text. JMD
MATAS, CAROL 
Sparks Fly Upward. Clarion, 2002 
[192p]
ISBN 0-618-15964-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
Twelve-year-old Rebecca shares a room with four aunts (according to the helpfully
included family tree, her mother is the eldest of the thirteen children) and her
younger sister-until a fire destroys their Oxbow, Saskatchewan farmhouse and
barn, forcing the extended family to move to even more cramped quarters, joining
other first-generation immigrants in 1910 Winnipeg. Things get worse: because
her father can't find acceptable work, Rebecca and her siblings are placed in foster
care through the Hebrew Sick Benefit Society; while her younger brother and
sister are appropriately placed in the home of observant Jews, shy Rebecca goes to
live with Ukrainian Christians. There she finds a kindly mother, an anti-Semitic
father and brother, and, unexpectedly, a friend in Sophie, the daughter of the
house-a seeming good that ultimately forces Rebecca to wrestle with the compet-
ing demands of clan loyalty and intercultural friendship. Though a bit flat at
times, this is a consistently thoughtful novel, with Rebecca's dilemma realistically
remaining a problem even though almost everyone involved sees the artificiality of
the lines that are being drawn in the sand; her growing understanding of indi-
vidual moral responsibility is credibly depicted. This sophisticated exploration of
free will vs. determinism manages to rub the tarnish off the golden rule and make
it shine. FK
MCCAUGHREAN, GERALDINE 
The Kite Rider. HarperCollins, 2002 
[24 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623875-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623874-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Gou Haoyou's father has just been ordered to act as "wind tester" by the jealous
first mate of his ship, a duty as human kite rider that sends him to his death. Now
Gou Haoyou must take up the only trade available to him to support his widowed
mother-making kites. The infuriating, constant memory of his father's demise is
compounded by the family patriarch's insistence that the widow marry her husband's
murderer, and Haoyou is driven in desperation to offer his services to mysterious
410 
* THE BULLETIN
circus master, the Great Miao, as a kite rider. Haoyou masters the sky and comes
to love the nauseating yet exhilarating experience of flight. His career prospers,
but collateral dramas intensify, as Miao proves to be a rebel against the great Kublai
Khan, greedy relatives appear to cash in on his fortune, and his mother is far from
safe. McCaughrean's construction of the kite rider is (according to closing notes)
more suggested by than based on actual thirteenth-century Chinese "wind testing"
practices, and her characters miraculously arrive at their stage marks just in time to
impel the plot along. Nonetheless, the solid, old-fashioned melodrama is exquis-
itely embroidered with exotica, and Haoyou's aerial skills are positively riveting.
Adventure fans are in for a breathtaking ride. EB
MCGILL, ALICE 
Here We Go Round; illus. by Shane Evans. 
Houghton,
2002 
115p
0-618-16064-7 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Seven-year-old Roberta doesn't want to leave her mother to go "Down South" to
visit her loving grandparents on their farm in North Carolina; she's particularly
resentful that what's driving her away is her mother's pregnancy (Mama's been
confined to bed). The visit proves largely enjoyable-Roberta makes some new
friends, participates in chores on the farm, and travels into town-but she's nagged
throughout by her anxiety about the coming interloper, an anxiety reflected in her
awkward interactions with a friend's baby brother. Grandpa offers Roberta a more
positive way to think about the ways family circles grow and change, but it's a scare
at the Children's Day picnic (her friend Jimmy falls in a well) that seems finally to
do the trick. This is an affectionate historical celebration (the novel's set in 1946)
of a close African-American family and a tight southern community, and there's a
great deal of charm in its richly textured evocation of country life. Unfortunately,
there's period atmosphere rather than structure, so that Roberta's experiences sim-
ply aggregate with little emphasis or shaping, and the overlay of psychology is both
didactic and too obliquely handled for its audience (who may share Roberta's un-
answered questions about how the baby will come out of Mama). The book's
solid warmth is emphasized and extended by Evans' sharp-edged and quirky pen-
cil drawings, which invite readers to meet Roberta's friends and relations and share
their old-fashioned pleasures. Though a bit lacking in impact, this is ultimately a
wide-eyed story about a summer visit to the farm, suitable for reading aloud to
dreamy listeners and handing to youngsters who may have their own country vaca-
tions to relate. FK
McKINLEY, ROBIN 
Water: Tales of Elemental Spirits; by Robin McKinley and
Peter Dickinson. 
Putnam, 2002 
[272p]
ISBN 0-399-23796-8 
$18.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Six stories (with McKinley and Dickinson alternating authorial turns) feature vari-
ous bodies of water, the denizens that dwell within them, and the land-bound folk
who deal with both. Dickinson's tales lean toward fairy-tale anthropology while
McKinley's incline to high fantasy, but all are effectively supernatural, no matter
where they're set. In Dickinson's opening story, set in a restrained, Calvinist-like
community, Pitiable Naismith learns a secret "Mermaid's Song" passed down from
her grandmother that helps her save a stranded merchild, along with herself.
McKinley's opening tale is a romance in which a wealthy but sheltered girl, be-
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 411
trayed by her unworthy fiance, finds true love with "The Sea-King's Son." Other
tales focus on man-beast opposition (Dickinson's "Sea-Serpent" and "Kraken"),
legendary water creatures (McKinley's "Water Horse"), and water's mysterious
powers (McKinley's "A Pool in the Desert"). Despite their brevity, the entries
manage to establish mood, structure, and logic; each tale has a richly textured
sense of place, an environmental backdrop against which characters play out their
destinies. The stories rise and fall like waves, first high fantasy, then earthy con-
flict, but they're always intriguing and ultimately satisfying. The cover, which fea-
tures an unearthly finned creature holding a ball of air, will draw readers into the
collection; once there, they will be immersed in the magic. JMD
MCNAMEE, GRAHAM 
Sparks. 
Lamb/Random House, 2002 
[144p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90054-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72977-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
"Grow a brain. Fast. That's my Mission Impossible," says Todd, who's valiantly
struggling with the regular fifth grade ("the big leagues") after being in Special
Needs class the previous year. There he was the smart kid, basking in the admira-
tion of his friend Eva, but now he's the class dummy ("There's a big fat D- beside
my name at the top, like that's going to be my grade forever so they might as well
just add it onto my name"), subject to ridicule, feeling like a failure, and avoiding
Eva because of her membership in the stigmatized special class. Todd's narrative is
sturdy and surprisingly humorous, but it's also raw and anguished. McNamee
deftly makes it clear just how genuinely difficult the work is for Todd while still
keeping him an everyday kind of kid, an "us" rather than a "them." Characteriza-
tion is economical but effective, especially in the high-spirited and authoritative
Eva and Todd's thoughtful teacher, Mr. Blaylock; human dynamics are also per-
ceptively conveyed, particularly in the difficulties and rewards of Todd's friend-
ship with Eva. There's perhaps a bit more optimism than is warranted at the end
(Todd's imagination and empathy results in a B+ on an important assignment, but
it's not the kind of assignment with which he can count on saving himself every
semester), but Todd's misery has been so palpable that readers will rejoice that he's
found success. DS
MCPHAIL, DAVID 
Piggy's Pancake Parlor; written and illus. by David
McPhail. 
Dutton, 2002 
48p
ISBN 0-525-45930-8 
$15.99 
R Gr. 2-3
Eight short chapters tell the story of Piggy, "the runt of a large litter of pigs," taken
in by Mr. and Mrs. Farmer Todd because "he was weak and underfed"; there
Piggy learns from Mrs. Farmer Todd how to make fabulous pancakes with a spe-
cial secret ingredient. When Piggy catches a starving fox stealing eggs (Fox is also
the runt of his litter), Piggy invites him home for a good meal, and a true friend-
ship is born. The two critters set up a pancake house in town, business booms, and
things happen: they feed a busload of stranded school kids, dissuade a constantly
grumbling customer from future grumblings with a display of melodramatic re-
pentance, and fend off an attempt to buy the secret pancake ingredient. Finally,
Piggy teaches Fox how to make the pancakes, with a little dash of nutmeg and the
secret ingredient-"a little bit of love." Kid-pleasing elements abound here: food,
electric trains, food, juggling, food, and friendship carry the day, and aside from
412 
* THE BULLETIN
the sentimental and obvious ending, the tale of the pancake-making Piggy works
well. Visually, each page benefits from McPhail's keen drafting and lively sense of
line. The line-and-watercolor illustrations are precise and delicate in their details
and cozily modulated in their hues, and both humans and animals seem right at
home in McPhail's clean, shiny, and retro restaurant. Hungry early readers will be
glad to pull up a chair to Piggy and Fox's counter. JMD
MURPHY, BARBARA BEASLEY 
Miguel Lost & Found in the Palace; illus. by George
Ancona. 
Museum of New Mexico Press, 2002 
[136p] 
(Museo Kids)
Paper on board ed. ISBN 0-89013-394-8 
$24.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-89013-395-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Six years old when he and his parents cross the Rio Grande from Mexico, Miguel
Rivera is now a third-grader living with his family in El Paso, where his family
works long hours and fears the INS and Miguel deals with racist class bully Joey
Jeter Cortes, the son of an American border guard. Fear of deportation drives
Miguel's mother to pack up Miguel and his siblings (an adopted sister, and twins
born in the United States) and follow her husband to Santa Fe, where he has gone
to pursue a new job. Once in Santa Fe, however, the family is unable to find Mr.
Rivera, and Miguel's mother shoulders the responsibility of caring for her children
and earning a living alone. Miguel misses his father desperately, battles the bullies
in his class (including Joey Jeter, who has moved to Santa Fe), and meets Isabel, a
Mexican-American teenager who introduces him to the Palace of the Governors
and to the contributions Mexicans have made to New Mexican and American
culture. There are some good messages here: illegal immigrants are often moti-
vated by desperate desire for a better life, strong family ties are beneficial, and
immigrants legal and otherwise contribute to the cultural fabric of the United
States. The family's struggle in El Paso is depicted with a quiet dignity; Miguel's
relationship with his parents and sisters is treated with respect, and the disappear-
ance of Miguel's father is heartbreakingly limned. The messages are unsubtle and
contrived, however, especially in the Santa Fe portion of the text: Miguel discov-
ers pride in his heritage in the Palace of Governors, his father is miraculously
returned to his family, and Joey Jeter's point of view is changed by a school play
about bullying. 
For less didactic insight into the politics and plight of illegal
immigrants, see Buss' Journey of the Sparrow (BCCB 1/92) or Jiminez' The Cir-
cuit, but those readers able to leap from moment to moment may find themselves
involved in Miguel's life. Ancona's wiry sketches display a high energy and inten-
sity that adds impact to the narrative. JMD
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Handbook for Boys: A Novel; illus. by Matthew
Bandsuch. 
Amistad/HarperCollins, 2002 
179p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029147-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029146-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Sixteen-year-old Jimmy is given a choice by the judge: go to juvenile hall or spend
six months in a mentoring program. Opting for the second, he finds himself
working alongside another juvenile offender, Kevin, in the Harlem barbershop of
Mr. Duke Wilson, listening to the wisdom of Duke and his cronies as various
customers and neighborhood folk pass under their scrutiny. Jimmy is resistant,
disliking the men's persistent lectures ("They didn't understand what being young
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 413
was all about. Maybe they knew once, but they had definitely forgotten some-
where along the way"), but he sticks it out. Eventually he begins to appreciate
Duke's efforts ("I saw he was just trying to be in my corner and helping me to get
my stuff correct. You don't goof on somebody like that"), even as he realizes that
taking the path of adulthood and responsibility isn't easy. This is a fairly preachy
narrative, with page after page repeatedly making the point that people-even
young people-must be active participants in their own destiny or have no one to
blame but themselves; between the reliance on speeches and the barbershop set-
ting, the proceedings are somewhat static, and the book's end is equivocal. Myers'
comfortable style makes the lessons go down easily, however, and the message is
one that young people may be better able to consider from a favorite author than
from a garden-variety parent. The casual camaraderie of the barbershop, where
philosophy comes as naturally as a short back and sides, is warmly conveyed, and
the diverse array of characters livens up the environment as well as providing teach-
able moments for Duke. It's probably too much to hope for that Jimmy's example
of listening to the wisdom of his elders will suffice to convince readers to do the
same, but Myers has the ear of a lot of teenagers; maybe they'll at least listen to
him. Bandsuch's orderly, lightly sketched line drawings enhance the book's acces-
sibility. DS
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
Daughter of Venice. 
Lamb/Random House, 2002 
274p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90036-8 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32780-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Teenage Donata, the daughter of a noble in seventeenth-century Venice, wants
more than an arranged marriage or a sheltered convent life, so she dresses as a boy
to roam the alleys and canals in search of adventures she can use as fodder for
stories to tell her dutiful but bored sisters. An unlikely turn of events finds Donata
and her twin sister Laura taking lessons with their brothers; after proving to be a
gifted scholar, Donata denounces herself to Venice's ruling court, gets out of her
planned marriage (twin sister Laura is to become the willing bride), and acquires
her father's permission to study at the university and become a tutor. Venice is a
romantic setting for historical drama, and this has both intriguing historical tidbits
and a sympathetic heroine in Donata. Unfortunately, the historical facts aren't
blended well into the story, and good intentions tend to run roughshod over his-
torical fidelity in both Donata's behavior and in the male characters' response to
her; nor does the stately pace help pull things together. Still, those readers with a
taste for costume drama and tradition-bucking heroines may find their hunger
appeased here. An appended author's note discusses the first Venetian woman
scholar ever to be awarded a doctoral degree from the University of Padua. JMD
O'CONNOR, JANE 
The Emperor's Silent Army: Terracotta Warriors of Ancient
China. Viking, 2002 
48p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-670-03512-2 
$17.99 
R Gr. 3-7
In 1974, two farmers in China's Lintong County made a sensational historical
find when their digging turned up the head of a "pottery man"; subsequent ar-
chaeological exploration, still continuing, has revealed an elaborate army of over
7,500 terracotta men, installed in pits by the first emperor of China over two
millennia ago. This is the kind of discovery of which budding (and other) archae-
ologists dream, and the still, watchful visages of the unearthed soldiers (there are
414 
* THE BULLETIN
some judiciously chosen close-up portraits) add a slightly creepy and fantastical
touch that spices up the account. O'Connor capably touches on early Chinese
history, describing the reign and beliefs of Emperor Qin Shihuang that may have
prompted his creation of this army, but she never allows the Emperor to over-
shadow his surprise legacy. Discussion of the terracotta army itself includes analy-
sis of its making ("Hundreds of craftsmen from all over the empire spent more
than ten years in workshops set up near the pits creating the warriors") and the
theories about its arrangement ("Archeologists think that Pit 3 represents army
headquarters"), as well as dashes of military history ("By the time of the first em-
peror, soldiers on horseback were replacing war chariots"). Diagrams and com-
puter-assisted images help convey the configuration and original appearance of the
underground warriors, since excavation unfortunately tends to result in the re-
moval of their paint. The gloss of mystery is finish enough, however ("What is the
terracotta army guarding so steadfastly? ... The answer is that nobody knows"),
and this will catch the imagination of a wide range of readers. The appended
author's note describes the contradictions and uncertainties in the historical record;
a bibliography and index are included. DS
O'HALLORAN, BARBARA COLLOPY 
Creature Comforts: People and Their Security
Objects; illus. with photographs by Betty Udesen. 
Houghton, 2002 
64p
ISBN 0-618-11864-0 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 4 up
The bonds that are forged between people and their childhood security objects are
often emotional and enduring, as this unique photoessay clearly demonstrates.
Each spread features a large black-and-white photograph of a person with his or
her comfort object along with the object's name and the name and age of its owner.
Also included is anecdotal information (often humorous or poignant) about the
object from the owner's perspective: "I like the fuzzy threads to snuggle with, and
the stringy ones are good for chewing," says one girl of her blanket. Udesen's
highly expressive photographs are richly varied in terms of lighting, contrast, and
composition (one full-page close-up shows two little hands rubbing a comforter;
another is shot at floor level as an adult subject and his teddy bear stand on their
heads). There's a pleasantly diverse range of subjects, too, in terms of age (eigh-
teen months to fifty years old), gender (men as well as young girls are shown with
dolls and stuffed animals), and situation (an adopted child, a seriously ill child, a
college student, a journalist). Though this may draw adults more readily than chil-
dren, readers with strong attachments to their own comfort objects will likely find
these personal images and stories both reassuring (maybe they don'thave to give up
their "blankies" after all) and entertaining. This unusual title could serve as a
springboard for similar projects in classrooms or for parent-child reminiscing; it
would also be a natural partner to Margery Williams' The Velveteen Rabbit or
Kevin Henkes' Owen (BCCB 10/93). JMH
PALATINI, MARGIE 
Earthquack!; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Simon, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84280-5 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
In this hyperactive take on Henny Penny's falling sky, little Chucky Ducky has
just finished his morning laps when "he heard the ground grumble. He felt the
ground rumble. And then, with a stumble, Chucky Ducky went down in a tumble!"
The little duck thinks it's an earthquake and rushes off to warn his friends, spread-
ing the alarm from Lucy Goosey to Vickie, Rickie, and Nickie Chickie, from
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 415
Brewster Rooster to Sue Ewe. The commotion attracts a hungry weasel who dis-
guises himself in his white winter coat as "Herman Ermine" and promises the
frightened farm animals safety, all the while plotting to fill his pantry, but a rumble
at the right moment causes "Herman Ermine" to stumble out of his winter coat,
exposing him for the weasel he is. The cause of the earthly disturbances proves to
be the ground-breaking ofJoel and Lowell Mole, who are looking for their cousin,
Garret Ferret ("Does anyone know the way to San Jose? We think we took a
wrong turn at the Lincoln Tunnel"). The repartee of Palatini's text sometimes tips
into excess, but it's still funny and exuberant. Moser's watercolor-and-graphite
personifications of the dizzy farmyard denizens are a little lighter than his usual
fare, with a broad comic touch to the animals' expressions, but they retain his
signature power. The full-page compositions playfully juxtapose light, dark, and
shadow, and the images have a sinewy energy that helps propel the text. In the
hands of the right storyteller or reader-aloud, this will make for one rumbling,
tumbling storytime. JMD
PARTRIDGE, ELIZABETH 
This Land Was Made for You andMe: The Life &c Songs of
Woody Guthrie. Viking, 2002 
218p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-670-03535-1 
$21.99 
R* 
Gr. 7 up
See this month's Big Picture, p. 393, for review.
PINKWATER, DANIEL 
Fat Camp Commandos Go West; illus. by Andy
Rash. 
Scholastic, 2002 
89p
ISBN 0-439-29772-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Brother and sister Ralph and Sylvia Nebula and their best friend, Mavis Goldfarb,
are facing another summer without their parents: Ralph and Sylvia will be attend-
ing Deepdip Cha Cha's Fun Ashram for Kids, and Mavis is residing at a dude
ranch called Rough-Ridin' Rudy's Rootin'-Tootin' Rancho. Ralph and Sylvia are
unpleasantly surprised to discover that their parents, whom they thought had got-
ten the message last summer (see Fat Camp Commandos, BCCB 6/01), have actu-
ally sent them not to meditation camp but to yet another fat farm, so it's Mavis to
the rescue. Soon the plump but perky trio are attempting to unite rival groups of
dude-ranch cowboys and health-farm joggers with the promise of a visit from in-
terplanetary aliens. The aliens-Fat Men from Space, who else?-do arrive, a
blissful musical time is had by all, and Mavis even gets to go on a little interplan-
etary sightseeing junket. This does not have nearly the bite of the trio's first out-
ing: the skewering of the health industry and the media fascination with body
image is disappointingly absent, replaced by a rather lightweight plot and low-cal
humor. Still, Pinkwater does know how to move a plot along, and readers who
drop in for a quick bite won't be sorry, even if they're hungry again an hour later.
The multifont format and the solid black-and-white illustrations (featuring con-
tentedly globose characters) will invite literary nibblers. JMD
POWELL, RANDY 
Three Clams and an Oyster. 
Farrar, 2002 
21 6p
ISBN 0-374-37526-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
The title refers to a four-man flag football team-McCallister, Beaterson, Deshutsis,
and Savage-now in their junior year in high school. Flint McCallister, captain of
the team, is wrestling with a dilemma: Cade Savage has devoted himself to party-
ing after the tragic death of one of their friends, and he is now a serious detriment
416 
* THE BULLETIN
to the team. Should Flint let him go, and, if so, whom to replace him with? The
action takes place over a weekend, spent mostly in Beaterson's car, as the team-
mates (sans Cade) debate the issue. Two possible replacements don't pan out; the
remaining possibility, Summerfield, is not only a girl, she's a girl who doesn't
shave her legs, a detail that seems insurmountable to Beaterson and Deshutsis,
despite the fact that she's the best choice. This is a perceptive picture of guyhood,
with authentic banter, hanging out, and even angst, and teens will relate to the
exploration of the ethics of friendship. This isn't up to some of Powell's previous
novels (such as Tribute to Another DeadRock Star, BCCB 4/99), however: the plot
meanders and the pace is slow, and despite McCallister's constant agonizing, his
sudden dumping of Savage is unforeshadowed and abrupt. Nonetheless, readers
may enjoy the male camaraderie and consider the underlying moral questions.
JMD
RALLSON, JANETTE 
Playing the Field. Walker, 2002 
172p
ISBN 0-8027-8804-1 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
McKay has just been handed an ultimatum-the algebra grade goes up or baseball
is out. A term's worth of inattention has rendered equations inscrutable ("Not
only had x shown up again for today's assignment, but he'd brought y along with
him too. They were both in disguise, and I was supposed to figure out which
numbers they really were"), and McKay's friend Tony recommends that McKay
sweettalk the lovely Serena Kimball into tutoring him. If Tony just happens to
catch the eye of one of Serena's girlfriends, so much the better. It doesn't take long
before they're both swept into the vortex of eighth-grade romantic intrigue, risk-
ing lunchroom embarrassment, carelessly wounding hearts, and passing enough
notes to deforest some significant acreage. McKay's travails are all the more con-
vincing for his background struggles-a campaign for a bedroom apart from his
kindergarten brother and anxiety over the household income. Rallison treats the
guys' fumbling dating debuts with humor and a good measure of compassion,
playing Tony's cockiness and maddening success against McKay's utter perplex-
ity, and leaving their friendship mercifully intact. Serena proves to be a good tutor
and an even better friend, the baseball season is saved, and McKay's mystifying
variables-mathematical and romantic-begin to make sense. EB
ROBERTS, KATHERINE 
CrystalMask. Chicken House, 2002 
270p
ISBN 0-439-33864-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Song Quest. Chicken House, 2002 
272p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-439-33892-1 
$4.99 
R Gr. 5-8
In a land populated by humans and Half-Creatures (mer-beings, centaurs, etc.),
the Singers live on an island of amplifying blue stone and maintain order through
special songs that psychically effect behavior; one of their sacred duties is to keep
the Half-Creatures from being abused by decadent or stupid humans. In Song
Quest (first published in Britain in 1999), the merlees (merpeople) are being slaugh-
tered by Frazhin, a Khizpriest determined to use the destructive powers of black
Khiz crystal to kill his lord, defeat the Singers, and rule the world. Only Rialle and
Kherron, two young Singers from the enclave of the Echorium, stand between the
Khizpriest and the end of the world's balance. In Crystal Mask, Renn, the son of
Rialle, and the centaur-raised Shaiala are unwillingly drawn into the machinations
of Frazhin, who has regained his power in the intervening twenty years and has
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 417
returned to achieve his goal of domination of the Echorium. The slightly balky
beginning of Song Quest is quickly overcome by the increasing action; CrystalMask
avoids that mistake with a Spielberg-like opening sequence that will draw in read-
ers. Characterizations are sharply drawn (though the language patterns of Shaiala
and the Half-Creatures are awkward), and the children remain the focus, with the
grownups figuring in but never dominating the action. Young readers will also
warm to the concrete nature of the protagonists' quests to save family and friends,
and Roberts (author of Spellfall, BCCB 2/02) offers plenty of grand sweep in the
traditional heroic-journey plots. Combine a quick booktalk with a flash of this
sharp cover art, and you have a new fantasy series to put right up front. Each book
includes a map. JMD
RODDA, EMILY 
Rowan and the Zebak. 
Greenwillow, 2002 
198p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029779-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029778-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
In this fourth and final installment in the Rowan of Rin series (Rowan and the
Keeper ofthe Crystal, BCCB 4/02, etc.), Rowan resolves to rescue his younger sister
Annad after she is kidnapped by Rin's sworn enemies, the Zebak. His quest re-
quires a fellowship of four unlikely companions: Rowan, the uneasy hero; Zeel, a
Zebak adopted by the Travelers, allies of Rin; Allun, part Rin, part Traveler; and
Perlain, a marine-being who cannot live without water. Sheba, the wise but de-
spised witch of Rin, leads the journey, appearing to the four misfits in the flames of
the twigs Rowan burns on their way. On their travels, the companions encounter
a multitude of perils, overcoming them with the aid of their special talents-but
will they be able to rout the Zebak and rescue Annad? The happy ending is fore-
shadowed from the beginning, and the plot pieces fall into place a tad too smoothly
(the vengeful dragon chasing the trespassing Zebak from Rin's sky is just too con-
venient), making this ultimately formulaic and predictable. Readers will still ap-
preciate the action of the chase-and-escapes, and there are not a few chills to be had
from Rodda's creepy atmospherics. JMD
SACHS, MARILYN 
The Four Ugly Cats in Apartment 3D; illus. by Rosanne
Litzinger. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2002 
72p
ISBN 0-689-84581-2 
$15.00 
R Gr. 3-5
Mr. Freeman in apartment 3D was, by and large, a "mean, unfriendly, nasty"
neighbor, but he was once kind to eleven-year-old Lily, and she was touched by his
devotion to a quartet of loud, stray cats. When he dies, no one in the building
seems willing to take in the perpetually yowling feline foursome, until Lily staunchly
undertakes the job of finding homes for them in just four days, which is all the
time the landlord will allow her before he calls the SPCA. Wisely realizing that "if
you don't have a name, it's hard to get somebody to like you," Lily names each of
the cats, including an uncompromisingly wild, one-eyed black cat ("Leonardo,
after the actor") that seems destined to remain homeless. She manages to find
places for all of the cats except Leonardo, but she eventually comes up with a
solution that satisfies her, the landlord, and Leonardo himself: the one-eyed cat
remains outdoors, showing up as he pleases and allowing Lily to feed and pet him
out on the fire escape. Despite the brevity of the book, Sachs manages unobtru-
sively to describe her characters and her setting with enough specificity to make
them credible and absorbing, and her storytelling is clear and tidy. Lily's youthful
418 
* 
THE BULLETIN
voice is natural and unaffected, and kids will sympathize with her situation while
admiring her problem-solving abilities. Sketchy, energetic pencil and charcoal
drawings of the apartment dwellers and scruffy cats are interwoven with minimal
text (in a large font) per page against a creamy background, making this a fine
choice for young chapter-book readers; animal-loving youngsters will simply purr
with pleasure. JMH
SINGER, MARILYN 
Footprints on the Roof. Poems about the Earth; illus. by Meilo
So. 
Knopf, 2002 
4 1p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91094-8 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81094-3 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Singer has examined the natural world before, but where Turtle in July (BCCB 9/
89) featured animals, this collection of nineteen poems generally focuses on inani-
mate phenomena such as geology, weather, and seasons. The free-verse lyrics are
delicately spun, offering quiet reflection on caves ("The thing about caves/ is you
go so deep/ inside the earth/ you think that you have left it"-"Caves"), the
prioritization of the prehistoric ("Dinosaurs get all the press... / But before/ way
before reptiles ruled/ other creatures were here"-"Prehistoric Praise"), and slip-
pery conditions ("Out on the street/ Dad windmilled like a slapstick dancer/ Mom
crept like a mincing crab"-"Ice"). Some of the poems offer more elegant beauty
than impact, but there's plenty of reward here for readers of evocative verse (and
for younger listeners, since many of these entries will be splendidly sonorous when
read aloud). The book's format is polished and attractive, with its narrow creamy
pages and artistic but readable font (it's a shame that flimsy paper allows for dis-
ruptive bleed-through of the images); So's ink illustrations show an astonishing
variety of textures, from precise tracery to glimmering gray washes, throughout
evincing a dash and naturalness that usefully complement the poetry. DS
SNICKET , LEMONY 
Lemony Snicket: The Unauthorized Autobiography. HarperCollins,
2002 
215p 
illus.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000720-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000719-2 
$11.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
As gimmicky as this title is, it will certainly be welcomed by at least some of the
fans of the author's Victorian spoof series, "A Series of Unfortunate Events." An
obituary for Lemony Snicket (said series' author) is the catalyst for this autobiogra-
phy, written in the vein of "the reports of my death have been greatly exagger-
ated." Bits of photographs, letters, snatches of song lyrics, and seemingly connected
but ultimately random events purport to be the life story of the elusive and verbose
Mr. Snicket. Contradictory declarations and melodramatic language present plots
and counter-plots, conspiracy theories, and secret societies in this mock chronicle
of the supposed author's supposed life. Readers will need to start with the Snicket
novels to appreciate this work, but there's plenty of satiric humor here (including
a parody book jacket for a less traumatic volume), and the cornucopia of elements
will lure Snicket fans. Unfortunately, the cohesive if repetitive plots that drive the
Baudelaire saga are missing here, and while the included bits and pieces of meta-
paraphernalia are cleverly disposed, they are ultimately just too disjointed. Those
who follow the series already know who Snicket really is; it will be a tribute to the
author if his readers are willing to follow the joke this far. JMD
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 419
STEWIG, JOHN WARREN 
MakingPlumJam; illus. by Kevin O'Malley. 
Hyperion,
2002 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-7868-0460-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
A little boy narrates the activities of a summer week spent with "the aunts," three
loving (and apparently fairly eccentric) women who live on a farm. His chores
(which he likes more than the ones at home) include gathering eggs, slopping the
pig, and watering the runner beans, but "that only takes part of the morning.
What shall we do next?" The aunts decide to make jam, since they're almost out,
but there isn't any suitable fruit available, at least not on their farm. A trip to the
plum tree on the farm down the road (which has a new "bachelor farmer") results
in a wild escape from the farmer, who feels a bit possessive of his ripening plums.
The aunts' matter-of-fact approach to plum-poaching is pretty funny, and the
deliberately understated description of the aunts' escapade will elicit amused giggles;
the pace is slow, however, and the nostalgic adult approach interferes with the
story's momentum. Though the bucolic vistas are enticing, O'Malley's figures are
surprisingly staid, and the palette is subdued where some lively color could provide
a welcome boost. Nonetheless, patient listeners will appreciate the boy's solution
to his aunts' petty larceny (he takes jars of the finished jam and leaves them on the
injured farmer's porch), and they might even be inspired to ask grownup readers
about their own summer memories. JMD
STUTSON, CAROLINE 
Night Train; illus. by Katherine Tillotson. 
Roaring Brook,
2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2662-6 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1598-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
"Thunder/ Lightning/ On the tracks. . . Here comes the train!/ Watch out.
Stand back." The diesel charges up to the station, where a boy and his dad climb
aboard and zoom through the countryside. Past grazing cattle and sheep, over
arched bridges, through sleeping towns and buzzing highways the train sweeps,
while father and son feast in the dining car, wash up in the silver sink, drink from
paper cups, and catch an uneasy catnap. Grandma waves them welcome in the
busy station, then "There it goes/ Our train moves on." Stutson's rhymed text
offers no real plot, just impressions of a nocturnal journey, never lingering long
enough to savor any single experience. Tillotson's hazy, gray-cast illustrations are
infused with nostalgic atmosphere that creates a distance between rider and viewer,
and the misproportioned livestock, fuzzy fields, and toylike buildings suggest a
model-train setup rather than a true adventure. Still, kids lucky enough to have
ridden the rails may enjoy comparing notes, and those who only catch a flash of
passing cars can ponder the wonders behind the windows. EB
TELANDER, RICK 
String Music. 
Marcato/Cricket, 2002 
138p
ISBN 0-8126-2657-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Robbie Denwood dodges the pain in his life by focusing on "string
music," that resonance between player and net when the basketball takes a perfect
plunge. There's not much harmony of any kind in Robbie's life at present, though,
as his divorced mother fights incessantly with his older sister and his basketball
420 
* THE BULLETIN
coach abusively brands the awkward boy "Dimwit," consigning him to racking
balls and partaking in the occasional scrimmage. Badly in need of a hero, Robbie
sets his sights on Jasper Jasmine, undeniably the greatest basketball player of all
time, and his life takes a fairy-tale turn when the great man himself finds Robbie-
runaway, stranded, and forlorn-after a game and reluctantly but kindly takes the
boy under his wing. Telander transparently models Jasmine on a media-idealized
Michael Jordan, from his tailored suit and gentlemanly demeanor to his devotion
to his own young son, and M. J.'s near-mythical aura transmutes a fairly ordinary
basketball dream into the sort of wishful fantasy for guys that A Little Princess has
long been to girls. The tale's patent hokeyness is mitigated by Robbie's dignified,
understated narration, in which self-pity never rears its whining head, and gangly
'tweenagers in need of some adult sympathy will readily embrace Jasmine as a
secret guardian angel. EB
WALLACE, IAN 
The True Story of Trapper Jack's Left Big Toe; written and illus. by
Ian Wallace. 
Roaring Brook, 2002 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2405-4 
$24.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1493-8 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Narrator Josh is a new kid in Dawson, Alaska, but he's already made a friend,
Gabe, who's eager to fill him in on the local legend: "The old guy living there is
Trapper Jack. He's only got nine toes. The tenth, his left big one, is inside an
empty tobacco tin behind the bar at the Sourdough Saloon.'" Josh wants to see
the evidence, but getting into the barroom is a problem. Trapper Jack himself
offers to do the honors, but just as Josh gets a chance to hold that "something
black and shriveled," a three-legged dog runs off with the goods. Half the legend
remains unproved, but Trapper demonstrates beyond doubt that he has a full
complement of toes-four on one foot and six on the other. Wallace bases his tall
tale on a Yukon barroom prank that involves tossing back a drink with the ampu-
tated toe afloat and "kissing" the toe, as it were. The note explaining this delight-
fully gruesome ritual is probably more fascinating than Wallace's concoction, which
sends the toe off to neverland and obviates any tantalizing residual truth. More-
over, the illustrations' stilted figure drawing makes the boys' changeable features
(rubber-lipped, glassy-eyed, and awash in jaundice yellow) often eerier than the
toe tale itself, though the broad Yukon vistas are satisfyingly bleak against the
textured sweeps of muted color. Tall-tale collections often beg for fresh titles,
though, and errant body parts have their literary following; kids who got a giggle
from DeFelice's Cold Feet (BCCB 11/00) could take a peek. EB
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
The Germ Busters; illus. by Jody Wheeler. 
Volo/Hyperion,
2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-0728-8 
$9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7868-1534-5 
$3.99 
M 
4-7 yrs
Singing the "clean hands" song and vigilant hand washing haven't been enough to
keep Mrs. Jenkins' class healthy; there's a bug going 'round, kids are out with
fevers, and Mrs. Jenkins suspects someone isn't practicing proper hygiene. It's
obvious to listeners that the culprits are the bulldog Frank Brothers, who proudly
claim (when out of the teacher's earshot) that they never wash up after using the
bathroom and they never use tissues ("'That's for wussies!' said the Franks"). Class-
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 421
mates construct a bogus Germostat that flashes lights and convinces the Franks
that their unwashed hands really are too gross to live with. Forget for a moment
that the clean hands song is sung to a tune all kids and many teachers are too
young to remember ("My Boyfriend's Back"), or that the words don't scan, or that
the construction and operation of the Germostat is confusing at best. Forget also
that anyone who's ever spent time in a classroom knows that airborne germs are
unavoidable, that no one can realistically hope to dodge most common conta-
gions, and that the eradication of all germs is genuinely undesirable as well as
impossible. No matter how important personal hygiene may be, it would be pretty
difficult to point a squeaky-clean finger at a particular individual responsible for a
class malady. Certainly Wells' bouncy text and the kissin'-cute cast of critters can
sell just about any message, but this unrealistic tale isn't the ideal vehicle to deliver
the goods. EB
WESTERHOUT, LYNN 
Business in Bangkok; illus. by Chum McLeod. 
Second
Story, 2002 
24p
ISBN 1-896764-48-7 
$10.95 
Ad 4-7 yrs
When his parents tell him about the big business trip, Corey is understandably put
out: "Ten days! ... She can't go to Bangkok for ten days." When his father points
out that "people do," he replies "People do, ... but not Mommy. Mommy can't
go." Corey is worried about a lot of things (who will make his lunch, tie his shoes,
fix his bear), but his father feels that things are under control: some things Dad
can do ("just like always") and others Corey can even do himself. This is a pur-
pose-built story with few frills and no surprises, but it offers a respectful and well-
paced treatment of separation anxiety, and it's nice to see Mommy and not just
Daddy getting some executive travel now and then. Appealingly off-kilter water-
color and cut-paper illustrations face each text page; a few black-and-white vi-
gnettes under the text bounce the reader from pink-cheeked Corey to his angular,
cubist father. This simple tale could provide those holding the fort back home
with a positive mantra. FK
WHEELER, JILL C. 
September 11, 2001: The Day That ChangedAmerica.
See review under Lalley, p. 407.
WOJCIECHOWSKI, 
SUSAN 
Beany Goes to Camp; illus. by Susanna
Natti. 
Candlewick, 2002 
110p
ISBN 0-7636-1615-X 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Beany (of Beany and the Dreaded Wedding, BCCB 12/00, etc.) doesn't actually
want to go to camp for a week, but once her bossy friend Carol Ann put the idea
into Beany's parents' head, Beany was pretty much doomed. Once there, she's
intimidated by Carol Ann and by the strange and somewhat rustic surroundings;
gradually, though, she makes friends with her equally uncertain cabinmate, Skye,
and finds her own camp pleasures. Wojciechowski carefully crafts her simple story,
overplaying neither Beany's discomfort nor her eventual enjoyment, and there's
reassurance both in the small but frightening obstacles survived (Beany turns up
late to the first breakfast) and in the challenges mastered (with the help of her
counselor, Beany eventually learns to dive). There are also a multitude of warm
422 
* THE BULLETIN
touches-young readers will particularly envy Beany's growing closeness with Daisy,
her counselor-and Beany's interspersed letters home are authentically plaintive
and incomprehensible. Beany is currently one of the most reliable and sympa-
thetically depicted of early grades heroines, and her fans will want to join her as she
surprises herself by not only surviving but enjoying this adventure. Natti's lavish
line drawings are, like Beany, friendly and appealing. DS
WooD, AUDREY 
When the Root Children Wake Up; illus. by Ned
Bittinger. 
Scholastic, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-590-42517-X 
$16.95 
M 
5-8 yrs
When Grandfather Winter retires to his cave, it's time for the Root Children to
awaken: "Mother Earth lights a fire in the hearth, sweeps away the cobwebs, then
throws open the shutters. Young Robin Redbreast lands at the window. 'Root
Children! Root Children!' Young Robin calls. 'Wake up! It's time for the mas-
querade!"' The children wake up, make their blossom costumes, paint bugs bright
colors, and "rush out into the world." They find "kind Aunt Spring," who tells
them, "You are so beautiful. May love and happiness follow wherever you may
bloom." Visits from "jolly Cousin Summer" and "studious Uncle Fall" follow,
until finally Mother Earth calls the children home for their "long winter's nap."
This retelling of Sybille von Olfer's 1906 story is sentimental through and through,
and there are better treatments of the cycle of the seasons than this oversweet
allegory. Oil paintings similar in style to Don Woods' in Heckedy Peg (BCCB 12/
87) appear in panels and double-page spreads decorated with the appropriate sea-
sonal flora and fauna; the drafting of the human figures that dominate the scenes is
disproportionate and the palette is often muddy. A pointedly multicultural cast of
root children frolic in a glamorized bucolic setting; there's a Caucasian predomi-
nance, however, in the seasons and Mother Earth. Song lyrics for the winter lullaby
are included. JMD
WOODS, BRENDA 
The Red Rose Box. 
Putnam, 2002 
136p
ISBN 0-399-23702-X 
$16.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Leah Jean Hopper receives the titular box for her tenth birthday; a gift from her
mother's estranged sister, Olivia, the present reconnects the sisters, resulting in a
trip for Leah, her sister, Ruthie, and her mother to visit Olivia in Los Angeles.
There Leah discovers a whole new world-accustomed to her 1950s small-town
life under Jim Crow in Sulphur, Louisiana, she's stunned by the liberty of life in
California ("All I could wonder was why any colored man or woman would ever
go back to the South, below the Mason-Dixon line, after knowing what freedom
felt like"). A second adventure, a trip to New York with Olivia and her husband
opens Leah's and Ruthie's eyes further-and means they're safe when a hurricane
hits Sulphur, killing their parents and many of their friends, and cutting them off
from their old life forever. The novel is shaped by little other than chronology,
and Leah's grief for her parents never really translates to the reader. As a slice of
history and a young girl's reaction to same, however, this is delicately and richly
drawn. There's realism in Leah's largely contented but shadowed and restricted
life in the South and in the details of the wider world she'd never imagined ("Uncle
Bill told me he knowed a colored lady lawyer once") as well as in the tensions
between them; there's also nuance and affection in characterization of major and
even minor characters, such as Olivia's smart and kind husband Bill (a Morehouse
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 423
graduate and the owner of a successful real estate business) and young Gilbert
Martinez next door (on whom Leah has a crush). This provides more insight into
the forces behind (and the state of the country before) the civil rights movement
than many novels dealing more directly with the subject, and it's also a quietly
touching story of a girl's survival in the face of family tragedy. DS
WYss, THELMA HATCH 
Ten Miles from Winnemucca. 
HarperCollins,
2002 
129p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029784-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029783-2 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-10
Martin's unhappy to be uprooted to Seattle from his home in Winnemucca when
his mother remarries, but he's even less pleased when his new stepbrother, taking
advantage of the adults' absence on their honeymoon, kicks Martin out of the
house. "Hungry, homeless, and sweating at age sixteen," Martin heads in his be-
loved Jeep for the place that used to be home but runs out of money and stops in
little Red Rock, Idaho. There he moves rapidly and surprisingly from survival
mode to genuine comfort, acquiring a job, lying his way into a place in school,
sleeping in his Jeep in a wilderness camp, and finding romance with his exotic and
charismatic new classmate Diantha Dragon. This is a difficult book to slot but an
easy one to enjoy: while thematically there's survival story, adjustment to familial
change, and a generous helping of coming into one's own, there's pleasure merely
in getting to know Martin through his rueful, deadpan narrative ("I also wondered
if lack of food was affecting my mind, or if it had worked this way before"). The
understated style is both literarily and emotionally accessible, dealing sympatheti-
cally with a boy in genuine and understandable distress ("I was feeling darn good
for Martin J. Miller, which is usually the time someone takes a potshot at me")
while inviting readers put off by more flowery prose and emotion. This is a quirky,
easygoing, and uplifting tale, likely to suit reluctant and other readers who'll ap-
preciate Martin's directness and quiet triumph. DS
YOLEN, JANE, ad. 
The Firebird; illus. by Vladimir Vagin. 
HarperCollins,
2002 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028539-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028538-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
6-9 yrs
Yolen's retelling of this Russian folktale opens promisingly: "In a certain land, in
a certain kingdom-as they say in old Russia--on the far side of a certain tangled
wood, a garden shimmered like a green jewel. The garden belonged to the wizard
Kotschei the Deathless-so called, it was said, because he could not be killed."
Within the garden is a princess and her nine handmaidens; they are surrounded by
statues of handsome princes, turned to stone in attempts to rescue the women
from the wicked wizard. Prince Ivan, lost in the woods, captures the Firebird,
which gives Ivan a magical feather in exchange for its life. When Ivan stumbles on
the wizard's garden, he engages in battle to save the princess and her maidens; after
he waves the magic feather, the Firebird appears with a golden sword, with which
Ivan kills Kotschei the Deathless and releases the captives. This retelling, based
both on the Russian folktale and Balanchine's version of the popular ballet, is
clumsily wordy, and sections of the tale are unfortunately static. Though the col-
ors have a bright joie de vivre, the visuals are problematic as well: the story of the
424 
* THE BULLETIN
folktale dominates the spreads, but a running border on the bottom of the pages
illustrates the plot of the ballet, and the result is crowded and confusing; the awk-
wardness of the human figures is particularly inappropriate for a depiction of dancers.
This title has some built-in appeal for balletomanes and folktale enthusiasts, but a
trip to the ballet will likely prove more rewarding. A note on the folktale and the
ballet is appended. JMD
YOUNG, ED, ad. 
What About Me?; ad. and illus. by Ed Young. 
Philomel,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23624-4 
$16.99 
Ad 7-10 yrs
When a boy seeks knowledge from a teacher, the Grand Master sends the boy off
to bring him a small carpet for his work. The boy travels to a carpet maker, who
demands thread; to a spinner who demands goat hair; to a goatkeeper who demands
goats; to a goat-seller who needs a goat pen; to a carpenter who wants a wife; to a
matchmaker who wants knowledge, but not badly enough. The frustrated boy
then discovers a merchant's daughter in love with the wife-seeking carpenter,
whereupon he takes the maiden to the carpenter, who gives him wood for a goat
pen. The goat seller, pleased with the pen, gives the boy the required goats, which
allows the boy to acquire goat hair for the spinner, and so on. Young's retelling of
this Sufi teaching story reads like a standard cumulative tale; in form, it is similar
to traditional tales such as the "The Old Woman and Her Pig." Unfortunately,
the retelling here is a bit choppy, lacking the humor and pointed zest of many
other Sufi tales, and the concluding morals ("Some of the most precious gifts we
receive are those we receive when we are giving" and "Often, knowledge comes to
us when we least expect it"), while not obscure, do not resonate clearly with the
plot. Still, this is an enjoyably structured tale, and the ambivalence of the morals
may provide useful grist for discussion. The collage and watercolor illustrations
fall somewhat short as well: although the characters themselves (formed from
textured paper and textiles, free-floating against speckled paper backgrounds) are
cleverly rendered, overall the images are repetitive and the compositions static. A
cultural note on the origins of the tale is included, but no specific citation is given.
JMD
YUMOTO, KAZUMI 
The Letters; tr. from the Japanese by Cathy Hirano. 
Farrar,
2002 
16 5p
ISBN 0-374-34383-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7 up
When six-year-old Chiaki's father dies, she and her mother move from the family
home in the city to an apartment in Poplar House, a small building presided over
by the initially frightening landlady, Mrs. Yanagi. Chiaki's anxiety begins to make
her ill, and her mother, unable to take more time off from her new job, leaves her
in the care of Mrs. Yanagi. The two form an unlikely friendship, based on Mrs.
Yanagi's sharing a secret with the little girl: when she, Mrs. Yanagi, dies and goes
to heaven, she will take with her letters (kept in a special drawer) from the living to
the deceased. Encouraged by Mrs. Yanagi, Chiaki begins to write to her dead
father, at first with no more than a brief line or two, but later in letters more
detailed, more urgent, filled with a child's sense of loss and her aching efforts to
understand her grief. The entire story is told in a flashback framed by the now-
grown Chiaki's disappointment with her remarried mother, disillusion with her
chosen career, and heartache over a miscarriage, the result of her first serious love
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 425
affair. Since the narrator is an adult looking back on her childhood from an adult
perspective, the overall tone is that of an adult memoir, and there's a shortage of
direct empathy with youthful experience. The scenes between the young Chiaki
and the residents and visitors of Poplar House have a lively charm, however, and
there's a touching exploration of the effects of early bereavement. Yumoto (author
of The Friends, BCCB 2/97) has written a novel that, in the right hands, may be a
catalyst for revelatory discussions of the nature of grief, loss, and regret. JMD
Elisha Cooper's Ice Cream, published by HarperCollins and reviewed in the Bulletin's
June issue, is listed as appearing in a paper edition in addition to the library edi-
tion; the second edition is in fact a hardback trade edition. The Bulletin regrets the
error.
426 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE: Cooney; George;
McCaughrean; Roberts; Rodda
African Americans-fiction: Fuqua;
McGill; Myers; Woods
Africans-fiction: Ashley
Aliens-fiction: Pinkwater
ALPHABET BOOKS: Cheney
ANIMAL STORIES: Hutchins;
Palatini
Animals: Darling
Animals-stories: Fox
Archaeology: O'Connor
Aunts-stories: Stewig
Baseball-fiction: Rallison
Basketball-fiction: Telander
BEDTIME STORIES: Brimner;
Stutson
BIOGRAPHIES: Partridge; Snicket
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Carey;
Rodda
Brothers-fiction: Connelly
Brothers-stories: Fisher, V.
Bullies-fiction: Murphy
Bullies-stories: Fierstein
Camps and camping-fiction:
Griffin; Pinkwater;
Wojciechowski
Carnivals-stories: Fisher, C.
Cats-fiction: Sachs
China: O'Connor
China-fiction: McCaughrean
COOKBOOKS: Gillies
COUNTING BOOKS: Demarest
Dancers and dancing-stories: Yolen
Dating-fiction: Rallison
Death and dying-fiction: Carey;
Connelly; Woods; Yumoto
Disasters: Lalley; Wheeler
Divorce-fiction: Telander
Dogs-stories: George
Ducks-stories: Fierstein
Elephants: Darling
Ethics and values: Myers
FABLES: Fierstein; Hartman;
Young
Families-fiction: Couloumbis;
Creech; Machado; Woods
Families-stories: Brutschy;
Westerhout
FANTASY: Griffin; McKinley;
Pinkwater; Roberts; Rodda
Farms-fiction: McGill
Farms-stories: Fisher, C.; Stewig
Fate-fiction: Howe
Father and sons-stories: Brimner;
Fierstein
Firefighters-stories: Demarest
Fires-fiction: Auch; Ingold; Matas
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Hartman; Johnson; Palatini;
Yolen; Young
Food and eating: Gillies
Food and eating-fiction: McPhail
Food and eating-stories: Hartman;
Hutchins
Football-fiction: Powell
Foxes-fiction: McPhail
Friendship-fiction: Matas;
McNamee; Powell
Friendship-stories: Heap
Frogs-stories: Cooper
Games-stories: Heap; Isadora
Gangs-fiction: Ashley
Gays and lesbians-stories: deHaan
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 
427
Gender roles-fiction: Napoli
Gender roles-stories: Fierstein
Geography: Lewis
Giants-stories: Johnson
Grandparents-fiction: McGill
Greece, ancient-fiction: Cooney
Hats-stories: Fox
Health: Wells
HISTORICAL FICTION: Auch;
Cooney; Fuqua; Ingold;
McCaughrean; McGill; Napoli;
Woods
History, Asian: O'Connor
History, U.S.: Cheney; Lalley;
Partridge; Wheeler
HUMOR: Fisher, C.; Fox;
Hartman; Howe; Hutchins;
Johnson; Machado; Palatini;
Pinkwater; Snicket; Stewig
Immigrants-fiction: Auch; Murphy
Irish Americans-fiction: Auch
Italy-fiction: Napoli
Japan-fiction: Yumoto
Jews-fiction: Matas
Kings-stories: deHaan
Kites-fiction: McCaughrean
Latinos-fiction: Machado; Murphy
Letters-fiction: Yumoto
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Griffin
Magic and magicians-stories: Fox
Make-believe-stories: Heap
Mathematics-fiction: Rallison
Maya: Crandell
Music and musicians: Partridge
Music and musicians-stories:
Brutschy
Neighbors-fiction: Sachs
Night-stories: Stutson
Orphans-fiction: Creech
Patriotism: Cheney
Pets-fiction: Sachs
Pigs-fiction: McPhail
POETRY: Lewis; Singer
Princes-stories: deHaan
Racism-fiction: Fuqua
Reading aloud: Auch; Creech;
McGill; McNamee; McPhail;
O'Halloran; Sachs; Singer
Reading, easy: McPhail; Sachs;
Wojciechowski
Reading, reluctant: Darling; Wyss
Religion-fiction: Matas
RHYMING BOOKS: Demarest;
Fox; Stutson
School-fiction: McNamee; Rallison
School-stories: Wells
Science: Singer
Seasons-stories: Wood
SHORT STORIES: McKinley
Sisters-fiction: Griffin
Social studies: Cheney; Crandell;
Lalley; Wheeler
South, the-fiction: Fuqua; Woods
SPORTS STORIES: Connelly;
Powell; Telander
Stepmothers-fiction: Couloumbis
Storytelling: Johnson; Palatini;
Yolen; Young
Storytelling-stories: Brutschy
Storytime: Brimner; Brutschy;
Cooper; Fisher, C.; Fisher, V.;
Heap; Hutchins; Palatini
Suicide-fiction: Connelly
Summer-fiction: Pinkwater;
Wojciechowski
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Machado
SURVIVAL STORIES:
Couloumbis; Ingold; Wyss
Swimming-stories: Cooper
TALL TALES: Wallace
Terrorism: Lalley; Wheeler
Toddlers-stories: Isadora
Tornadoes-stories: Fisher, C.
Toys: O'Halloran
Trains-stories: Stutson
Voyages and travel-fiction: Rodda;
Woods
Voyages and travel-poetry: Lewis
Voyages and travel-stories: Brutschy;
Stutson; Westerhout
War-fiction: Ashley
Water-fiction: McKinley
Weddings-stories: deHaan
Witches-fiction: Griffin
Wolves-stories: Brimner; Hartman
Women's studies: Napoli
World cultures: Crandell
Writers and writing-fiction: Fuqua
428 
* THE BULLETIN
THE
B UL LE T
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
AUTHOR/TITLE INDEX, VOLUME 55
SEPTEMBER, 2001-JULY/AUGUST, 2002
1621. Grace. 56.
19 Varieties of Gazelle. Nye. 376.
5,000-Year-Old Puzzle. Logan. 371.
7 x 9 = Trouble! Mills. 289.
9.11.01. Lalley. 407.
Abbott. Dracula. 354.
Abiyoyo Returns. Jacobs. 115.
Above and Beyond. Bonners. 131.
Abraham Lincoln. Cohn. 201.
Across a Dark and Wild Sea. Brown. 313.
Across the Steel River. Stenhouse. 186.
Adkins. Bridges. 308.
Adler, C. No Place Cat. 270.
Adler, D. B. Franklin, Printer. 198.
Adoff. Daring Dog and Captain Cat. 48.
Adventures of Bert. Ahlberg. 5.
Adventures of Erasmus Twiddle. Laster. 210.
Aero and Officer Mike. Russell. 73.
After Elaine. Dreyer. 319.
After the Holocaust. Greenfeld. 173.
Ahlberg. Adventures of Bert. 5.
_ .Treasure Hunt. 271.
.Woman Who Won Things. 354.
Alarc6n. Iguanas in the Snow. 92.
Ali and the Magic Stew. Oppenheim. 336.
Alien & Possum. Johnston. 176.
All Shook Up. Denenberg. 169.
All the Old Haunts. Lynch. 67.
Allen. Remember Pearl Harbor. 48.
Almond. Counting Stars. 232.
Alone across the Arctic. Flowers. 171.
Alphin. Simon Says. 355.
Amado. Great Canoe. 147.
Amandine. Griffin. 57.
Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents.
Pratchett. 217.
Amazing Thinking Machine. Haseley. 326.
America. Cheney. 396.
America. Frank. 239.
Among the Impostors. Haddix. 17.
Anansi and the Magic Stick. Kimmel. 144.
Ancient Egyptians. Baker. 129.
Andersen. Ugly Duckling. 128.
Anderson, L. Big Cheese of Third Street. 233.
Anderson, M. Handel, Who Knew What He
Liked. 164.
Angelo. Macaulay. 372.
Animagicals: Homes. Shields. 220.
Animagicals: Sports. Shields. 220.
Animals and the Ark. Kuskin. 246.
Animals in Flight. Jenkins. 143.
Animals on the Trail with Lewis and Clark.
Patent. 338.
Animals' Christmas Carol. Ward. 119.
Anne Frank House. Anne Frank in the World.
233.
Anne Frank in the World. Anne Frank House.
233.
Anthropologist. Batten. 165.
Any Small Goodness. Johnston. 21.
Aphrodite's Blessings. McLaren. 288.
Apollo. Grigoire. 325.
Appaloosa Zebra. Haas. 241.
Appelt. Bubba and Beau. 271.
. Down Cut Shin Creek. 49.
Arithme-Tickle. Lewis. 286.
Armstrong. Kindling. 355.
.Shattered. 309.
Army Ant Parade. Sayre. 255.
Arnold. More Parts. 6.
Arnosky. Field Trips. 356.
Artemis Fowl: Arctic Incident. Colfer. 358.
Arthur: The Seeing Stone. Crossley-Holland.
202.
Aruego. Weird Friends. 356.
Asare. Sosu's Call. 309.
IN
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 
429
Ascension. Dalkey. 276.
Ashes of Roses. Auch. 394.
Ashley. Little Soldier. 394.
Ashman. Can You Make a Piggy Giggle? 271.
Atkins. Becoming Little Women. 49.
Atlantic. Karas. 283.
Attenborough. Poetry by Heart. 198.
Atwater-Rhodes. Shattered Mirror. 50.
Auch. Ashes of Roses. 394.
. Princess and the Pizza. 234.
Autobiography of Meatball Finkelstein.
Venokur. 39.
Avi. Secret School. 50.
Awful Ogre's Awful Day. Prelutsky. 31.
Aylesworth. Burger and the Hot Dog. 128.
B. Franklin, Printer. Adler. 198.
Babbitt. Elsie Times Eight. 129.
Bad Boy. Myers. 29.
Bad Stuff in the News. Gellman. 279.
Badoe. Pot of Wisdom. 164.
Baker. Ancient Egyptians. 129.
Ballet Bug. McDonnell. 69.
Bancroft. Four to the Pole. 26.
Bang-Campbell. Little Rat Sets Sail. 309.
Bang. Tiger's Fall. 130.
Banks. Day for Vincent Chin and Me. 234.
Barner. Dinosaur Bones. 6.
Barnes. Jessica Haggerthwaite: Witch Dis-
patcher. 165.
Barron. Tree Girl. 51.
Bartoletti. Black Potatoes. 51.
.Christmas Promise. 93.
Basket of Bangles. Howard. 209.
Bat Loves the Night. Davies. 135.
Bateman. Merbaby. 6.
. Plump and Perky Turkey. 93.
_ Red, White, Blue, and Uncle Who? 199.
Batten. Anthropologist. 165.
Be Quiet, Marina! DeBear. 168.
Beany Goes to Camp. Wojciechowski. 421.
Beastly Arms. Jennings. 61.
Bechard. Hanging on to Max. 310.
Becoming Butterflies. Rockwell. 338.
Becoming Joe DiMaggio. Testa. 342.
Becoming Little Women. Atkins. 49.
Beguilers. Thompson. 222.
Behold...the Unicorns! Gibbons. 140.
Being Dead. Vande Velde. 39.
iB6isbol! Winter. 83.
Bell. Hansel and Gretel. 58.
Belle Teal. Martin. 213.
Beloved Dearly. Cooney. 315.
Benno's Bear. Zucker. 156.
Benny and the Binky. Lindgren. 330.
Benson. Conjure Times. 141.
Bernard Goes to School. Goodman. 15.
Best Part of Me. Ewald. 136.
Best. Shrinking Violet. 52.
Beto and the Bone Dance. Freschet. 139.
Between. Thesman. 343.
Beverly Billingsly Borrows a Book. Stadler. 296.
Bible. Easter. 199.
Bierhorst. Is My Friend at Home? 94.
Big Burn. Ingold. 406.
Big Cheese of Third Street. Anderson. 233.
Big Dig. Vanderwarker. 118.
Big Jimmy's Kum Kau Chinese Take Out.
Lewin. 177.
Big Mouth & Ugly Girl. Oates. 377.
Big, Big Wall. Howard. 209.
Bildner. Shoeless Joe & Black Betsy. 200.
Billinghurst. Growing Up Royal. 130.
Bintou's Braids. Diouf. 99.
Bippity Bop Barbershop. Tarpley. 259.
Birdbrain Amos. Delaney. 278.
Birds of Killingworth. San Souci. 340.
Birdseye. Look Out, Jack! The Giant Is Back!
52.
Birdwatchers. James. 368.
Bitter Dumplings. Lee. 329.
Black Mirror. Werlin. 81.
Black Potatoes. Bartoletti. 51.
Blackaby. Rembrandt's Hat. 310.
Blacklock. Olympia. 130.
Bledsoe. Cougar Canyon. 200.
Blister. Shreve. 115.
Block. Echo. 52.
Blue Avenger and the Theory of Everything.
Howe. 405.
Blue Eyes Better. Wallace-Brodeur. 260.
Board. Bridget and the Gray Wolves. 25.
Bodkin. Christmas Cobwebs. 94.
Body Parts in Rebellion. Soto. 384.
Bolden. Rock of Ages. 166.
.Tell All the Children Our Story. 272.
Bonners. Above and Beyond. 131.
Bonning. Fox Tale Soup. 235.
Boots for Beth. Moran. 333.
Born Blue. Nolan. 181.
Born in the Breezes. Lasky. 145.
Born Too Short. Elish. 320.
Boston Jane. Holm. 60.
Bourgeois. Oma's Quilt. 131.
Boursin. Origami Paper Airplanes. 132.
Bowen. Ralph Nader. 235.
Bowling for Beginners. Nace. 29.
Box Girl. Withrow. 156.
Boy in the Burning House. Wynne-Jones. 120.
Boy Who Drew Cats. Hodges. 282.
Bradley. Halfway to the Sky. 310.
. Pop! 7.
Branford. Little Pig Figwort Can't Get to Sleep.
311.
Brashares. Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants.
132.
Brave Harriet. Moss. 179.
430 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Brave Little Seamstress. Osborne. 337.
Breaking Point. Flinn. 363.
Breaking Through. Jiminez. 175.
Brett. Daisy Comes Home. 235.
Brewster. To Be a Princess. 133.
Bridges. Adkins. 308.
Bridget and the Gray Wolves. Lindenbaum. 25.
Briggs. Hobart. 356.
Brillhart. Molly Rides the School Bus. 311.
Brimner. Littlest Wolf. 395.
Bring on That Beat. Isadora. 175.
Brockmeier. City of Names. 312.
Bronx Masquerade. Grimes. 240.
Brooks. Dolores. 312.
Brothers Below Zero. Seidler. 255.
Brothers Grimm. Hettinga. 208.
Brothers in Valor. Tunnell. 37.
Brown. Across a Dark and Wild Sea. 313.
. Voice from the Wilderness. 94.
Bruchac, J. Navajo Long Walk. 236.
. Skeleton Man. 7.
Bruchac, M. 1621. 56.
Brutschy. Just One More Story. 395.
Bubba and Beau. Appelt. 271.
Bug Scientists. Jackson. 368.
Bugliest Bug. Shields. 294.
Build It Up and Knock It Down. Hunter. 327.
Bull's-Eye. Macy. 178.
Bunting. Gleam and Glow. 133.
.We Were There. 95.
Burg. Outside the Lines. 272.
Burger and the Hot Dog. Aylesworth. 128.
Burleigh. Pandora. 313.
Burningham. Hushabye. 95.
Burns. Mansa Musa. 134.
Bus Stop, Bus Go! Kirk. 23.
Business in Bangkok. Westerhout. 421.
Butcher, K. Gramma War. 166.
Butcher, N. Kindling. 355.
Butterfly Buddies. Cox. 167.
Buttons, Bones, and the Organ-Grinder's Mon-
key. Greene. 57.
Byars. Little Horse. 357.
Cabot. Princess in Love. 314.
. Princess in the Spotlight. 8.
Cabrera. Old Mother Hubbard. 96.
Cadnum. Forbidden Forest. 357.
Caleb's Story. MacLachlan. 68.
Calhoun. Shepherd's Gift. 96.
Calling. Clinton. 134.
Calmenson. Good for You! 97.
Cameron. Gloria Rising. 273.
Can You Make a Piggy Giggle? Ashman. 271.
Cappo. Cheating Lesson. 273.
Captain and Matey Set Sail. Laurence. 24.
Carey. Wenny Has Wings. 396.
Cart. Love & Sex. 8.
Carter. Get to Work Trucks! 314.
Carver. Nelson. 30.
Case Closed. Meltzer. 214.
Caseley. On the Town. 358.
Casey. One Day at Wood Green Animal Shel-
ter. 9.
Cat in the Manger. Foreman. 101.
Cat's Pajamas. Hurd. 19.
Catalanotto. Emily's Art. 9.
Cats of Cuckoo Square. Geras. 139.
Celebrating Ramadan. Hoyt-Goldsmith. 142.
Champion. Haskins. 366.
Chanukah Lights Everywhere. Rosen. 114.
Chapel of Thieves. Clements. 274.
Cheating Lesson. Cappo. 273.
Cheney. America. 396.
Child. What Planet Are You From, Clarice
Bean? 236.
Children of the Dragon. Garland. 102.
Chimpanzees I Love. Goodall. 204.
Christensen. Woody Guthrie. 53.
Christmas Cobwebs. Bodkin. 94.
Christmas Magic. Garland. 102.
Christmas Promise. Bartoletti. 93.
Cinderella. Roberts. 184.
Cinderella. Sanderson. 339.
Circle Opens: Cold Fire. Pierce. 377.
Circus in the Woods. Littlefield. 146.
City of Names. Brockmeier. 312.
City of the Dead. Stewart. 222.
Class Artist. Karas. 22.
Clement-Davies. Sight. 274.
Clements, A. Jacket. 237.
.Jake Drake: Know-It-All. 201.
. Things Not Seen. 358.
Clements, B. Chapel of Thieves. 274.
Clever Beatrice. Willey. 82.
Cliff Hanger. George. 403.
Clinton. Calling. 134.
Clip Clip Clip. Krull. 284.
Cock-a-Moo-Moo. Dallas-Cont6. 277.
Cod's Tale. Kurlansky. 63.
Cohn, A. Abraham Lincoln. 201.
Cohn, R. Gingerbread. 274.
Cole. Larky Mavis. 9.
Colfer. Artemis Fowl: The Arctic Incident. 358.
Colman. Where the Action Was. 275.
Color of Absence. Howe. 142.
Colt and the King. McGee. 288.
Company's Going. Yorinks. 189.
Conjure Times. Haskins. 141.
Connelly. St. Michael's Scales. 397.
Cooney, C. For All Time. 97.
.Goddess of Yesterday. 397.
Cooney, D. Beloved Dearly. 315.
Cooper, E. Dance! 10.
_ 
Ice Cream. 359.
Cooper, S. Frog. 398.
. Green Boy. 315.
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 431
Coram Boy. Gavin. 204.
Cormier. Rag and Bone Shop. 134.
Corn-Fed. Stevenson. 297.
Cougar Canyon. Bledsoe. 200.
Couloumbis. Say Yes. 398.
Coulter. Secrets in Stone. 135.
.To Be a Princess. 133.
Counting Stars. Almond. 232.
Cowboy Christmas. Wood. 120.
Cox, C. Houdini. 167.
Cox, J. Butterfly Buddies. 167.
Crandell. Hands of the Maya. 399.
Crawford. Freedom beyond the Sea. 146.
Crazy Loco. Rice. 32.
Creature Comforts. O'Halloran. 414.
Creech. Ruby Holler. 399.
Crespo. Secret Life of Food. 359.
Crocodile Listens. Sayre. 74.
Cronin. Giggle, Giggle, Quack. 360.
Cross. Phoning a Dead Man. 315.
Crossley-Holland. Arthur: The Seeing Stone.
202.
. Ugly Duckling. 128.
Crowe. Mississippi Trial, 1955. 276.
Crystal Mask. Roberts. 416.
Cullen, C. Magical, Mystical, Marvelous Coat.
10.
Cullen, L. Nelly in the Wilderness. 316.
Cummins. Tomboy of the Air. 11.
Cunningham. Stable Rat. 98.
Curlee. Seven Wonders of the Ancient World.
237.
Curley. Old Magic. 276.
Currie. Thar She Blows. 167.
Curry. Egyptian Box. 316.
Cuyler. Stop, Drop, and Roll. 98.
Daisy Comes Home. Brett. 235.
Dalkey. Ascension. 276.
Dallas-Contd. Cock-a-Moo-Moo. 277.
Daly. What's Cooking, Jamela? 168.
Dance! Cooper. 10.
Daniel Boone. Streissguth. 258.
Daniel's Walk. Spooner. 116.
Danitra Brown Leaves Town. Grimes. 280.
Darby. Fuqua. 402.
Daring Dog and Captain Cat. Adoff. 48.
Daring Escape of Ellen Craft. Moore. 250.
Darling. Elephant Hospital. 400.
Datlow. Green Man. 277.
Daughter of Madrugada. Wood. 385.
Daughter of Venice. Napoli. 413.
Daughters of Fire. Manushkin. 178.
David. Peter Claus and the Naughty List. 98.
Davies. Bat Loves the Night. 135.
.One Tiny Turtle. 99.
_ 
Wild about Dolphins. 53.
Davy Crockett Saves the World. Schanzer. 218.
Day for Vincent Chin and Me. Banks. 234.
Day. Piecing Earth & Sky Together. 317.
Days of the Ducklings. McMillan. 149.
de Haan. King & King. 400.
Deacon. Slow Loris. 317.
Dealey. Goldie Locks Has Chicken Pox. 278.
Deaver. Night I Disappeared. 318.
DeBear. Be Quiet, Marina! 168.
Delaney. Birdbrain Amos. 278.
Demarest. Smokejumpers One to Ten. 400.
Demi. Gandhi. 136.
.King Midas. 318.
Denenberg. All Shook Up. 169.
Denslow. Georgie Lee. 360.
de Paola. What a Year. 238.
Despite All Obstacles. Goodman. 172.
Dessen. This Lullaby. 319.
Dewey. Weird Friends. 356.
Dial-a-Ghost. Ibbotson. 20.
Dickinson. Ropemaker. 169.
. Water. 410.
Dinnertime! Williams. 299.
Dino Riddles. Hall. 241.
Dinomania. Manning. 331.
Dinosaur Bones. Barner. 6.
Dinosaurs After Dark. Emmett. 238.
Dinosaurs Meet Dr. Clock. Weston. 299.
Dinosaurs of Waterhouse Hawkins. Kerley. 62.
Diouf. Bintou's Braids. 99.
Dixon. Alone across the Arctic. 171.
Do Like a Duck Does! Hindley. 282.
Do the Hokey Pokey. McDonough. 27.
Dog Eared. Harvey. 207.
Doherty. Famous Adventures of Jack. 54.
Dolores. Brooks. 312.
Don't Whistle in School. Feldman. 203.
Donahue. Till Tomorrow. 100.
Donaldson. Room on the Broom. 11.
Double Luck. Lu. 66.
Down Cut Shin Creek. Appelt. 49.
Doyle. Mary Ann Alice. 361.
Dr. Franklin's Island. Halam. 325.
Dracula. Abbott. 354.
Dreyer. After Elaine. 319.
Druce. Halloween Night. 12.
Drummond. Liberty! 319.
Duck on a Bike. Shannon. 256.
Duey. Unicorn's Secret: Moonsilver. 170.
Duncan. Song of the Circus. 320.
Dupre. Raven's Gift. 12.
Dyssegaard. Benny and the Binky. 330.
Earthquack! Palatini. 414.
Earthquake. Lee. 25.
Easter. Bible. 199.
Easton. Trouble at Betts Pets. 361.
Ebb & Flo and the Baby Seal. Simmons. 257.
Echo. Block. 52.
Edge on the Sword. Tingle. 79.
Edward in the Jungle. McPhail. 289.
432 
* THE BULLETIN
Eek! Creak! Snicker, Sneak. Greene. 240.
Egyptian Box. Curry. 316.
Eisenberg. Dino Riddles. 241.
Elephant Book. Redmond. 183.
Elephant Hospital. Darling. 400.
Elish. Born Too Short. 320.
Ella Fitzgerald. Pinkney. 378.
Elliott. Under a War-Torn Sky. 170.
Elsie Times Eight. Babbitt. 129.
Emily's Art. Catalanotto. 9.
Emmett. Dinosaurs After Dark. 238.
Emperor's Silent Army. O'Connor. 413.
Empress of the World. Ryan. 34.
English. Strawberry Moon. 202.
Ericson. Harriet Spies Again. 278.
Escape from the Ice. Roop. 205.
Evangelista. In Search of the Perfect Pumpkin.
13.
Ewald. Best Part of Me. 136.
Fair Weather. Peck. 70.
Fairy Dust. Smith. 295.
Falconer. Olivia Counts. 362.
_ Olivia Saves the Circus. 100.
. Olivia's Opposites. 362.
Fama. Overboard. 362.
Famous Adventures of Jack. Doherty. 54.
Farley. King's Secret. 101.
Fat Camp Commandos Go West. Pinkwater.
415.
Fat Cat. MacDonald. 108.
Fat Chance Thanksgiving. Lakin. 64.
Fearless Jack. Johnson. 21.
Feather Boy. Singer. 295.
Feed the Children First. Lyons. 248.
Feiffer. I'm Not Bobby! 136.
Feldman. Don't Whistle in School. 203.
Ferris. Of Sound Mind. 54.
Field Trips. Arnosky. 356.
Fierstein. Sissy Duckling. 401.
Fiesta Femenina. Gerson. 103.
Finch. Playtime Rhymes for Little People. 137.
Find Where the Wind Goes. Jemison. 20.
Finding H. F. Watts. 188.
Fine. Up on Cloud Nine. 321.
Firebird. Yolen. 423.
Firestorm. Schultz. 293.
First Morning. Siegen-Smith. 116.
First Thing My Mama Told Me. Swanson. 342.
Fisher, C. Twisted Tale. 401.
Fisher, L. Gods and Goddesses of the Ancient
Norse. 362.
Fisher, V. My Big Brother. 402.
Fleischman, J. Phineas Gage. 321.
Fleischman, P. Seek. 101.
Fleming, C. Muncha! Muncha! Muncha! 239.
__ . Who Invited You? 137.
Fleming, D. Pumpkin Eye. 55.
Fleming, M. Place at the Table. 279.
Fletcher, R. Poetry Matters. 363.
Fletcher, S. Walk across the Sea. 138.
Flight of the Raven. Tolan. 153.
Flinn. Breaking Point. 363.
Flipped. Van Draanen. 187.
Flood. Heneghan. 281.
Florian. Summersaults. 322.
Flowers from Mariko. Noguchi. 181.
Flowers. Alone across the Arctic. 171.
Fly! Myers. 180.
Follow the Money. Leedy. 285.
Footprints on the Roof. Singer. 418.
For All Time. Cooney. 97.
Forbidden Forest. Cadnum. 357.
Foreman. Cat in the Manger. 101.
Forensics. Yeatts. 203.
Fossil Fish Found Alive. Walker. 298.
Four in All. Payne. 150.
Four to the Pole. Loewen. 26.
Four Ugly Cats in Apartment 3D. Sachs. 417.
Fox, C. What Shape Is That, PiggyWiggy? 364.
.What's the Opposite, PiggyWiggy? 364.
Fox, M. Magic Hat. 402.
Fox Eyes. Gerstein. 14.
Fox Tale Soup. Bonning. 235.
Frank, E. America. 239.
Frank, L. Just Ask Iris. 138.
Franny B. Kranny, There's a Bird in Your Hair!
Goldhor. 25.
Free Radical. Murphy. 375.
Freedman. In the Days of the Vaqueros. 138.
Freedom beyond the Sea. Lewin. 146.
French. Easter. 199.
Freschet. Beto and the Bone Dance. 139.
Fresh Girl. Placide. 252.
Freymann-Weyr. My Heartbeat. 322.
Frida. Winter. 225.
Friedlander. When Objects Talk. 203.
Fritz. Leonardo's Horse. 55.
Frog. Cooper. 398.
Froggy Plays in the Band. London. 287.
Frogs Wore Red Suspenders. Prelutsky. 252.
From Tadpole to Frog. Zoehfeld. 386.
Fuqua. Darby. 402.
Gandhi. Demi. 136.
Gantos. Hole in My Life. 323.
Garland, M. Christmas Magic. 102.
. President and Mom's Apple Pie. 323.
Garland, S. Children of the Dragon. 102.
In the Shadow of the Alamo. 171.
Gauchada. Lamm. 247.
Gavin. Coram Boy. 204.
Gay. Stella, Fairy of the Forest. 240.
Geisert. Nursery Crimes. 13.
Gellman. Bad Stuff in the News. 279.
George. Cliff Hanger. 403.
George Speaks. King-Smith. 369.
Georgie Lee. Denslow. 360.
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 
433
Geras. Cats of Cuckoo Square. 139.
. Troy. 14.
Germ Busters. Wells. 420.
Gerson. Fiesta Femenina. 103.
Gerstein. Fox Eyes. 14.
_ What Charlie Heard. 280.
Get to Work Trucks! Carter. 314.
Get Well Soon. Rosenfeld. 184.
Ghost at the Window. McAllister. 373.
Gibbons. Behold...the Unicorns! 140.
Giblin. Life and Death of Adolph Hitler. 364.
Giggle, Giggle, Quack. Cronin. 360.
Giles. Shattering Glass. 324.
Gillies. Jumbo Vegetarian Cookbook. 403.
Gilmore. Group of One. 14.
Gingerbread. Cohn. 274.
Girls in Love. Wilson. 224.
Giving Thanks. Waters. 56.
Glass. Mountain Men. 56.
Gleam and Glow. Bunting. 133.
Gliori. Pure Dead Magic. 204.
Gloria Rising. Cameron. 273.
Glossop. Jumbo Vegetarian Cookbook. 403.
Goble. Storm Maker's Tipi. 172.
God of Beer. Keizer. 328.
Goddess of Yesterday. Cooney. 397.
Gods and Goddesses of the Ancient Norse.
Fisher. 362.
Goin' Someplace Special. McKissack. 28.
Gold-Threaded Dress. Marsden. 373.
Goldhor. Franny B. Kranny, There's a Bird in
Your Hair! 25.
Goldie Locks Has Chicken Pox. Dealey. 278.
Good for You! Calmenson. 97.
Goodall. Chimpanzees I Love. 204.
Goodbye Mousie. Harris. 59.
Goodman, J. Bernard Goes to School. 15.
. Despite All Obstacles. 172.
.Long and Uncertain Journey. 140.
Goodman, S. Ultimate Field Trip 5. 15.
Gordon. Muhammad Ali. 324.
Gospel according to Larry. Tashjian. 187.
Grace. 1621. 56.
Graff. Long Way Home. 141.
Graham. "Let's Get a Pup!" Said Kate. 16.
Gramma War. Butcher. 166.
Grandmas Trick-or-Treat. McCully. 27.
Granstr6m. Dinomania. 331.
Graves. Taking Care of Trouble. 365.
Great Blue Yonder. Shearer. 382.
Great Canoe. Maggi. 147.
Great Good Thing. Townley. 37.
Great Ships. O'Brien. 215.
Green, J. You Wouldn't Want to Be a Polar
Explorer! 205.
Green, M. Strong Right Arm. 365.
Green Boy. Cooper. 315.
Green Man. Datlow. 277.
Greene. Buttons, Bones, and the Organ-
Grinder's Monkey. 57.
. Eek! Creak! Snicker, Sneak. 240.
Greenfeld. After the Holocaust. 173.
Grigoire. Apollo. 325.
Griffin. Amandine. 57.
.Witch Twins at Camp Bliss. 404.
Grimes. Bronx Masquerade. 240.
. Danitra Brown Leaves Town. 280.
Grimm. Hansel and Gretel. 58.
Group of One. Gilmore. 14.
Grover G. Graham and Me. Quattlebaum. 183.
Growing Up Royal. Billinghurst. 130.
Grunt. Richardson. 379.
Guest. Iris and Walter and Baby Rose. 281.
. Iris and Walter: True Friends. 16.
Guy Book. Jukes. 283.
Haas. Appaloosa Zebra. 241.
Haddix. Among the Impostors. 17.
. Takeoffs and Landings. 58.
Hague. Kate Culhane. 17.
Halam. Dr. Franklin's Island. 325.
Halfway to the Sky. Bradley. 310.
Hall. Dino Riddles. 241.
Halloween Night. Druce. 12.
Hampton. Meltdown. 173.
Handel, Who Knew What He Liked. Ander-
son. 164.
Handbook for Boys. Myers. 412.
Hands of the Maya. Crandell. 399.
Hanging on to Max. Bechard. 310.
Hanna's Christmas. Peterson. 112.
Hansel and Gretel. Grimm. 58.
Hansel and Gretel. Montresor. 28.
Hansen. One True Friend. 141.
Hantman. Heaven Sent. 241.
Harriet Spies Again. Ericson. 278.
Harris, P. Ordinary Audrey. 206.
Harris, Robert. Hippolyta and the Curse of the
Amazons. 300.
Harris, Robie. Goodbye Mousie. 59.
Harrison. Young Oxford Book of Christmas
Poems. 206.
Hartman, B. Wolf Who Cried Boy. 404.
Hartman, T. Bad Stuff in the News. 279.
Hartnett. Thursday's Child. 325.
Harvey. Dog Eared. 207.
Haseley. Amazing Thinking Machine. 326.
Haskins. Champion. 366.
.Conjure Times. 141.
Hatton. VWro and Philippe. 242.
Haunting Hour. Stine. 117.
Hayles. He Saves the Day. 242.
He Saves the Day. Hayles. 242.
Head Bone's Connected to the Neck Bone.
McClafferty. 148.
Head, Body, Legs. Paye. 338.
Heap. What Shall We Play? 405.
434 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Heaven Sent. Hantman. 241.
Helen Keller. Lawlor. 24.
Heneghan. Flood. 281.
Henkes. Owen's Marshmallow Chick. 207.
Henry Builds a Cabin. Johnson. 328.
Here Comes the Year. Spinelli. 296.
Here We Go Round. McGill. 410.
Herman. Labyrinth. 59.
Hero. Woods. 261.
Heroine of the Titanic. Landau. 64.
Hesse. Witness. 103.
Hettinga. Brothers Grimm. 208.
Heuston. Shakeress. 366.
Hiawatha and Megissogwon. Longfellow. 247.
Hidden Worlds. Kramer. 144.
Hill, D. Time Out. 104.
Hill, P. Last Grail Keeper. 208.
Hindley. Do Like a Duck Does! 282.
Hippolyta and the Curse of the Amazons,Yolen.
300.
Hirano. Letters. 424.
Hite. Hole in the World. 104.
Hoban. Jim's Lion. 174.
Hobart. Briggs. 356.
Hobble. Toot & Puddle: I'll Be Home for
Christmas. 104.
Hobbs. Tender. 60.
Hoberman. Marvelous Mouse Man. 326.
.You Read to Me, I'll Read to You. 60.
Hodges. Boy Who Drew Cats. 282.
Hoffman. Indigo. 367.
Holbrook. Wham! It's a Poetry Jam. 367.
Hole in My Life. Gantos. 323.
Hole in the World. Hite. 104.
Holm. Boston Jane. 60.
Home of the Brave. Say. 382.
Hoodwinked. Howard. 19.
Hoofbeats, Claws & Rippled Fins. Hopkins.
243.
Hooper, Maureen. Silent Night. 105.
Hooper, Meredith. Who Built the Pyramid?
174.
Hoops with Swoopes. Kuklin. 107.
Hoose. We Were There, Too! 61.
Hopkins. Hoofbeats, Claws & Rippled Fins.
243.
Hopkinson. Under the Quilt of Night. 208.
Hornik. Secret of Ms. Snickle's Class. 18.
Horowitz. Stormbreaker. 18.
Horse in the Pigpen. Williams. 346.
Houdini. Cox. 167.
House in the Mail. Wells. 223.
House of Sports. Russo. 254.
How I Became a Writer & Oggie Learned to
Drive. Lisle. 331.
How I Wonder What You Are. Lynch. 108.
How Santa Lost His Job. Krensky. 106.
How to Disappear Completely and Never Be
Found. Nickerson. 335.
Howard, A. Hoodwinked. 19.
Howard, G. Basket of Bangles. 209.
Howard, R. Big, Big Wall. 209.
Howe, J. Color of Absence. 142.
.Misfits. 174.
Howe, N. Blue Avenger and the Theory of Ev-
erything. 405.
Howland. Matzah Man. 327.
Hoyt-Goldsmith. Celebrating Ramadan. 142.
Huge Hog Is a Big Pig. Keeler. 332.
Hughes. Soldier Boys. 243.
Hungry Hen. Waring. 261.
Hunter. Build It Up and Knock It Down. 327.
Hurd. Cat's Pajamas. 19.
Hurst. In Plain Sight. 244.
. Rocks in His Head. 143.
Hush. Woodson. 262.
Hushabye. Burningham. 95.
Hutchins. We're Going on a Picnic! 406.
I Had a Rooster. Seeger. 185.
I Stink! McMullan. 374.
I'm Not Bobby! Feiffer. 136.
I, Too, Sing America. Rhynes. 253.
Ibbotson. Dial-a-Ghost. 20.
.Journey to the River Sea. 283.
Ice Cream. Cooper. 359.
Ice Cream. Older. 359.
If the Shoe Fits. Soto. 258.
Iguanas en la nieve. Alarc6n. 92.
Iguanas in the Snow. Alarc6n. 92.
lijima. Way We Do It in Japan. 244.
In My New Yellow Shirt. Spinelli. 36.
In Plain Sight. Hurst. 244.
In Search of the Perfect Pumpkin. Evangelista.
13.
In Spite of Killer Bees. Johnston. 143.
In the Company of Men. Mace. 147.
In the Days of the Vaqueros. Freedman. 138.
In the Shadow of the Alamo. Garland. 171.
Indigo. Hoffman. 367.
Ingold. Big Burn. 406.
Iris and Walter: True Friends. Guest. 16.
Iris and Walter and Baby Rose. Guest. 281.
Irving and Muktuk. Pinkwater. 113.
Is My Friend at Home? Bierhorst. 94.
Isadora. Bring on That Beat. 175.
.Peekaboo Morning. 407.
Island Boyz. Salisbury. 255.
J. K. Rowling. Meister. 214.
Jack Outwits the Giants. Johnson. 407.
Jacket. Clements. 237.
Jackie's Nine. Robinson. 72.
Jackson. Bug Scientists. 368.
Jacobs. Abiyoyo Returns. 115.
Jacobsen. Rescued Images. 210.
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 435
Jacobson. Winnie Dancing on Her Own. 105.
Jake Drake: Know-It-All. Clements. 201.
James. Birdwatchers. 368.
Jane. Monster Mischief. 20.
Janeczko. Seeing the Blue Between. 363.
Jason Rat-a-Tat. Rodowsky. 339.
Jeapes. Xenocide Mission. 369.
Jemison. Find Where the Wind Goes. 20.
Jenkins. Animals in Flight. 143.
Jenks. Flowers from Mariko. 181.
Jennings. Beastly Arms. 61.
Jessica Haggerthwaite: Witch Dispatcher.
Barnes. 165.
Jim's Lion. Hoban. 174.
Jimenez. Breaking Through. 175.
John & Abigail Adams. St. George. 153.
Johnson, A. Running Back to Ludie. 176.
Johnson, D. Henry Builds a Cabin. 328.
Johnson, P. Fearless Jack. 21.
. Jack Outwits the Giants. 407.
Johnston, J. In Spite of Killer Bees. 143.
Johnston, T. Alien & Possum. 176.
.Any Small Goodness. 21.
Journey to the River Sea. Ibbotson. 283.
Jukes. Guy Book. 283.
Jumbo Vegetarian Cookbook. Gillies. 403.
Jumping Tree. Saldafia. 34.
Junebug in Trouble. Mead. 374.
Just Ask Iris. Frank. 138.
Just One More Story. Brutschy. 395.
Kanefield. Rivka's Way. 244.
Karas. Atlantic. 283.
. Class Artist. 22.
Kate Culhane. Hague. 17.
Keeler. Huge Hog Is a Big Pig. 332.
Keizer. God of Beer. 328.
Kentley. Story of the Titanic. 245.
Kerley. Dinosaurs of Waterhouse Hawkins. 62.
Kerr. Slap Your Sides. 106.
Kimmel. Anansi and the Magic Stick. 144.
. ZigaZak! 62.
Kindling. Armstrong. 355.
King & King. de Haan. 400.
King Midas. Demi. 318.
King's Secret. Farley. 101.
King-Smith. George Speaks. 369.
. Lady Lollipop. 22.
Kirk. Bus Stop, Bus Go! 23.
Kite Rider. McCaughrean. 409.
Kittredge. Neeluk. 23.
Knockabeg. Lyons. 26.
Kochenderfer. Victory Garden. 245.
Koertge. Stoner and Spaz. 246.
Koss. Strike Two. 63.
Kramer. Hidden Worlds. 144.
Krensky. How Santa Lost His Job. 106.
Krull. Clip Clip Clip. 284.
Kuklin. Hoops with Swoopes. 107.
Kurlansky. Cod's Tale. 63.
Kurtz. Water Hole Waiting. 369.
Kuskin. Animals and the Ark. 246.
Kvasnosky. One Lucky Summer. 329.
Labyrinth. Herman. 59.
Lady Lollipop. King-Smith. 22.
Lady of Ten Thousand Names. Muten. 111.
Lake of Secrets. Littke. 286.
Lakin. Fat Chance Thanksgiving. 64.
Lalley. 9.11.01. 407.
Lamm. Gauchada. 247.
.Pirates. 177.
Land. Taylor. 78.
Land Ho! Parker. 70.
Landau. Heroine of the Titanic. 64.
.Smokejumpers. 247.
Larky Mavis. Cole. 9.
Lasky. Born in the Breezes. 145.
Last Grail Keeper. Hill. 208.
Laster. Adventures of Erasmus Twiddle. 210.
Laurence. Captain and Matey Set Sail. 24.
Lawlor. Helen Keller. 24.
.Old Crump. 284.
Lawrence, I. Lord of the Nutcracker Men. 64.
Lawrence, J. This Little Chick. 285.
Le Guin. Tom Mouse. 329.
Leaf by Leaf. Rogasky. 33.
Lee, J. Bitter Dumplings. 329.
Lee, M. Earthquake. 25.
Lee, T. Wolf Queen. 370.
.Wolf Star. 65.
Leedy. Follow the Money. 285.
Legend of Lady Ilena. Malone. 287.
Legend of Strap Buckner. Wooldridge. 188.
Leiner. Mama Does the Mambo. 145.
Lemony Snickset. Snicket. 418.
Leonardo's Horse. Fritz. 55.
Lerner. Franny B. Kranny, There's a Bird in
Your Hair! 25.
"Let's Get a Pup!" Said Kate. Graham. 16.
Let's Go Home. Rylant. 381.
Letters. Yumoto. 424.
Levine. Two Princesses of Bamarre. 65.
Levinson, M. Rufus and Magic Run Amok. 177.
Levinson, N. Magellan and the First Voyage
around the World. 211.
Levy. Splash! 370.
Lewin, T. Big Jimmy's Kum Kau Chinese Take
Out. 177.
Lewin, W. Freedom beyond the Sea. 146.
Lewis. Arithme-Tickle. 286.
.World of Wonders. 408.
Liberty! Drummond. 319.
Life and Death of Adolph Hiter. Giblin. 364.
Light. Puss in Boots. 330.
Lindenbaum. Bridget and the Gray Wolves. 25.
436 
* THE BULLETIN
Lindgren. Benny and the Binky. 330.
Lippert. Head, Body, Legs. 338.
Lisle. How I Became a Writer & Oggie Learned
to Drive. 331.
Littke. Lake of Secrets. 286.
Little Chicago. Rapp. 379.
Little Flower. Rand. 378.
Little French Whistle. Schaefer. 218.
Little Horse. Byars. 357.
Little Lit. Spiegelman. 185.
Little Pig Figwort Can't Get to Sleep. Branford.
311.
Little Rat Sets Sail. Bang-Campbell. 309.
Little Soldier. Ashley. 394.
Little Squeegy Bug. Sampson. 179.
Little Tree. Raschka. 114.
Littlefield. Circus in the Woods. 146.
Littlest Wolf. Brimner. 395.
Liu. Thousand Peaks. 371.
Locker. Mountain Dance. 211.
Loewen. Four to the Pole. 26.
Logan. 5,000-Year-Old Puzzle. 371.
London. Froggy Plays in the Band. 287.
. What the Animals Were Waiting For.
372.
Long and Uncertain Journey. Goodman. 140.
Long Night of Leo and Bree. Wittlinger. 261.
Long Way Home. Graff. 141.
Longfellow. Hiawatha and Megissogwon. 247.
. Midnight Ride of Paul Revere. 212.
Look Out, Jack! The Giant Is Back! Birdseye.
52.
Lord of the Nutcracker Men. Lawrence. 64.
Loser. Spinelli. 342.
Lost at Sea. Neale. 335.
Love & Sex. Cart. 8.
Love, Ruby Lavender. Wiles. 41.
<<Love, Sara>>. Lundgren. 107.
Love to Langston. Medina. 249.
Lovell. Stand Tall, Molly Lou Melon. 66.
Lu. Double Luck. 66.
Lucy the Giant. Smith. 296.
Lucy Was There. Van Leeuwen. 260.
Lulu's Hat. Meddaugh. 333.
Lundgren. <<Love, Sara>>. 107.
Lunge-Larsen. Race of the Birkebeiners. 67.
Lupton. Story Tree. 108.
Lynch, C. All the Old Haunts. 67.
Lynch, L. How I Wonder What You Are. 108.
Lyons. Feed the Children First. 248.
. Knockabeg. 26.
Macaulay. Angelo. 372.
MacDonald, A. Snarlyhissopus. 373.
MacDonald, M. Fat Cat. 108.
Mace. In the Company of Men. 147.
Machado. Me in the Middle. 408.
MacLachlan. Caleb's Story. 68.
MacLeod. To the Top of Everest. 76.
Macy. Bull's-Eye. 178.
Madlenka's Dog. Sis. 383.
Magellan and the First Voyage around the
World. Levinson. 211.
Maggi. Great Canoe. 147.
Magic Hat. Fox. 402.
Magical, Mystical, Marvelous Coat. Cullen. 10.
Mahalia. Orgill. 336.
Mak. My Chinatown. 147.
Making Plum Jam. Stewig. 419.
Malone. Legend of Lady Ilena. 287.
Mama Does the Mambo. Leiner. 145.
Manning. Dinomania. 331.
Manns. Operating Codes. 212.
Mansa Musa. Burns. 134.
Manushkin. Daughters of Fire. 178.
Mara's Stories. Schmidt. 218.
Marcus. Side by Side. 248.
Marrin. Secrets from the Rocks. 287.
Marsden, C. Gold-Threaded Dress. 373.
Marsden, J. Night Is for Hunting. 213.
Martin's Big Words. Rappaport. 183.
Martin, A. Belle Teal. 213.
Martin, B. Little Squeegy Bug. 179.
Martin, R. Shark God. 179.
Marvelous Mouse Man. Hoberman. 326.
Mary Ann Alice. Doyle. 361.
Master Swordsman & the Magic Doorway.
Provensen. 182.
Matas. Sparks Fly Upward. 409.
Matchit. Moore. 375.
Math for All Seasons. Tang. 259.
Matthews. Scorpio's Child. 68.
Matzah Man. Howland. 327.
May. Princesses Are People, Too. 334.
Mayer. Real Santa Claus. 109.
McAllister. Ghost at the Window. 373.
McCall. Huge Hog Is a Big Pig. 332.
McCaughrean. Kite Rider. 409.
McClafferty. Head Bone's Connected to the
Neck Bone. 148.
McCoy. Penny Lee and Her TV. 374.
McCully. Grandmas Trick-or-Treat. 27.
. Orphan Singer. 213.
McDonald, Janet. Spellbound. 69.
McDonald, Joyce. Shades of Simon Gray. 148.
McDonnell. Ballet Bug. 69.
McDonough. Do the Hokey Pokey. 27.
McGee. Colt and the King. 288.
McGill. Here We Go Round. 410.
McKay. Saffy's Angel. 332.
McKenna. Third Grade Stinks! 109.
McKinley. Water. 410.
McKissack. Goin' Someplace Special. 28.
McLaren. Aphrodite's Blessings. 288.
McMillan. Days of the Ducklings. 149.
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 437
McMullan. I Stink! 374.
McNamee. Sparks. 411.
McPhail. Edward in the Jungle. 289.
.Piggy's Pancake Parlor. 411.
Me in the Middle. Machado. 408.
Mead. Junebug in Trouble. 374.
Meade. Place to Sleep. 149.
Meaner than Meanest. Somers. 116.
Meddaugh. Lulu's Hat. 333.
Medina. Love to Langston. 249.
Meister. J. K. Rowling. 214.
__ 
.R. L. Stine. 214.
Melmed. This First Thanksgiving Day. 110.
Meltdown. Hampton. 173.
Meltzer. Case Closed. 214.
SPiracy & Plunder. 110.
_ 
.Walt Whitman. 249.
Merbaby. Bateman. 6.
Mice and Beans. Ryan. 73.
Midnight Ride of Paul Revere. Longfellow. 212.
Miguel Lost & Found in the Palace. Murphy.
412.
Miklowitz. Secrets in the House of Delgado.
111.
Mills. 7 x 9 = Trouble! 289.
Mim's Christmas Jam. Pinkney. 113.
Mirror, Mirror. Silverman. 341.
Misfits. Howe. 174.
Missing from Haymarket Square. Robinet. 71.
Mississippi Trial, 1955. Crowe. 276.
Molly and the Magic Dress. Norwich. 215.
Molly Rides the School Bus. Brillhart. 311.
Monster Goose. Sierra. 152.
Monster Mischief. Jane. 20.
Monster Museum. Singer. 76.
Montresor. Hansel and Gretel. 28.
Moore, Cathy. Daring Escape of Ellen Craft.
250.
Moore, Clement. Night before Christmas. 111.
Moore, M. Matchit. 375.
Mora. Race of Toad and Deer. 150.
Moran. Boots for Beth. 333.
More Parts. Arnold. 6.
Morgenstern. Princesses Are People, Too. 334.
Moss. Brave Harriet. 179.
Mother Holly. Stewig. 78.
Mother to Embarrass Me. Williams. 345.
Mouly. Little Lit. 185.
Mountain Dance. Locker. 211.
Mountain Men. Glass. 56.
Mrs. McCool and the Giant Cuhullin. Souhami.
258.
Muhammad Ali. Gordon. 324.
Muncha! Muncha! Muncha! Fleming. 239.
Murphy, B. Miguel Lost & Found in the Pal-
ace. 412.
Murphy, C. Free Radical. 375.
Muten. Lady of Ten Thousand Names. 111.
My Big Brother. Fisher. 402.
My Chinatown. Mak. 147.
My Heartbeat. Freymann-Weyr. 322.
Myers, C. Fly! 180.
Myers, W. Bad Boy. 29.
. Handbook for Boys. 412.
. Patrol. 334.
Mysterious Matter of I. M. Fine. Stanley. 77.
Nace. Bowling for Beginners. 29.
Naidoo. Other Side of Truth. 30.
Nakamura. Song of Night. 290.
Napoli. Daughter of Venice. 413.
.Three Days. 112.
Nathan. Yankee Doodle Gals. 181.
Navajo Long Walk. Bruchac. 236.
Naylor. Simply Alice. 376.
Neale. Lost at Sea. 335.
Neeluk. Kittredge. 23.
Nelly in the Wilderness. Cullen. 316.
Nelson. Carver. 30.
Never Sell Yourself Short. Riggs. 184.
Nibbling on Einstein's Brain. Swanson. 186.
Nickerson. How to Disappear Completely and
Never Be Found. 335.
Night before Christmas. Moore. 111.
Night I Disappeared. Deaver. 318.
Night Is for Hunting. Marsden. 213.
Night Train. Stutson. 419.
Nighty Night! Wild. 40.
Nijland. King & King. 400.
No More! Rappaport. 290.
No Place Cat. Adler. 270.
Noah and the Devil. Philip. 31.
Noguchi. Flowers from Mariko. 181.
Nolan. Born Blue. 181.
Norwich. Molly and the Magic Dress. 215.
Numbering All'the Bones. Rinaldi. 380.
Nursery Crimes. Geisert. 13.
Nye. 19 Varieties of Gazelle. 376.
O'Brien. Great Ships. 215.
O'Connor. Emperor's Silent Army. 413.
O'Halloran. Creature Comforts. 414.
O'Neill. Recess Queen. 250.
Oates. Big Mouth & Ugly Girl. 377.
Of Sound Mind. Ferris. 54.
Oh My Gosh, Mrs. McNosh! Weeks. 344.
Old Crump. Lawlor. 284.
Old Magic. Curley. 276.
Old Mother Hubbard. Cabrera. 96.
Older. Ice Cream. 359.
Olivia Counts. Falconer. 362.
Olivia Saves the Circus. Falconer. 100.
Olivia's Opposites. Falconer. 362.
Olympia. Blacklock. 130.
Oma's Quilt. Bourgeois. 131.
On the Town. Caseley. 358.
438 
* THE BULLETIN
On the Trail Made of Dawn. Webster. 222.
One Day at Wood Green Animal Shelter. Casey.
9.
One Day, Daddy. Thomas. 79.
One Lucky Summer. Kvasnosky. 329.
One Night. Qualey. 253.
One Tiny Turtle. Davies. 99.
One True Friend. Hansen. 141.
Operating Codes. Manns. 212.
Oppenheim. Ali and the Magic Stew. 336.
Ordinary Audrey. Harris. 206.
Orgill. Mahalia. 336.
Origami Paper Airplanes. Boursin. 132.
Orphan Singer. McCully. 213.
Osborne. Brave Little Seamstress. 337.
Other Side of Truth. Naidoo. 30.
Outside the Lines. Burg. 272.
Overboard. Fama. 362.
Owen's Marshmallow Chick. Henkes. 207.
Page. Animals in Flight. 143.
Palatini. Earthquack! 414.
.Tub-boo-boo. 70.
Pandora. Burleigh. 313.
Park. When My Name Was Keoko. 337.
Parker. Land Ho! 70.
Partridge. This Land Was Made for You and
Me. 415.
Patent. Animals on the Trail with Lewis and
Clark. 338.
Patrol. Myers. 334.
Paye. Head, Body, Legs. 338.
Payne. Four in All. 150.
Peacock. Worth. 385.
Pearsall. Trouble Don't Last. 251.
Peck. Fair Weather. 70.
Peekaboo Morning. Isadora. 407.
Pelletier. Sixteen Miles to Spring. 290.
Penny Lee and Her TV. McCoy. 374.
Perdomo. Visiting Langston. 251.
Peter Claus and the Naughty List. David. 98.
Petersen. Rising Water. 216.
Peterson. Hanna's Christmas. 112.
Philip. Noah and the Devil. 31.
Phillips. When Objects Talk. 203.
Phineas Gage. Fleischman. 321.
Phoning a Dead Man. Cross. 315.
Piecing Earth & Sky Together. Day. 317.
Pied Piper of Peru. Tompert. 297.
Pierce. Circle Opens: Cold Fire. 377.
Piggy's Pancake Parlor. McPhail. 411.
Pinkney. Ella Fitzgerald. 378.
__ 
. Mim's Christmas Jam. 113.
Pinkwater. Fat Camp Commandos Go West.
415.
Irving and Muktuk. 113.
Piracy & Plunder. Meltzer. 110.
Pirate Diary. Plant. 216.
Pirates. Lamm. 177.
Pizza Kittens. Voake. 384.
Place at the Table. Fleming. 279.
Place to Sleep. Meade. 149.
Placide. Fresh Girl. 252.
Platt. Pirate Diary. 216.
Playing the Field. Rallison. 416.
Playtime Rhymes for Little People. Finch. 137.
Plump and Perky Turkey. Bateman. 93.
Poetry by Heart. Attenborough. 198.
Poetry Matters. Fletcher. 363.
Pop! Bradley. 7.
Poppleton in Winter. Rylant. 152.
Pot of Wisdom. Badoe. 164.
Powell. Three Clams and an Oyster. 415.
Pratchett. Amazing Maurice and His Educated
Rodents. 217.
Prelutsky. Awful Ogre's Awful Day. 31.
. Frogs Wore Red Suspenders. 252.
President and Mom's Apple Pie. Garland. 323.
Princess and the Pea. Vaes. 80.
Princess and the Pizza. Auch. 234.
Princess in Love. Cabot. 314.
Princess in the Spotlight. Cabot. 8.
Princesses Are People, Too. Morgenstern. 334.
Protopopescu. Thousand Peaks. 371.
Provensen. Master Swordsman & the Magic
Doorway. 182.
Pullman. Puss in Boots. 32.
Pumpkin Eye. Fleming. 55.
Pure Dead Magic. Gliori. 204.
Puss in Boots. Light. 330.
Puss in Boots. Pullman. 32.
Qualey. One Night. 253.
Quattlebaum. Grover G. Graham and Me. 183.
Quiet Night. Singer. 383.
R. L. Stine. Meister. 214.
Race of the Birkebeiners. Lunge-Larsen. 67.
Race of Toad and Deer. Mora. 150.
Radunsky. Table Manners. 150.
Rael. Rivka's First Thanksgiving. 113.
Rag and Bone Shop. Cormier. 134.
Rain Is Not My Indian Name. Smith. 35.
Rainbow Boys. Sanchez. 115.
Rallison. Playing the Field. 416.
Ralph Nader. Bowen. 235.
Rand. Little Flower. 378.
.Sailing Home. 71.
Ransom. Rescue on the Outer Banks. 250.
Rapp. Little Chicago. 379.
Rappaport. Martin's Big Words. 183.
.No More! 290.
Raschka. Little Tree. 114.
.Table Manners. 150.
Raven's Gift. Dupre. 12.
Razzle. Wittlinger. 84.
Real Santa Claus. Mayer. 109.
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 439
Recess Queen. O'Neill. 250.
Recycling George. Roos. 293.
Red Rose Box. Woods. 422.
Red Wolf. Shannon. 340.
Red, White, Blue, and Uncle Who? Bateman.
199.
Redmond. Elephant Book. 183.
Rembrandt's Hat. Blackaby. 310.
Remember Pearl Harbor. Allen. 48.
Remember the Bridge. Weatherford. 344.
Rescue on the Outer Banks. Ransom. 250.
Rescued Images. Jacobsen. 210.
Revenge of Randal Reese-Rat. Seidler. 219.
Rhynes. I, Too, Sing America. 253.
Rice. Crazy Loco. 32.
Richardson. Grunt. 379.
Riggs. Never Sell Yourself Short. 184.
Riley. Song of Night. 290.
Rinaldi. Numbering All the Bones. 380.
Rising Water. Petersen. 216.
Rivers. Surviving Sam. 380.
Rivka's First Thanksgiving. Rael. 113.
Rivka's Way. Kanefield. 244.
Roberts, K. Crystal Mask. 416.
. Song Quest. 416.
. Spellfall. 217.
Roberts, L. Cinderella. 184.
Roberts, W. Undercurrents. 291.
Robertson. Standing Like a Stone Wall. 32.
Robinet. Missing from Haymarket Square. 71.
Robinson. Jackie's Nine. 72.
Rock of Ages. Bolden. 166.
Rockbuster. Skurzynski. 220.
Rocks in His Head. Hurst. 143.
Rockwell. Becoming Butterflies. 338.
. They Called Her Molly Pitcher. 381.
Rodda. Rowan and the Keeper of the Crystal.
291.
. Rowan and the Travelers. 72.
. Rowan and the Zebak. 417.
Rodowsky. Jason Rat-a-Tat. 339.
Rogasky. Leaf by Leaf. 33.
Romanek. Technology Book for Girls. 73.
_ 
. Zzz .... 292.
Room on the Broom. Donaldson. 11.
Roop. Escape from the Ice. 205.
.Take Command, Captain Farragut! 292.
Roos. Recycling George. 293.
Ropemaker. Dickinson. 169.
Rosen. Chanukah Lights Everywhere. 114.
Rosenfeld. Get Well Soon. 184.
Ross. In the Company of Men. 147.
Rottman. Stetson. 254.
Rowan and the Keeper of the Crystal. Rodda.
291.
Rowan and the Travelers. Rodda. 72.
Rowan and the Zebak. Rodda. 417.
Rowan Hood. Springer. 36.
Rubin. Steven Spielberg. 151.
. There Goes the Neighborhood. 33.
Ruby Holler. Creech. 399.
Rufus and Magic Run Amok. Levinson. 177.
Rumford. Traveling Man. 151.
Running Back to Ludie. Johnson. 176.
Russell. Aero and Officer Mike. 73.
Russo. House of Sports. 254.
Ryan, P. Mice and Beans. 73.
Ryan, S. Empress of the World. 34.
Rylant. Let's Go Home. 381.
. Poppleton in Winter. 152.
Sachs. Four Ugly Cats in Apartment 3D. 417.
Safe Place Called Home. Spinelli. 36.
Saffy's Angel. McKay. 332.
Sailing Home. Rand. 71.
Saldafia. Jumping Tree. 34.
Salisbury. Island Boyz. 255.
Sampson. Little Squeegy Bug. 179.
San Souci. Birds of Killingworth. 340.
Sanchez. Rainbow Boys. 115.
Sanderson. Cinderella. 339.
Say. Home of the Brave. 382.
Say Yes. Couloumbis. 398.
Sayre. Army Ant Parade. 255.
. Crocodile Listens. 74.
Schaefer, C. Little French Whistle. 218.
Schaefer, L. This Is the Rain. 74.
Schanzer. Davy Crockett Saves the World. 218.
Scheer. Thanksgiving Turkey. 75.
Schmidt, G. Mara's Stories. 218.
. Straw into Gold. 35.
Schmidt, S. Abraham Lincoln. 201.
Schmitzer. Down Cut Shin Creek. 49.
Schultz. Firestorm. 293.
Scorpio's Child. Matthews. 68.
Sea So Far. Thesman. 117.
Secret in St. Something. Wallace. 80.
Secret Knowledge of Grown-Ups: Second File.
Wisniewski. 155.
Secret Life of Food. Crespo. 359.
Secret of Ms. Snickle's Class. Hornik. 18.
Secret School. Avi. 50.
Secrets from the Rocks. Marrin. 287.
Secrets in Stone. Coulter. 135.
Secrets in the House of Delgado. Miklowitz.
111.
Sedgwick. Witch Hill. 75.
Seeger. Abiyoyo Returns. 115.
_ I Had a Rooster. 185.
Seeing the Blue Between. Janeczko. 363.
Seek. Fleischman. 101.
Seidler. Brothers Below Zero. 255.
SRevenge of Randal Reese-Rat. 219.
Separate Sisters. Springer. 221.
September 11, 2001. Wheeler. 407.
440 
* THE BULLETIN
Seven for a Secret. Sheppard. 219.
Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. Curlee.
237.
Seymour Simon's Book of Trains. Simon. 257.
Shades of Simon Gray. McDonald. 148.
Shadow Club Rising. Shusterman. 294.
Shakeress. Heuston. 366.
Shannon, D. Duck on a Bike. 256.
Shannon, M. Red Wolf. 340.
Shark God. Martin. 179.
Shattered. Armstrong. 309.
Shattered Mirror. Atwater-Rhodes. 50.
Shattering Glass. Giles. 324.
Shearer. Great Blue Yonder. 382.
Shepherd's Gift. Calhoun. 96.
Sheppard. Seven for a Secret. 219.
Shields. Animagicals: Homes. 220.
.Animagicals: Sports. 220.
. Bugliest Bug. 294.
Shoeless Joe & Black Betsy. Bildner. 200.
Shreve. Blister. 115.
Shrinking Violet. Best. 52.
Shusterman. Shadow Club Rising. 294.
Side by Side. Marcus. 248.
Sidewalk Chalk. Weatherford. 81.
Siegen-Smith. First Morning. 116.
Sierra. Monster Goose. 152.
Sight. Clement-Davies. 274.
Silent Night. Hooper. 105.
Silent Night. Turner. 118.
Silverman. Mirror, Mirror. 341.
Silverstone. Winona LaDuke. 256.
Simmons. Ebb & Flo and the Baby Seal. 257.
Simon. Seymour Simon's Book of Trains. 257.
Simon Says. Alphin. 355.
Simply Alice. Naylor. 376.
Singer, M. Footprints on the Roof. 418.
. Monster Museum. 76.
.Quiet Night. 383.
Singer, N. Feather Boy. 295.
Singing Diggety. Stern. 78.
Sfs. Madlenka's Dog. 383.
Sissy Duckling. Fierstein. 401.
Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants. Brashares.
132.
Sixteen Miles to Spring. Pelletier. 290.
Skeleton Man. Bruchac. 7.
Skreslet. To the Top of Everest. 76.
Skurzynski. Rockbuster. 220.
Slap Your Sides. Kerr. 106.
Slavery. Watkins. 40.
Sloan. Supercroc and the Origin of Crocodiles.
341.
Slow Loris. Deacon. 317.
Small. Vulliamy. 298.
Smith, C. Rain Is Not My Indian Name. 35.
Smith, J. Fairy Dust. 295.
Smith, S. Lucy the Giant. 296.
Smokejumpers. Landau. 247.
Smokejumpers One to Ten. Demarest. 400.
Snarlyhissopus. MacDonald. 373.
Snicket. Lemony Snicket. 418.
Snyder. Spyhole Secrets. 77.
Soldier Boys. Hughes. 243.
Some from the Moon, Some from the Sun.
Zemach. 85.
Some Kind of Pride. Testa. 153.
Somers. Meaner than Meanest. 116.
Sometimes I'm Bombaloo. Vail. 298.
Sones. What My Mother Doesn't Know. 152.
Song of Night. Nakamura. 290.
Song of the Circus. Duncan. 320.
Song Quest. Roberts. 416.
Sorry. Van Leeuwen. 38.
Sosu's Call. Asare. 309.
Soto. Body Parts in Rebellion. 384.
. If the Shoe Fits. 258.
Souhami. Mrs. McCool and the Giant Cuhullin.
258.
Sparks. McNamee. 411.
Sparks Fly Upward. Matas. 409.
Spellbound. McDonald. 69.
Spellfall. Roberts. 217.
Spiegelman. Little Lit. 185.
Spinelli, E. Here Comes the Year. 296.
.In My New Yellow Shirt. 36.
. Safe Place Called Home. 36.
Spinelli, J. Loser. 342.
Splash! Levy. 370.
Spooner. Daniel's Walk. 116.
Springer. Rowan Hood. 36.
. Separate Sisters. 221.
Spyhole Secrets. Snyder. 77.
St. George. John & Abigail Adams. 153.
St. Michael's Scales. Connelly. 397.
Stable Rat. Cunningham. 98.
Stadler. Beverly Billingsly Borrows a Book. 296.
Stand Tall, Molly Lou Melon. Lovell. 66.
Standing Like a Stone Wall. Robertson. 32.
Stanley. Mysterious Matter of I. M. Fine. 77.
Stavans. Wchale! 221.
Steamboat Annie and the Thousand-Pound
Catfish. Wright. 41.
Stella, Fairy of the Forest. Gay. 240.
Stenhouse. Across the Steel River. 186.
Stern. Singing Diggety. 78.
Stetson. Rottman. 254.
Steven Spielberg. Rubin. 151.
Stevenson. Corn-Fed. 297.
Stewart. City of the Dead. 222.
Stewig. Making Plum Jam. 419.
.Mother Holly. 78.
Stine. Haunting Hour. 117.
Stoner and Spaz. Koertge. 246.
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 441
Stop, Drop, and Roll. Cuyler. 98.
Stopping to Home. Wait. 154.
Storm Maker's Tipi. Goble. 172.
Stormbreaker. Horowitz. 18.
Story of the Titanic. Kentley. 245.
Story Tree. Lupton. 108.
Straw into Gold. Schmidt. 35.
Strawberry Moon. English. 202.
Streissguth. Daniel Boone. 258.
String Music. Telander. 419.
Strike Two. Koss. 63.
Strong Right Arm. Green. 365.
Stuart-Clark. Young Oxford Book of Christmas
Poems. 206.
Stutson. Night Train. 419.
Summersaults. Florian. 322.
Supercroc and the Origin of Crocodiles. Sloan.
341.
Surviving Sam. Rivers. 380.
Swanson, D. Nibbling on Einstein's Brain. 186.
Swanson, S. First Thing My Mama Told Me.
342.
Table Manners. Raschka. 150.
Take Command, Captain Farragut! Roop. 292.
Takeoffs and Landings. Haddix. 58.
Taking Care of Trouble. Graves. 365.
Tang. Math for All Seasons. 259.
Tarpley. Bippity Bop Barbershop. 259.
Tashjian. Gospel according to Larry. 187.
Taylor. Land. 78.
Technology Book for Girls. Romanek. 73.
Teeny Tiny Tingly Tales. Van Laan. 38.
Telander. String Music. 419.
Tell All the Children Our Story. Bolden. 272.
Ten Miles from Winnemucca. Wyss. 423.
Tender. Hobbs. 60.
Testa. Becoming Joe DiMaggio. 342.
.Some Kind of Pride. 153.
Thanksgiving Turkey. Scheer. 75.
Thar She Blows. Currie. 167.
There Goes the Neighborhood. Rubin. 33.
Thesman. Between. 343.
_.Sea So Far. 117.
They Called Her Molly Pitcher. Rockwell. 381.
They Came from the Bronx. Waldman. 154.
Things Not Seen. Clements. 358.
Third Grade Stinks! McKenna. 109.
This First Thanksgiving Day. Melmed. 110.
This Is the Rain. Schaefer. 74.
This Land Was Made for You and Me. Par-
tridge. 415.
This Little Chick. Lawrence. 285.
This Lullaby. Dessen. 319.
Thomas. One Day, Daddy. 79.
Thompson. Beguilers. 222.
Those Extraordinary Women of World War I.
Zeinert. 189.
Thousand Peaks. Liu. 371.
Three Clams and an Oyster. Powell. 415.
Three Days. Napoli. 112.
Thursday's Child. Hartnett. 325.
Tiger's Fall. Bang. 130.
Till Tomorrow. Donahue. 100.
Time Out. Hill. 104.
Tin Forest. Ward. 39.
Tingle. Edge on the Sword. 79.
To Be a Princess. Brewster. 133.
To the Top of Everest. Skreslet. 76.
Tolan. Flight of the Raven. 153.
Tom Mouse. Le Guin. 329.
Tomboy of the Air. Cummins. 11.
Tompert. Pied Piper of Peru. 297.
Toot & Puddle: I'll Be Home for Christmas.
Hobbie. 104.
Townley. Great Good Thing. 37.
Traveling Man. Rumford. 151.
Treasure Hunt. Ahlberg. 271.
Tree Girl. Barron. 51.
Trouble at Betts Pets. Easton. 361.
Trouble Don't Last. Pearsall. 251.
Troy. Geras. 14.
True Story of Trapper Jack's Left Big Toe.
Wallace. 420.
Truth or Something. Willis. 384.
Tub-boo-boo. Palatini. 70.
Tunnell. Brothers in Valor. 37.
Turner. Silent Night. 118.
Twisted Tale. Fisher. 401.
Two Princesses of Bamarre. Levine. 65.
Ugly Duckling. Andersen. 128.
Ultimate Field Trip 5. Goodman. 15.
Under a War-Torn Sky. Elliott. 170.
Under the Quilt of Night. Hopkinson. 208.
Undercurrents. Roberts. 291.
Unger. Me in the Middle. 408.
Unicorn's Secret: Moonsilver. Duey. 170.
Up on Cloud Nine. Fine. 321.
Vaes. Princess and the Pea. 80.
Vail. Sometimes I'm Bombaloo. 298.
Van Draanen. Flipped. 187.
Van Laan. Teeny Tiny Tingly Tales. 38.
Van Leeuwen. Lucy Was There. 260.
.Sorry. 38.
Vande Velde. Being Dead. 39.
Vanderwarker. Big Dig. 118.
Venokur. Autobiography of Meatball
Finkelstein. 39.
Vero and Philippe. Hatton. 242.
Vicky Angel. Wilson. 83.
Victory Garden. Kochenderfer. 245.
Visiting Langston. Perdomo. 251.
Voake. Pizza Kittens. 384.
Voice from the Wilderness. Brown. 94.
Vulliamy. Small. 298.
442 
* THE BULLETIN
Vyner. World Team. 343.
Wachale! Stavans. 221.
Wait. Stopping to Home. 154.
Waldman. They Came from the Bronx. 154.
Walk across the Sea. Fletcher. 138.
Walker. Fossil Fish Found Alive. 298.
Wallace, B. Secret in St. Something. 80.
Wallace, I. True Story of Trapper Jack's Left
Big Toe. 420.
Wallace-Brodeur. Blue Eyes Better. 260.
Walt Whitman. Meltzer. 249.
Ward. Animals' Christmas Carol. 119.
. Tin Forest. 39.
Waring. Hungry Hen. 261.
Warren. We Rode the Orphan Trains. 119.
Water. McKinley. 410.
Water Hole Waiting. Kurtz. 369.
Waters. Giving Thanks. 56.
Watkins. Slavery. 40.
Watts. Finding H. F. 188.
Way We Do It in Japan. lijima. 244.
We Rode the Orphan Trains. Warren. 119.
We Were There. Bunting. 95.
We Were There, Too! Hoose. 61.
We're Going on a Picnic! Hutchins. 406.
We're Not Monsters. Weill. 223.
Weatherford. Remember the Bridge. 344.
. Sidewalk Chalk. 81.
Webster. On the Trail Made of Dawn. 222.
Weeks. Oh My Gosh, Mrs. McNosh! 344.
Weill. We're Not Monsters. 223.
Weird Friends. Aruego. 356.
Welcome to the River of Grass. Yolen. 225.
Wells. Germ Busters. 420.
_ House in the Mail. 223.
.Wingwalker. 345.
_ 
.Yoko's Paper Cranes. 155.
Wenny Has Wings. Carey. 396.
Werlin. Black Mirror. 81.
Westerhout. Business in Bangkok. 421.
Weston. Dinosaurs Meet Dr Clock. 299.
Wham! It's a Poetry Jam. Holbrook. 367.
What a Year. de Paola. 238.
What About Me? Young. 424.
What Charlie Heard. Gerstein. 280.
What My Mother Doesn't Know. Sones. 152.
What Planet Are You From, Clarice Bean?
Child. 236.
What Shape Is That, PiggyWiggy? Fox. 364.
What Shall We Play? Heap. 405.
What the Animals Were Waiting For. London.
372.
What's Cooking, Jamela? Daly. 168.
What's the Opposite, PiggyWiggy? Fox. 364.
Wheeler, J. September 11, 2001. 407.
Wheeler, L. Wool Gathering. 82.
When Esther Morris 
Headed West.
Wooldridge. 84.
When My Name Was Keoko. Park. 337.
When Objects Talk. Friedlander. 203.
When the Circus Came to Town. Yep. 225.
When the Root Children Wake Up. Wood. 422.
Where the Action Was. Colman. 275.
White. Double Luck. 66.
Who Built the Pyramid? Hooper. 174.
Who Invited You? Fleming. 137.
Whybrow. Wish, Change, Friend. 224.
Wild about Dolphins. Davies. 53.
Wild. Nighty Night! 40.
Wiles. Love, Ruby Lavender. 41.
Willey. Clever Beatrice. 82.
Williams, C. Mother to Embarrass Me. 345.
Williams, L. Horse in the Pigpen. 346.
Williams, S. Dinnertime! 299.
Willis. Truth or Something. 384.
Wilson. Girls in Love. 224.
_.Vicky Angel. 83.
Winch. Colt and the King. 288.
Windling. Green Man. 277.
Wingwalker. Wells. 345.
Winnie Dancing on Her Own. Jacobson. 105.
Winona LaDuke. Silverstone. 256.
Winter. Frida. 225.
_ .iBisbol! 83.
Wish, Change, Friend. Whybrow. 224.
Wisniewski. Secret Knowledge of Grown-Ups:
The Second File. 155.
Witch Hill. Sedgwick. 75.
Witch Twins at Camp Bliss. Griffin. 404.
Withrow. Box Girl. 156.
Witness. Hesse. 103.
Wittlinger. Long Night of Leo and Bree. 261.
. Razzle. 84.
Wojciechowski. Beany Goes to Camp. 421.
Wolf Queen. Lee. 370.
Wolf Star. Lee. 65.
Wolf Who Cried Boy. Hartman. 404.
Woman Who Won Things. Ahlberg. 354.
Wood, A. Cowboy Christmas. 120.
. When the Root Children Wake Up.
422.
Wood, F. Daughter of Madrugada. 385.
Woods, B. Red Rose Box. 422.
Woods, R. Hero. 261.
Woodson. Hush. 262.
Woody Guthrie. Christensen. 53.
Wool Gathering. Wheeler. 82.
Wooldridge. Legend of Strap Buckner. 188.
.When Esther Morris Headed West. 84.
World of Wonders. Lewis. 408.
World Team. Vyner. 343.
Worth. Peacock. 385.
Wright. Steamboat Annie and the Thousand-
Pound Catfish. 41.
Wynne-Jones. Boy in the Burning House. 120.
Wyss. Ten Miles from Winnemucca. 423.
JULY/AUGUST 2002 
* 443
Xenocide Mission. Jeapes. 369.
Yankee Doodle Gals. Nathan. 181.
Yeatts. Forensics. 203.
Yep. When the Circus Came to Town. 225.
Yoko's Paper Cranes. Wells. 155.
Yolen. Firebird. 423.
. Hippolyta and the Curse of the Ama-
zons. 300.
._ Welcome to the River of Grass. 225.
Yorinks. Company's Going. 189.
You Read to Me, I'll Read to You. Hoberman.
60.
You Wouldn't Want to Be a Polar Explorer!
Green. 205.
Young. What About Me? 424.
Young Oxford Book of Christmas Poems.
Harrison. 206.
Yumoto. Letters. 424.
Zeinert. Those Extraordinary Women of World
War I. 189.
Zemach. Some from the Moon, Some from the
Sun. 85.
ZigaZak! Kimmel. 62.
Zoehfeld. From Tadpole to Frog. 386.
Zucker. Benno's Bear. 156.
Zzz.... Romanek. 85.
The
FIVE OWLS
7 publication for readers personally and professionally
involved in children's literature.
THE FIVE OWLS is a bimonthly
publication devoted to children's
literature, bringing together many
of today's finest books with writers
whose contributions are shaping the
future of children's books. A yearly
bscription is available for $35.00.
THE FIVE OWLS for Parents
Schools, libraries and other institutions that have a subscription
to the magazine can receive free quantities of THE FIVE OWLS for
Parents-it's short on advertising and long on book picks,
parenting information, and child development content that
is of real value to families.
For more information,
call 612-377-2004
or visit www.fiveowls.com
IllU.-on by Hdr Kught froan Elois (Snmonomd 
Schut.r, 1955)
9-
9.
W"- 'See those bags? I smell breakfast!' The garbage truck who
Snarrates this down-and-dirty picture book is not a demure figure.
His job description, which he outlines with healthy machismo,
•iquirs 
IIIII 
LU Idal IrIIUUYI 
LH I 
UII 
rets, 
Uding WUIIo 
IIIUL 
IpeopeI
find repugnant. Jim McMullan's [full-color] depiction of the
hulking beast on his nightly rounds amplifies the text's brash tone.
And fans of gross-out humor will appreciate the garbage truck's
personal recipe for alphabet soup .... "
-Starred 
review / The Horn Book
i--- "[A] thoroughly engaging narrator... [a] hilarious homage
to an unsung hero." 
-Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly
-;- "An appealingly gross package ... a fun and funny
read-aloud." 
-Starred 
review/ School LibraryJournal
Ages 4-8. $15.95 Tr (0-06-029848-0); $15.89 Lb (0-06-029849-9)
i 
Joanna Cotler Books An imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
I)_ 
__ 
_ 
__ 
__ 
_ 
_ 
_ 
__ 
__ 
_
I
I
I
I GRAT NEW 
PRIC 
-ONLY
UNLOCK THE SECRETS
Full-color, fun, and crammed with cool facts, DK's
Secret Worlds Series takes a fresh look at familiar
subjects with brilliant results! Kids ages 9 and up
can delve into a wide range of subjects from nature,
history, and science for researching school projects,
satisfying a curious appetite, or just for the love
of reading. Tried-and-tested web sites and a mega-
reference section are just two of the innovative
features that will keep kids coming back for more.
Black Holes 
Mini Beasts
ISBN:0-7894-8845-0 (ob) 
ISBN:0-7894-8847-7 (ob)
Survival 
Villains
ISBN:0-7894-8849-3 (pb) 
ISBN: 0-7894-8851-5 (pb)
Other SECRETWORLDS Titles
Apes
ISBN: 0-7894-8019-0 (pb)
ISBN: 0-7894-8003-4 (he)
Body
ISBN: 0-7894-7968-0 (pb)
ISBN: 0-7894-7967-2 (he)
Brain
ISBN: 0-7894-8528-1 (pb)
ISBN: 0-7894-8527-3 (hc)
Bugs
ISBN: 0-7894-7970-2 (pb)
ISBN: 0-7894-7969-9 (hc)
Code Breakers
ISBN: 0-7894-8503-3 (pb)
ISBN: 0-7894-8529-X (hc)
Dinosaurs
ISBN: 0-7894-7972-9 (pb)
ISBN: 0-7894-7971-0 (hc)
Explorers
ISBN: 0-7894-7974-5 (pb)
ISBN: 0-7894-7973-7 (he)
Gladiator
ISBN: 0-7894-8532-X (pb)
ISBN: 0-7894-8531-1 (hc)
Mummies
ISBN:0-7894-7976-1 (pb)
ISBN: 0-7894-7975-3 (hc)
Native Americans
ISBN: 0-7894-7978-8 (pb)
ISBN: 0-7894-7977-X (he)
Sharks
ISBN: 0-7894-8534-6 (pb)
ISBN: 0-7894-8533-8 (hc)
Tornadoes
ISBN: 0-7894-7980-X (pb)
ISBN: 0-7894-7979-6 (hc)
1 
.
, 
.
s 
_ 
I
Univers
1325 Sc
Champ:
U.S.A.
RPTURN
rc:~rt
·~
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2001 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.orglccb/
2. 
When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and password.
This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit number but
may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
·~
University of Illinois Press 
PERDI
1325 South Oak Street 
POSA
Champaign, IL 61820 
POST
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
0 
,
~ 
·· ·
a I?
\LS
:NIL
·~
J
0008-9036(200207)55:11 ;1 -A
4--
I ne Durrenn wnllne Is avallaDle 
only to prinr suDscnDers, ana Incluaes 
me
1998-200 1 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
i. Go to http:llwww.prai rie net.o rglctbl
2. When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and password.
-This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit number but
may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be r~quired to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this ncw
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub·
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribtrs' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: hao:l/www.lis.uiuc.edulpuboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alcxia.lis.uiuc.edu.
i
