I LLI NO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Univerity of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
r
· I;
i
-
· i; 
·
*:
; *"
ir~
i; 
·
i;~at·;l·
·· ·
;·
THE
B U L L E T I N
January 1996
Vol. 49 No. 5
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
A LOOK INSIDE
153 THE BIG PICTURE
Trout Summer by Jane Leslie Conly
154 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
154 * Poppy written by Avi; illus. by Brian Floca
157 * The Watsons Go to Birmingham-1963 by Christopher Paul Curtis
160 * Sleeping Dogs by Sonya Hartnett
165 * The Other Side of Silence by Margaret Mahy
168 * My Fellow Americans: A Family Album written and illustrated by Alice
Provensen
174 BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1995
176 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
_ 
__ 
___ _
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Tara L. Rivera, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor Emeritus, GSLIS
Christine Jenkins, Assistant Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1996 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Joe Baker, from Trout Summer ©1995 and used by permission of Henry Holt
and Company.
JANUARY 1996 
* 153
THE BIG PICTURE
Trout Summer
by Jane Leslie Conly
Camus noted that in the depth of winter he found in himself an invincible sum-
mer; young readers seeking an assist for their chilled internal resources might want
to find in their libraries this invincible summer book. There's summer in the title,
summer on the cover, and summer permeating every page, so we're not even going
to pretend that there's a secret snowy January heart here, and we'll simply call it a
seasonal antidote.
Summertime it may be in this book, but the living isn't exactly easy.
Shana, thirteen, and Cody, twelve, move with their mother from their small Vir-
ginia town to an upscale Maryland suburb after their restless father has left the
family to find himself. Classy Laglade is a puzzle to the kids, but they quickly find
a spiritual and literal home in an old summer cabin, where the family is staying in
exchange for repair work. Alone in the woods all day while Mom's at work, the
siblings revel in the peaceful rural surroundings and the flowing river, which re-
mind them of their old home. Their peaceful explorations are challenged by an
old ranger who zealously guards the river and its gradually returning trout popula-
tion, but cranky old Henry soon is teaching Cody how to canoe the river and
imperiously demanding that Shana run errands for him. Cody is a born river rat,
but Shana, a budding writer, finds herself more interested in Henry's solitude, his
suspicion of people, his increasing infirmity, and his love of the river.
The river flows through this book much as its cousin did in Norman
Maclean's A River Runs Through It. Conly accumulates ripples of small details
about the Leanna, about fishing, and about the wildlife, forming small pools of
unforced lyricism ("The pool Cody'd found was lined with marsh grass, unusual
for the Leanna, and a downed tree gave cover for bass. We started off with worms.
Then I tried a plastic twister grub, bouncing it off the bottom and reeling in slow.
A fish took the lure gently, then began to run. Line was pouring off my reel").
The inspirited evocation of atmosphere never bogs down the story (the book's
most exciting scenes, in fact, take place in the river rapids) but allows readers to
understand and share Henry's, and, eventually, Shana's, feeling for the Leanna.
It's appropriate that the kids invoke Sterling North's Rascal; like that book (and
like Misty of Chincoteague, to which Shana also alludes), Trout Summer displays a
respectful but unpretentious knowledge of the natural world and its particular
regional manifestations.
This is, however, more sharply focused on the people than its literary
predecessors were. Shana feels battered by family changes ("How would you feel if
the members of your family were like dice and somebody stuck you in a shaker and
tossed you around and threw you out any old way?") and wounded by what she
sees as repeated betrayals of her trust: by her beloved grandfather, who dies; by her
154 
* THE BULLETIN
adored father, who leaves; by her mother, who uproots the family and, finally,
refuses to permit Shana's father to return; and by Henry, who has lied about his
authority from the first time he met the children. Yet Shana too has betrayed
trusts, lying to her mother about her and Cody's river exploits and keeping her
contact with her father hidden from the rest of the family, and she fears her desire
to stay in Laglade come fall, to attend a really good school, is a betrayal too. "You
can't trust people," Henry tells Shana more than once, but Shana begins to see that
matters are not always so simple, that sometimes the price of constancy is greater
than the price of change. "Don't count on anybody," says Henry, but he counts
on Shana and Cody anyway in the end, first to find him when he's been seriously
injured in a last glorious attempt to run the rapids, and then, in a gesture of the
greatest trust of all, to care for the river after he's gone.
So it's a truly riparian book, with surging rapids and reflective pools,
challenging whitewater and quiet sunny coves. Its denizens are thorny, believable,
and sympathetic, it solutions authentically untidy. Use Trout Summer as a lure for
young readers, who will appreciate a chance, at least literarily, to lay aside the grim
business of winter and go a-fishing. (Imprint information appears on p. 156.)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Avi 
Poppy; illus. by Brian Floca. Jackson/Orchard, 1995 
14 7p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08783-2 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09483-9 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Poppy, a mouse, knew she was doing the wrong thing when she went with her
boyfriend Ragweed to Bannock Hill without the permission of Mr. Ocax, the owl
who has styled himself the ruler of Dimwood Forest. Ragweed, an Angry Young
Mouse, scorned the rules set down by the owl for the community of Dimwood
Forest mice, and for his rebellion he is eaten by the owl, who unsuccessfully attacks
Poppy as well. Although this mouse fantasy is fiercer than, say, Dick King-Smith's
The School Mouse, reviewed below, it hasn't the gore of Jacques' Redwall books,
and the owl-and-mouse chase that ensues as a vengeful Ocax contrives to destroy
Poppy is cozied by the woodsy atmosphere (and Brian Floca's personable and real-
istic pencil illustrations), leavened by the humor of Poppy's unlikely prickly helper
(a grouchy porcupine), and ennobled by Poppy's own fumbling yet valiant hero-
ism. The fate of her people depends upon Poppy's ability to stay out of Ocax's
talons and find the mice a new home on the other side of the forest, and her quest
holds both peril and adventure. Sprightly but un-cute dialogue, suspenseful chap-
ter endings, and swift shifts of perspective between Ocax and Poppy will make
chapter-a-day readalouds cause for anticipation, rewarded by a fight-to-the-death
conclusion. RS
JANUARY 1996 
* 
155
BANYAI, ISTVAN 
Re-zoom; illus. by Istvan Banyai. 
Viking, 1995 
6 4 p
ISBN 0-670-86392-0 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
As the title suggests, this is a resumption of the game in Zoom (BCCB 2/95), where
each succeeding spread drew back farther to show how every scene was actually a
misleading detail of a larger world. Here we go through a cave painting to a tomb
to a film set through a painting, Japanese fan, and billboard finishing in a maga-
zine being read on a subway train that disappears into the dark. It's hard to recap-
ture the fresh surprise of the first book; Banyai puts a few more temporal spins on
things here (often the viewer's impression of the era changes along with the source
of the images) and offers a few side jokes (such as an entertaining and appropriate
cameo appearance from Alfred Hitchcock). There's less revelation here, though,
with spreads sometimes expanding merely to reveal more of the same scene, and
there's more visual twisting and turning to fit the logic of each new scene in. Kids
who acquired a taste for the conceptual game of the first book will still enjoy
playing it in a new setting. DS
BECHARD, MARGARET 
Star Hatchling. Viking, 1995 
152p
ISBN 0-670-86149-9 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Brother and sister Shem and Cheko get a real shock when they find a space alien in
the forest-not that human Hanna feels any more comfortable to meet the lizard-
like siblings with their flaps and tails and three pairs of arms. Hanna assumes that
her family and the rest of the space colonists on the Alan Turing II have also
landed on this strange planet, but her transponder is not revealing their location,
and the two creatures seem to have decided she is some kind of a pet. While
Bechard is none too clear about the physiology, sociology, or ecology of her aliens
and their planet, the view of Us as the space monster is a well-handled twist. The
sib-squabbling between Cheko, tough as nails, and her gentler brother Shem gives
some bite to a story that, had tables been turned, would simply seem a rehash of
E. T. as Shem and, reluctantly, Cheko, help Hanna find her family. RS
BERRY, JAMES, ad. 
Don't Leave an Elephant to Go and Chase a Bird; illus. by Ann
Grifalconi. 
Simon, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80464-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
As Berry explains in his introductory source notes, this African Anancy tale has
been reshaped according to Jamaican tradition. Anancy receives a corncob from
the Skygod; after he "listened hard hard to himself.., he knew what he had to
do." Trading corncob for water, water for yam, yam for hoe, etc., Anancy finally
makes a triumphant deal, acquiring an elephant. When a pretty little bird catches
his eye, greedy Anancy wants that too, and in the heat of pursuit, loses every-
thing-bird, elephant, and even the little sack of corn flour. "So, you see it now.
You see how the saying 'don't leave an elephant to go and chase a bird' was started."
Older listeners will see it, and may even want to reflect on some adages from their
own culture. But even listeners who are unable to make the connection will be
intrigued by Anancy's trades, which include a little boy whom he acquires for
some palm oil and barters away for a wooden spoon. Grifalconi's bright, poster
color images are based on African carvings; her Anancy is neither man nor spider,
but a stylized sprite who dances with mischievous energy among his human neigh-
156 
* THE BULLETIN
bors. Children will enjoy comparing this rendering with other recent Anansi tales
(Kimmel's Anansi and the Talking Melon, BCCB 6/94, and Temple's Tiger Soup,
9/94, for instance). EB
BYALICK, MARCIA 
It's a Matter of Trust. Browndeer/Harcourt, 1995 
[192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-276660-X 
$11.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200240-5 
$5.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Erika's world falls apart when her father, an official in the state
government, is accused of and indicted for bribe-taking and racketeering. She's
baffled, hurt, and furious, and it doesn't help that her mother refuses to acknowl-
edge the strain, that the family moves to Erika's grandparents' house to escape
from the press, and that Erika's schoolmates, even her friends, seem as excited by
the story as gossip as they are concerned for Erika's well-being. It's interesting to
see the flip side of all those Dad-on-the-lam stories: Dad here is weak but loving,
led into the situation by a stronger friend but weaseling his way out of responsibil-
ity for that very reason, and the family dynamics are imaginatively probed. Erika,
however, is self-absorbed and shallow, the book's least interesting character, and
the writing often bogs down in overexplanation and in descriptions of clothes; nor
is it ultimately clear how much of Erika's father's self-justification the book ac-
cepts. Teens, however, probably won't mind much; they'll enjoy the story for the
same reason Erika's schoolmates do: it's juicy and it's happening to somebody else.
DS
CONLY, JANE LESLIE 
Trout Summer. 
Holt, 1995 
234 p
ISBN 0-8050-3933-3 
$15.95 
R* 
Gr. 7-10
See this month's Big Picture, p. 153.
COOMBS, KAREN MUELLER 
Flush!: Treating Wastewater; illus. with photographs
by Jerry Boucher. 
Carolrhoda, 1995 
56 p
ISBN 0-87614-879-8 
$16.13 
R 
Gr. 3-5
We use a whole lot of water here in these United States, and this book traces what
happens to it when we're through with it. First discussing the need for wastewater
treatment and then briefly describing the history of waste disposal, the author then
moves to explaining the workings of a major waste-treatment plant. She examines
the various stages wastewater goes through at a plant, clearly stating which proce-
dures are federally mandated by the Clean Water act, and then offers a look at
alternative methods for treatment, such as marsh systems and solar aquatics. Coombs
has struck a nice balance between the things kids ought to know about wastewater
and the things they want to know, such as information about slime-eating bacteria
and the various smells that cling to each stage of the process; her tone is lively and
far from dry, but it fortunately avoids the yuckety-yuck goofiness of other works
on the subject. There are a few weak spots, such as the vague explanation of re-
claimed water (more clearly described in the glossary) and the absence of any dis-
cussion of how all this works in a freezing winter (especially considering that one of
the book's subject plants is in Minnesota). Overall, however, this would be useful
as an addition to an environmental unit or as a pre-field-trip indoctrination, in
addition to informing readers drawn by the catchy title. An appendix of entertain-
ing and relevant facts, a glossary, and an index are included. DS
JANUARY 1996 
* 
157
COONEY, CAROLINE B. 
Flash Fire. Scholastic, 1995 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-590-25253-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Beverly Hills 90210 meets The Towering Inferno in this, ahem, sure-fire crowd
pleaser. Materially spoiled and emotionally neglected children of work-obsessed,
beautiful people are collectively alone in their upscale canyon homes as local brush
fires escalate into a raging conflagration. 
Sure, it's formulaic, but the formula
works, as Cooney condenses the plot into one hour and forty minutes of nonstop
action: looters strip prizes from victims, parents pursue their selfish concerns, and
the canyon kids (ranging from tots to teenagers) try to keep a step ahead of fiery
death. The rapid ricocheting among scenes will strike a familiar chord with read-
ers more attuned to TV than to books, hustling even the most reluctant effortlessly
through the novel. EB
CREW, LINDA 
Fire on the Wind. 
Delacorte, 1995 
198p
ISBN 0-385-32185-6 
$14.95 
R Gr. 6-9
The Blue Star logging camp is sweltering in the hot August of 1933, and along
with all the growing-up worries a thirteen-year-old girl has to handle, Storie thinks
she smells smoke. As readers see from interpolated reports from other camps in
the Oregon forests, fire is surely coming to Storie's home. It takes time, though,
and Crew makes an interesting and effective choice in not setting her story/Storie
in the thick of the flames, instead developing fictional tension through Storie's
waiting, watching and worrying-about her father and about the brash and hand-
some, young logger, Flynn, who have both left the camp to help fight the fire. The
narrative of logging-camp life is unsentimental and valuable in its depiction of
what the women did all day; while the book is honest about hardships, the gently
budding romance between Storie and Flynn gives the story a Mrs. Mike flavor
made all the more sweet by its perilous background. A heavy larding of logging
jargon in the opening chapters is too determinedly worked in, but while readers
may not understand every term, they will get the gist: trouble's coming. RS
CURTIS, CHRISTOPHER PAUL 
The Watsons Go to Birmingham-1963. Delacorte,
1995 
2 10p
ISBN 0-385-32175-9 
$14.95 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
Despite its politically charged title and photodocumentary cover, this unexpect-
edly subtle fiction derives its power not from polemics but from patient develop-
ment. A series of funny episodes delineates the Watson clan, an individualistic lot
including smart ten-year-old Kenny (who recounts the tale with personality plus),
his defiant older brother Byron, quirky little sister Joetta, affectionate Dad, and
determined Momma. The center of attention-and trouble-is often Byron, whom
Dad and Momma finally decide to take from their Flint, Michigan home, where
too many temptations abound, to feisty Grandma's house in Birmingham, Ala-
bama, in the hopes that his adolescence will pass into some sort of maturity. The
scene-setting mischief ("Byron had gotten a conk! A process! A do! A
butter!" ... which his father promptly shaves off) and the drive south reach comic-
epic proportions. After coasting from offhand humor ("Here that little egghead
punk is") to deliberate-and kid-authentic-jokes ("A peon? Didn't you see The
Magnificent Seven? Peons was them folks what was so poor that the rich folks
would just as soon pee on them as anything else"), readers get used to the story's
158 
* THE BULLETIN
picaresque movement, only to find the ground suddenly shifting under them with
an ominous rumble. It is the Birmingham church bomb that killed four children,
one of whom Kenny believes for a while to be his sister. The poignancy of the
ending lies in the protagonist's bright spirits darkening after this trauma, without
the author's relinquishing control of a consistently fresh narrative voice. The con-
trast is startling, innovative, and effective in a strong first novel showing how-
and why-the Civil Rights movement affected individual African Americans. BH
GALLOWAY, PRISCILLA 
Truly Grim Tales. 
Delacorte, 1995 
132 p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-385-32200-3 
$10.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Revisionist fairy tales are quite popular these days, and these eight stories are par-
ticularly worthwhile entries in the genre. Like Donna Jo Napoli in The Magic
Circle (BCCB 4/93), Galloway fills out each story from somebody else's point of
view: that of the giant's wife in Jack and the Beanstalk, whose husband suffers
from a deadly disease staved off only by eating the bones of smaller folk like Jack;
of Rapunzel's original parents, who spend years searching for their lost daughter;
of Rumpelstiltskin, whose secret relationship with the miller's daughter has an
additional layer known only to him; and of Cinderella's prince, whose interest in
her springs from his foot-fetishism. Settings and styles vary (there are even touches
of science fiction in several stories), but the interpretations are provocative and
ingenious throughout, managing to add magic to the originals rather than allow-
ing the new layers to diminish them. This might be a good choice for leading
readers into Angela Carter's Bloody Chamber. DS
GARDEN, NANCY 
DoveandSword: A Novelof oan ofArc. 
Farrar, 1995 
[30 4p]
ISBN 0-374-34476-0 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Different in tone and scope from Barbara Dana's YoungJoan (BCCB 4/91), which
recreated only Joan of Arc's early life, Dove and Sword is an old-fashioned histori-
cal epic, told in the voice of that most convenient of narrators, the fictional friend
to the famous. Gabrielle is accompanying Jeanne d'Arc's mother Isabelle on a
pilgrimage to Le Puy, where she convinces Isabelle to allow her to join her friend
Jeanne, who has already left home on her mission and is raising an army in Tours.
To keep safe from rapacious advances, Gabrielle disguises herself as a boy, serving
as a page and healer in Jeanne's army; the disguise nevertheless does not prevent
Gabrielle from conducting a passionate romance with the young nobleman Louis.
Due to some awkward insertions of historical information into conversations, the
book moves slowly, and the dialogue often has the ring of costume drama:
"'Gabrielle,' Pierre cried urgently,'do not linger! The brigands may still be nearby!'"
Still, Gabrielle, the "dove" of the title, is an appealing foil to the fiercer Joan (the
sword), and Garden introduces some feminist themes and questions into the story
that are enlightening without becoming anachronistic. RS
GOURLEY, CATHERINE 
Hunting Neptune's Giants: True Stories ofAmerican Whal-
ing; by Catherine Gourley in association with Mystic Seaport Museum. 
Millbrook,
1995 
96 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-56294-534-3 
$19.90 
R 
Gr. 4-9
Readers hooked on Carol Carrick's Whaling Days (BCCB 7/93) can sign on for a
longer voyage, as Gourley sounds the same waters to a greater depth. The text
JANUARY 1996 
* 
159
teems with kid-pleasing details, from George H. Newton's 1880 traveling whale
show ("Then came the spring thaw... People no longer needed newspaper adver-
tisements to learn of the whale's arrival. They could smell it") to fishing for sea
treats ("After being severed from their bodies, [turtles' heads] laid hold of whatever
touched them, . . . while their eyes glared wildly every few minutes"). Although
the primary source materials excerpted are briefer than the subtitle implies, each
testimonial concisely illuminates an aspect of life at sea and has been carefully
edited to achieve clarity and retain authenticity. In thematically organized chap-
ters Gourley introduces the men and women whose memoirs are featured and
supplements their accounts with historical and technical information. Period litho-
graphs, photos, and charts punctuate the text. Source notes, reading list, museum
directory, and index are included; although some-but not all-nautical and ar-
chaic terms are defined in the margin, no glossary is provided, so landlubbers may
need to tuck a Webster's into their sea chests. EB
GRIMM, JAKOB LUDWIG KARL 
The Seven Ravens; tr. by Anthea Bell; illus. by
Henriette Sauvant. 
North-South, 1995 
25p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-459-5 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-458-7 
$15.95 
R 
5-7 yrs
One of the Grimms' eerier tales (and that's saying a lot) centers on a girl whose
father inadvertently curses her brothers with becoming ravens when they are slow
to bring water for her baptism. As she grows up, learns of their fate, and under-
takes a journey to rescue them, we see her as both patient ("She journeyed on and
on, far away to the world's end") and intrepid (facing the sun that was "hot and
terrible and ate little children"). Losing the magic bone given her by the stars to
gain access to a glass mountain, she cuts off her little finger, sticks it into the
keyhole, and breaks the spell so that "all the ravens were turned back into boys
again." The spaciously composed illustrations have enough surrealistic aspects to
counter the literal drafting; while the characters themselves have a photographic
quality, the scenes include odd perspectives, objects, and overlays that make the art
seem to float in time and space. The sun, for instance, leans on a cloud and wears
a mask combining Native American motifs with robotic metal of a futuristic bent.
Simply translated and unapologetically inclusive of early folkloric elements, this is
a haunting, almost mystically graphic iteration of a nineteenth-century German
variant. BH
GUCCIONE, LESLIE DAVIS 
Come Morning. Carolrhoda, 1995 
120p
ISBN 0-87614-892-5 
$14.96 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Nehemiah Newcastle, a free black farmer in 1850s Delaware, is anxious to keep
his son Free officially ignorant of his Underground Railroad activities. Aware that
their movements are closely scrutinized by patrollers, Free understands the reason
for his father's solicitude, even as he longs to be of service to the cause. When his
father is detained in jail along with a Quaker neighbor, Free gets his chance to
spirit a runaway family to the next station and learns that real peril is not as glam-
orous as he had imagined. Guccione draws a credible portrait of a boy who daily
does a man's work and now justifiably desires a man's responsibility and respect.
She stretches well beyond formulaic middle-grade adventure, weighing the risks
that accompany each decision made along the escape route. Her frank look at the
obsequious demeanor Nehemiah is forced to present to the patrollers will impel
readers to ponder how it might, indeed, take "a smart man to act like he ain't." EB
160 
* THE BULLETIN
HALL, BARBARA 
The House Across the Cove. 
Laurel-Leaf, 1995 
2 58p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-440-21938-8 
$3.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Tyler's seventeen and pretty much on his own: his father recently committed
suicide and his mother is crazy beyond mere eccentricity, so he's spending the
summer in his friend's family's trailer at the lake, doing odd jobs to make a living.
Then he becomes entangled with the wealthy Ramsey family-particularly Abby
Winston, the congressman's daughter who's spending the summer with her Ramsey
cousins. Various people warn Tyler and Abby about the hopelessness of their
involvement and the importance of not crossing class boundaries; another prob-
lem is the mystery of what's going on in the abandoned house across the lake.
Soon Tyler and Abby discover that both problems dangerously converge as, of
course, the secret of the House Across the Cove threatens to destroy them all.
With its appealingly determined lovers and its attractive setting, this is a good
summer read. The mystery subplot, however, is atmospheric but ultimately less
successful, giving way to unlikely melodrama towards the end that undercuts the
believability of the love story. Abby and Tyler are an engaging pair, however, and
readers looking for a literary lakeside adventure will enjoy their story. DS
HARTNETT, SONYA 
Sleeping Dogs. 
Viking, 1995 
130p
ISBN 0-670-86503-6 $12.99 
R* 
Gr. 9 up
The Willows are an eccentric Australian farm family, eking out a living on scrub
land with the help of income from the trailer park campground they haphazardly
run. The five kids-Speck, Oliver, Jordan, Michelle, and Edward, ranging in age
from fourteen to mid-twenties-don't mix with other people in the area; they are
intimidated by their drunken and abusive father and accustomed to their mother's
retreat into fantasy and refusal to move from her safe room. This insular existence
is challenged when Bow Fox, self-important and not particularly talented artist,
comes to stay in the trailer park, finds meddling with the Willows diverting, and
eventually realizes that the family is not only insular but, in the case of Michelle
and Jordan, incestuous. The flap copy invokes Faulkner and Flannery O'Connor
and it's absolutely right to do so; the leisurely (but not opaque) style, looming
symbolism, and odor of captivity and decay is distinctly Faulknerian, but the sav-
age humor and slicing ironies do indeed have an O'Connor ring to them. The
characters are well-differentiated, intriguing, and compellingly drawn, with Bow
Fox's lofty urbanity somehow more offensive than the Willows' dysfunctionality,
so that the evil glee the Willows derive, at least temporarily, from his comeup-
pance is eerily contagious. The flavor of the writing may be different from what
some young adults are accustomed to, but there's enough action (with a swell
sheep-slaughtering scene starting right up on page two) and intensity of emotion
to keep readers involved through to the shocking ending. DS
HEINE, HELME 
Friends Go Adventuring; written and illus. by Helme
Heine. 
McElderry, 1995 
28p
ISBN 0-689-80463-6 
$16.00 
R 
4 -6 yrs
Ya just can't keep 'em down on the farm when there's "adventure in the great,
wide world." Charlie Rooster, Fat Percy, and Johnny Mouse (introduced in Friends)
get their thrills rescuing the goose princess, seeking buried treasure, eluding a can-
nibal chef, and hanging out on a bright crescent moon. Each adventure is built
around the merest hint of text ("Milly the cow's youngest son ... had gotten lost
JANUARY 1996 
* 
161
and was in trouble, so they helped him") and an energetic watercolor spread whose
absurdity spurs viewers to supply the narrative links (the friends join feathers and
tails, bridging a gaping crevice to reunite errant calf and anxious cow). Heine
keeps his audience busy ferreting out details (e.g., a half dozen of the most inven-
tive mousetraps extant), so they probably won't be much troubled by the disjoint-
edness of the trio's exploits. 
Heine assures listeners who want more of the same
that "true adventurers never run out of tales." EB
HESSE, KAREN 
A Time ofAngels. 
Hyperion, 1995 
[22 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2072-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0087-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-8
Hesse has taken on a lot here and managed to do justice to it all. This is a story
about being Jewish, being abandoned, being alone with a life-threatening illness,
and being able to survive through adjustment to sudden new circumstances. And
these story elements, including a mystical vision that borders on fantasy, take the
form of a first-person narrative set during three months of the influenza epidemic
in 1918. Living in Boston with Tanta Rose and an herbalist named Vashti, Hannah
Gold feels deeply responsible for her two younger sisters while her mother, who
returned to Russia to care for their grandmother, is detained there by the war in
which her father is fighting. When Tanta Rose dies of influenza and Hannah's
sisters sicken too, Vashti sends Hannah to relatives, but the girl is already ill. She
takes the wrong train, ends up in Vermont, and is saved by the Red Cross, by an
old German farmer who nurses her back to health, and by a mysterious presence
that seems to appear when Hannah most needs help. In spite of the large cast and
canvas of events, Hesse has taken care to develop secondary characters to a com-
plex degree: Vashti the healer is kind to patients but cruel to the children thrust
upon her; the farmer holds to his pacifist views despite unpopularity with a com-
munity already alienated by his German heritage; and the scholar whom Hannah
so disliked at the book's beginning and whom she reaches out to at the end goes
mad with grief over the death of his own siblings. Perhaps the resolution, when
Hannah finds her sisters alive and in the charge of her boyfriend's mother, is a little
too good to be true, but this is the kind of fluke that sometimes happens in chaotic
situations, and the groundwork has been well laid with period details that never
intrude on the fiction. BH
HITE, SID 
An Even Break. Holt, 1995 
92p
ISBN 0-8050-3837-X 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
A paying job is hard for anyone to come by in the little burg of Wilma, and espe-
cially hard for a twelve-year-old, but persistence lands Frisk a plum position as
manager of the Back Room, the tiny pool hall that serves as summer Mecca to
town teens, and even a few sporting adults. Frisk takes his work seriously and
thereby catches the attention of volunteer fireman Dan Breedon, the local eight-
ball champ, who recognizes that the even-tempered boy has the makings of a good
player. Frisk quickly learns the rudiments, and when Dan is called away from his
round in the seasonal tournament, student takes over for teacher and handily wins
the day. This is the stuff dreams are made of, and, as in a fairy tale, the story's
progress and outcome are never in doubt. But therein lies the charm: Hite invests
his narrative tension in the game itself, not in the set-up, and pits good guys against
162 
* THE BULLETIN
good guys in the friendliest of cutthroat competition. A tenuous and chaste ro-
mance that Frisk promotes between Dan and (divorced) Mom gives the main
characters some additional depth; not to worry, though, for sentiment never gets
in the way of sport. EB
HOFFMAN, MARY 
Earth, Fire, Water, Air; illus. by Jane Ray. 
Dutton, 1995 
76p
ISBN 0-525-45420-9 
$19.99 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Hoffman leads a mazy, meditative tour of the planet's ecology through its four
kingdoms of the classical elements. It's a synthesizing approach that combines
natural history, myths from many groups, bits of quoted poetry, and a fair amount
of didacticism: "If the earth is our mother, we have treated her very badly. We
have moved a long way from the native North American who refused even to dig
in the earth, saying it would mean wounding his mother." That's not only preachy,
it needs a footnote: if Hoffman is speaking of one North American in particular
she needs to identify him; if she is saying that Native Americans as a group did not
dig in the earth she is incorrect. Other claims, such as that abracadabra "comes
from an ancient phrase meaning 'the bull, the only bull,'" and that fire was first
made by people in China 400,000 years ago, need sources as well. But while
readers will sometimes feel puzzled and slightly more often fussed at, there's an
engaging sweep to Hoffman's parade of myth and legend, and Ray's pictures, with
their customary filigree of gold paint, are responsive to shifts in story and mood,
balancing a delicacy of design with some bold images. RS
HUGHES, LANGSTON 
The Block; illus. by Romare Bearden. 
Metropolitan Mu-
seum of Art/Viking, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-670-86501-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
It's a challenging project to combine art and poetry that weren't originally in-
tended as a pair; here Romare Bearden's six-panel collage The Block (1971), serves,
in small selections, big chunks, and the whole scene, as illustrations for thirteen
Langston Hughes poems. The poems are lesser-known verses, possessing Hughes'
unstudied deftness with language and aptness of phrase, plus a certain freshness
that overexposure has unfortunately dimmed in his more famous poetry. Bearden's
collage offers a rainbow palette of geometric buildings standing vigil over a gray
street; a collection of human figures cut and assembled from magazine and news-
paper photographs populate the apartments, the stores, the church, and the street
itself to live their ordinary and not-so-ordinary lives (people gather to chat on a
street corner, a couple makes love in a bedroom, angels accompany a funeral pro-
cession). It's a variably successful partnership: at its best, pictures and text illus-
trate (as in the funeral scene of "As Befits a Man") or extend (as in the understated
affirmation "Motto," paired with a small gleeful romp) each other, and Bearden's
images have a certain repose to them intriguingly counterpointed by the motility
of Hughes' verse. Sometimes, however, the connections seem restricted to the
literal or are simply obscure, and the visual recycling necessary to permit six paint-
ings to illustrate a thirty-two page book too often results simply in repetition rather
than in interesting echoes or perspectival shifts. It's a vivid plunge into a world of
verse and images, however, and one that can provoke many questions about art
and subject matter as well as appealing to kids who might ordinarily resist pictures
or poetry. Biographical notes on Bearden and Hughes are included. DS
JANUARY 1996 
* 
163
KARR, KATHLEEN 
In the Kaiser's Clutch. 
Farrar, 1995 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-374-33638-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Screenwriter Dorothy Dalton has finagled roles in her opus In the Kaiser's Clutch
for her twin children, Fitz and Nelly. The silent-movie serial is intended, in the
World War I era, as anti-German propaganda, and the twins star as, well, twins,
outwitting and outrunning the Kaiser's henchmen at every matinee. Unfortu-
nately, this seems to be happening in real life as well, as Fitz and Nelly find them-
selves pursued by evildoers who don't want the twins to get too close to the story
behind their father's mysterious death in the explosion of a munitions store. Just
like the serial, the real-life plot is silly and contrived; even though this may seem to
be the point, there's no tension between the two levels of story and the writing
isn't funny enough to convince us that the spoof is intended to be taken as such.
What's fun are the details of low-budget silent-film making and the ostentatious
ambitions of director Cedric Holmquist to graduate to real movies; in neither film
nor simple literary appearance are Fitz and Nelly convincing, but a lot surely hap-
pens to them, beset as they are at every turn. RS
KATZ, WILLIAM LOREN 
Black Women of the Old West. 
Atheneum,
1995 
84p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31944-4 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Through a litany of references to African-American women from the colonial pe-
riod through the early twentieth century, Katz succeeds in establishing that women
of color were an important, if unsung, presence on the westward-shifting frontier.
However, "unsung" is the keyword here: sparse gleanings of available information
create a choppy narrative in which each subject's experiences and contributions
can seldom be examined in any depth. Some fascinating but frustratingly brief
anecdotes do emerge-Sarah Lester, an overachieving black student, is expelled
from school in 1858 by her white San Francisco neighbors; Mary Pleasant, a nine-
teenth-century civil-rights activist, doubles as a bordello owner. But even famous
names receive scant coverage: Harriet Scott is little more than a footnote in hus-
band Dred's legal battle, and Lucy Parsons, about whom a great deal is known,
receives less attention than husband Albert. Close and careful interpretation of
Katz's sizeable photo portrait gallery of leisured beauties and work-worn sodbusters
yields more insight into black women's role in the West than does the shallow text.
An index and brief bibliography are included. EB
KENNA, KATHLEEN 
A People Apart; illus. with photographs by Andrew
Stawicki. 
Houghton, 1995 
[6 4 p]
ISBN 0-395-67344-5 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Kenna and photographer Stawicki are to be congratulated as much for what they
don't do as for what they do in presenting a clear, respectful, but ungushing por-
trait of a group, the Old Order Mennonites, living by old rules in a world increas-
ingly foreign to their beliefs. The Mennonites pictured here (and Kenna is careful
to explain that there are variances among congregations) employ little or no mod-
ern technology (cars, phones, electricity), dress conservatively, and attend school
only through the eighth grade. The young people see their futures uniformly: to
marry and to work a farm. Dissent is shown: one man interviewed was expelled
164 
* THE BULLETIN
from his church because he decided he needed a telephone for his work; at the
same time, a photograph of him shows him looking at a photograph of himself, the
"first he has ever seen" while his wife looks away, "since Old Order tradition says
that having photographs of oneself is a sign of pride." The text, topically arranged,
smoothly integrates historical information about Anabaptist persecution into the
contemporary picture (although it is unfortunately vague about where these par-
ticular people are); the black-and-white photographs have an unavoidably old-
fashioned look, but possess both dignity and good humor, as in a shot of Mennonite
girls in long, plain dresses-and running shoes. A bibliography is included. RS
KING-SMITH, DICK 
The School Mouse; illus. by Cynthia Fisher. 
Hyperion,
1995 
124 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2029-2 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0036-4 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Just as church mice live in churches, school mice live in schools, and young Flora
not only inhabits a schoolroom but has dreams of bettering her species by learning
the lessons of education. She's astoundingly successful, mastering reading and
counting to a degree that makes her the family savior when the school attempts to
rid itself of its mousy inhabitants, and she prospers as a teacher to the rest of her
mouse kin. King-Smith always has a flair for this sort of amiable and anthropo-
morphic romp; here he blends harsher truths (Flora's litter brothers and sisters all
die from eating rat poison, and there is constant attrition among the mice from
weasels and other nasties) with whimsical lightheartedness of character (Flora's
high-powered no-nonsense mother and hapless dad are cozily droll) and of dia-
logue ("I'll never squeak to you again!" an angry Flora threatens her boyfriend).
The combination of adventure, humor, and familiar school setting turned upside
down makes this an enticing literary mousehole to slip into. DS
KIRKPATRICK, KATHERINE 
Keeping the Good Light. 
Delacorte, 1995 
224p
ISBN 0-385-32161-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Eliza yearns for escape from the monotony of her days at Stepping Stones Light-
house in Long Island Sound, but when change comes, it's sudden and sweeping.
In 1903, her seventeenth year, Eliza loses her favorite brother, befriends his griev-
ing fiancde, moves onto the more urbane City Island with her pregnant sister, takes
a teaching post, and juggles three suitors. Rigid dialogues offer little distinction
among voices ("'You're very intelligent and you're very beautiful,' Charles said.
"Thank you,' she answered"). Eliza's love life is pure pulp fiction, lapsing into the
(unintentionally) salacious: "Go ahead, take a look at my dagger. I know you're
curious about it," quips her ne'er-do-well beau Ralph. Kirkpatrick adeptly con-
veys the remoteness of lighthouse life and the shock of Eliza's transition, however,
and the historical romance crowd will find plot aplenty here. EB
LEE, JEANNE M., ad. 
The Song ofMu Lan; ad. and illus. by Jeanne M. Lee. 
Front
Street, 1995 
34 p
ISBN 1-886910-00-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When the call to arms sounds, Mu Lan takes her father's place in battle. She rides
her white horse to the fighting, acquits herself bravely for twelve years, and asks
from the Emperor no reward but a camel to take her home again; once home, she
greets her delighted family and reveals her gender to her startled comrades-in-
JANUARY 1996 
* 
165
arms. Joan of Arc and Deborah Sampson rolled up into one makes for an intrigu-
ing story, but the text here (according to the source note, it's an ancient Chinese
folk poem), though simple and lyrical, is too oblique for a picture-book plot. The
elliptical narration of the verse, particularly towards the end, means that young
listeners may not understand, even if adults do, why Mu Lan goes to battle when it
seems she has a brother after all, which side wins the war, who Mu Lan gets her
reward from (the Emperor is termed "the Son of Heaven"), and why Mu Lan's
comrades didn't figure out she was a woman. The warm golden backgrounds
counterpoint the stillness of the figures; the smallness of the details (including the
absence of a beard and mustache which distinguishes Mu Lan) makes the book
more suited for small groups than big audiences. The combination of the spare,
rhythmic lyrics and the precise but unfussy delicacy of the art creates a compelling
world; unfortunately, it will be a difficult world for most young listeners to com-
prehend from the information given. Each spread also sports what seems to be the
story in Chinese; Chinese text from the Sung and Ming dynasties (according to
the notes) appears on the endpapers. DS
LEVIN, BETTY 
Fire in the Wind. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-688-14299-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Several thousand miles and nearly a half century away from Cooney's grand-scale
fire story (see above) is Levin's tightly woven drama which follows the course of a
ravaging 1947 Maine fire and its effect on Meg Yeadon's troubled relatives. As the
students in Meg's two-room school house gleefully anticipate the fire's approach,
her older, mildly retarded cousin Orin joins the men fighting the blaze. Orin's
intimate knowledge of the inferno's path allows him to rescue stranded Meg and
her brother, sheltering them in a culvert; with this act of wisdom and courage he
creeps out from the shadow of his dead World-War-II hero brother and wins the
respect of his heart-hardened parents. While the family tale is solidly satisfying,
the real star is the fire itself, which takes on roles ranging from murderous trickster
("an enormous orange balloon bounc[ed] from treetop to treetop ... Then in an
instant the balloon burst, and a solid wall of fire dropped like a giant curtain from
the trees") to seductive temptress ("Nothing can resist the lure of this beautiful,
deadly creature that has sprung living from the earth"). Pair this with Cooney's
and Crew's books, reviewed above, for a disaster-stories booktalk. EB
MAHY, MARGARET 
The Other Side ofSilence. 
Viking, 1995 
170p
ISBN 0-670-86455-2 
$14.99 
R* 
Gr. 6-9
"Real life is what you're supposed to watch out for, but an invented life, lived
truly, can be just as dangerous." Speechless Hero (labelled an "elective mute" by
those who think they know) sees her life in two parts: real life ("what everyone
agreed about") and true life ("what you somehow know inside yourself"). She
finds these lives entwining, at first seductively and then insidiously, when she is
taken up by an eccentric woman who lives in a spooky old mansion surrounded by
thick woods. Miss Credence "gossips" stories to Hero, whom she renames Jorinda,
and soon Hero realizes that Miss Credence is making a story for both of them, a
frightening fragment from Grimm's "Jorinda and Joringel." Intertextualities abound
in this ambitious novel from Mahy, which works in major motifs from The Secret
Garden as well (Hero finds a girl hidden--chained--in a secret bedroom); even in
166 * THE BULLETIN
"real life" Hero and her troubled but exciting older sister Ginevra are forced to see
themselves in the light of their mother's bestselling child-development book, Aver-
age-Wonderful. While Mahy too often ornaments the narrative with interesting
but surface abstractions about the nature of narrative, the maze of life and stories
she grows is richly traced, and the basic plot (reminiscent of Alan Davidson's The
Bewitching ofAlison Allbright, BCCB 6/89) is a suspenseful gothic. RS
MATHERS, PETRA 
Kisses from Rosa; written and illus. by Petra Mathers. 
Apple
Soup/Knopf, 1995 
4 0p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-92686-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0--679-82686-6 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Because her mother has "a whistling noise" in her lungs, Rosa has to go and stay
with her aunt Mookie and cousin Clara in the Black Forest. She stays, she adjusts,
she learns new things and misses and writes her mother; eventually, she returns
home filled with stories and love. This isn't a lot of story, but it's filled with
specific detail, such as Rosa gathering fruit for jam that her aunt promises will be
called Rosa's Blueberry Delight, and with an intense longing of a child for her
mother. Mathers' illustrations, inhabited by her characteristic naively drawn, open-
faced figures, depict a rural existence of scrubbed wooden floors, lush green hills,
and amiable livestock. The mysterious yet comforting embrace of the forest as
well as the plain, welcoming interiors of Aunt Mookie's home provide shelter for
Rosa's waiting; the wide gaze of Rosa's mother's eyes makes a promise at the end.
RS
MORI, KYOKO 
One Bird. Holt, 1995 
24 2p
ISBN 0-8050-2983-4 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Megumi is devastated when her mother leaves home to escape from her unhappy
marriage; Japanese custom and family pressures require the fifteen-year-old girl to
stay with her disliked father and cut off contact with her mother until Megumi
finishes college. Lost and desolate, Megumi finds some solace in the company of
an independent local woman, a veterinarian who teaches Megumi how to nurse
wild birds back to health, but she finds herself increasingly questioning the stric-
tures and rules of faith, of culture, and of gender roles with which she has been
raised. As she did in Shizuko's Daughter (BCCB 5/93), Mori paints a compelling
portrait of a girl creating herself in her mother's absence; this book, however, doesn't
have the delicate intensity that sustained the previous title, and the avian motif is
suggestive but never quite takes flight. The introspective prose isn't fast-paced but
it's sharpened by underlying social criticism that offers a broader counterpoint to
Megumi's very personal story. DS
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Being Danny's Dog. Atheneum, 1995 
[16 0p]
ISBN 0-689-31756-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
T.R., ten, and his brother Danny, twelve, aren't happy about their post-divorce
move with Mom to a new development in exurban Chicago. All the streets in
Rosemary Acres are named after herbs and spices (they convince Mom to choose a
townhouse on Cajun Drive rather than, yuck, Parsley Place); there's one pathetic
manmade pond, few trees, and fewer kids. Naylor knows how to play such a
JANUARY 1996 
* 
167
setting for both laughs and realism; her treatment of sibling and friendship dy-
namics displays the same sure touch. If The Boys against the Girls, etc. (BCCB 11/
94) is Naylor-lite, and Ice (11/95) Naylor-heavy, this, like the Alice books (4/95,
etc.), occupies a sage yet funny middle ground. Danny is less T.R.'s rival sibling
than his protector, but T.R. learns that Danny needs as much looking after as he
does himself, and their developing friendships with the few neighbor kids bring
entertaining scrapes as well as real trouble. The kids teach Miss Quinn, major-
domo of Rosemary Acres, a thing or two, just as they learn a thing or three them-
selves. RS
PERRY, SARAH 
If... ; written and illus. by Sarah Perry. 
J. Paul Getty Museum/
Children's Library Press, 1995 
44 p
ISBN 0-89236-321-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Each spread has a large-print fantastical postulation ("If cats could fly") facing an
illustrative rendering of the thought made reality (a Siamese wings its way through
the air over a feathered green-eyed tabby); "ifs" range from "if mice were hair" to
"if caterpillars were toothpaste" and "if the moon was square." While the con-
structions are imaginative, most of these ideas are more successful as artistic tropes
than as conceptual challenges; the tacit continuation of most of the sentences is
simply "then it would look like this" (and some of the phrases, such as "if ugly
were beautiful," beg as many questions as they ask). The pastel art offers some
brightly surreal visions, such as the happy girl who has toes for teeth and the loom-
ing dog mountains (more intriguingly eerie is the Medusa with rodential hair),
and youngsters will find their own favorites on which to fixate. This is interesting,
but it's probably more satisfying as a prompter for thinking or drawing beyond the
text than as a book in itself; otherwise, "then what?" starts to sound like "so what?"
DS
PETACH, HEIDI 
Goldilocks and the Three Hares; written and illus. by Heidi
Petach. 
Putnam, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22828-4 
$9.95 
R Gr. 1-3
Afraid that self-referentiality and intertexuality always mean sly, subtle, and so-
phisticated? Here's the book for you: Goldilocks happens into the house of the
three hares (geddit?) and does her usual schtick, while mice living below the hares
comment entertainingly on the action until some treacherous weasels (the infa-
mous Goze family, headed by Pop Goze the Weasel) attempt to rob the hares'
house, whereupon the helpful mice, the returning rabbits, the startled heroine,
and a set of Geese Police all come together to give the story an unexpectedly rol-
licking finish. Throughout, the verbal games and the puns (usually in the speech
bubbles of the characters or of the vocal but never-seen illustrator, although even
the straightfaced narration can't resist a low groaning blow now and then) are
generous, dopey, and entertaining without being condescending. Even primary-
graders will recognize the lameness of some of the wordplay, but the book is so
exuberant and enjoys its own game so much that it engenders the sort of embar-
rassed affection kids feel for their joke-cracking parents. Watercolor illustrations
filled with wide-eyed exaggeration and diverting detail, such as the Quaker Rabbit
on the oatmeal container, are breezy and inviting. Kids will get a kick out of
showing this to their peers or younger siblings; you could also use it to prompt a
wordplay game or assignment, if you're a glutton for pun-ishment. DS
168 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PROVENSEN, ALICE 
My Fellow Americans: A Family Album; written and illus. by
Alice Provensen. 
Browndeer/Harcourt, 1995 
6 1p
ISBN 0-15-276642-1 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 4 up
In her spirited author's note, Provensen explains her choices for this large gallery of
American movers, shakers, Quakers, and quacks: "Not all these Americans are
honored in our national imagination, but they live in mine. They are the compan-
ions of my daily thoughts-a kind of natural resource." (They are also, as Provensen
notes, all dead.) Counting the patchwork of portraits on the endpapers, more
than five hundred Americans are pictured here, assembled in double-spread tab-
leaux under such rubrics as "Warriors and Patriots," "The Pastoral Protectors:
Naturalists and Ecologists," and "Composers, Classy Tunesmiths, and All That
Jazz." Although the lack of an index makes it hard to see ifyour favorite American
is included, just taking one face from each spread reveals the breadth: Thoreau,
Ann Lee, Norman Vincent Peale, Amelia Bloomer, Little Big Man, Lewis Hine,
Zane Grey, Margaret Sanger, Cornelius Vanderbilt, Joe Hill, Rachel Carson, Cesar
Chavez, Gertrude Stein, Margaret Wise Brown, Wallace Stevens, Thomas Jefferson,
Louise Nevelson, Lassie, Jerome Kern, Roberto Clemente, Bonnie Parker, Tho-
mas Edison, and R. Buckminster Fuller are all here; the endpapers include Dr.
Seuss, Betsy Ross, and the Challenger crew. And those are just the famous ones.
Along with the portraits, rendered in Provensen's faux-primitive style that works
quite well with her theme, each face gets a label ("Writer" for Henry James, for
example), and the thematic arrangement allows for some witty juxtapositions:
"Expatriates" shows James Baldwin, Grace Kelly, T. S. Eliot, et al. rowing off to
Europe while Mary Cassatt floats nearby in a boat of her own and banana-skirted
Josephine Baker, "the toast of Paris," flies overhead like an American angel. Each
turn of the page reveals not just another facet of history, but another distinct turn
in Provensen's generous and eccentric imagination. Kids won't know who all
these people are (neither will you, and the book's main text and notes don't always
elucidate), but what a good place to start: pick a face, any face. RS
REISER, LYNN 
Night Thunder and the Queen ofthe Wild Horses; written and illus.
by Lynn Reiser. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11792-9 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11791-0 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
A little girl's artistic creation, the Queen of the Wild Horses, flies off with her in
the night when the relentless noise in the sky wakes them both up. They find
various crowds of noisy creatures (dinosaurs, elephants, elk, bears, and beavers),
each group of which is making its own peculiar noise in resentment of the fact that
another loud noise is keeping them from sleep. Finally the Queen of the Wild
Horses discovers the initial culprit is a tiny rabbit, who thumps to keep awake
because of everybody else's hullabaloo; everybody agrees to dial down the din, and
the Queen of the Wild Horses and the little girl go back and go to bed. If you look
at the story closely, it doesn't make a whole lot of sense, and the choice of dramatis
personae seems fairly random and a little peculiar (dinosaurs and beavers?). There's
a delicate gravity to the rhythmic text, however, that makes it a lulling readaloud,
and the repetition combined with the reassurance about scary loud night noises
will provide comfort to young listeners uneasy on thundery nights; more boister-
ous listeners may enjoy producing booms and bangs along with the story's noise-
JANUARY 1996 
* 
169
makers. The illustrations are simple, nearly cartoonish line-and-watercolor, de-
picting the Queen of the Wild Horses as a rainbow-winged centaur with hints of
the Sphinx in her countenance; the night images are concentrated into small boxes
on big white pages, so the dark is never overwhelming despite its constant pres-
ence. Youngsters won't worry about the logic, and they'll appreciate the partner-
ship between the young girl and the Queen as well as their dramatic yet soothing
adventure. DS
RINALDI, 
ANN 
The 
Secret of Sarah Revere. 
Gulliver/Harcourt,
1995 
3 24 p 
(Great Episodes)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200393-2 
$11.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200392-4 
$5.00 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Domestic tranquility is shattered for Sarah, teenage daughter of Paul Revere, as
hostilities between Colonists and Crown edge toward war. Her father and brother
arrange clandestine activities for the Committees of Correspondence, old Tory
friends may be conspiring with the Patriots, and the handsome widower James
Warren (whom Sarah more than admires) seems to be carrying on with her step-
mother. The opening battles of the Revolution drag some truths to the surface-
Dr. Warren and Mrs. Revere have been part of an information web for the rebel
colonists. Other truths must remain buried: Paul knows who fired the opening
shot at Lexington but he's not telling; Sarah recalls her harsh accusations to Dr.
Warren and muses, "I did not make it up with a dear friend before he died... And
what's true is that I shall carry my shabby, sad secret with me forever." Rinaldi
skillfully balances the dual aspects-witness at the fringe of political upheaval, and
jealous, love-struck teen-of Sarah's life. From the cantankerous grandmother to
the libidinous older sister, each historical footnote character has a credible role in
family alliances and conflicts. Historical ambiguities are zealously preserved; a
concluding note discusses the extent of Rinaldi's literary liberties and comments
on the fate of each Revere child. EB
RINGGOLD, FAITH 
My Dream ofMartin Luther King; written and illus. by Faith
Ringgold. 
Crown, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-59977-5 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-59976-7 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
Ringgold follows her dream-visit with Harriet Tubman (BCCB 12/92) with an-
other to Martin Luther King, Jr., equalling the first book's didacticism but failing
its narrative shape. No one expects a dream to make sense, but dreams and books
are different. Here Ringgold has a young African-American woman falling asleep
and dreaming of King: his early encounters with prejudice at the hands of school
and police, his participation in the Montgomery bus boycott while still a boy-
now wait a minute. That boycott did not take place until King was a grown man,
and it's a scene Ringgold replays later, sticking more closely to the facts. While
this book does have its inspirational moments-such as an anachronistic tableau
of young King holding hands with a white boy and a black one in front of Martin
Luther King Elementary School-it confuses history and vision and chronology in
a way that's only going to muddle children. That said, the paintings have a vivid
if sloganeering life of their own, and viewers will learn that King was important
even while they might not quite understand how. RS
170 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ROSEN, MICHAEL J. 
A School for Pompey Walker; illus. by Aminah Brenda Lynn
Robinson. 
Harcourt, 1995 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-15-200114-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
It's 1923, and elderly ex-slave Pompey Walker is speaking at the ceremony dedi-
cating a school in his name. His is a gentle, generous voice, as he tells the as-
sembled audience the story of how he got so interested in education in the first
place and how he and his white "owner" schemed to get the funds to build a school
for black children in post-Civil War Ohio. It was a trick more associated with
horse thieves than Abolitionists: Jeremiah Walker would sell Pompey at slave
auctions, wait for Pompey to escape, and sell him again. Based upon a number of
(unsourced) memoirs by ex-slaves, the story, lengthy for its picture-book format,
recounts Pompey's childhood and adolescence, perhaps somewhat distanced for
young readers as cast in its reminiscent monologue. Get a little gravel into your
voice, though, and you've got a fine readaloud. Robinson's paintings are loose yet
dignified, with a sophisticated, jazzy line that traces both the times Pompey is
talking about and the times he's talking in. RS
SCHLISSEL, LILLIAN 
Black Frontiers: A History ofAfrican American Heroes in the
Old West. 
Simon, 1995 
80p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-80285-4 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
African-American pioneers, cowboys, miners, businessmen-Schlissel surveys the
contributions of all these and more in her overview of the African-American pres-
ence in the old West (for a book focusing on the black female experience, see Katz,
reviewed above). Short chapters on individuals, such as Mary "Stagecoach Mary"
Fields, summarize biographical facts and rumors; short chapters on particular seg-
ments of the population, such as black homesteaders or black Indians, discuss the
life and historical role of that particular group. The overall effect is jerky and
unsatisfying since the book never tells quite enough about any one subject, and the
writing fails to convey the magnetism of the legendary or the experience of the
ordinary. The book peeks into topical corners many on the subject don't, how-
ever, touching on the image of blacks in dime novels and the importance of early
businessmen as well as more charismatic figures and more familiar stories. The
clean format and a multitude of period photographs open up the pages; endnotes
(which fail to support many statements and quotes), an index, and a bibliography
(including two museums of black western history) are included. DS
SCHWARTZ, HOWARD, ad. 
Next Year in Jerusalem: 3000 Years ofJewish Stories; tr.
and ad. by Howard Schwartz; illus. by Neil Waldman. 
Viking, 1995 
[58p]
ISBN 0-670-86110-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
After an introduction to the "real" Jerusalem, readers are treated to eleven tales
about the fabled city, with sources-ranging from Italy to Iraq-mainly in He-
brew and specifically cited by the author, who has translated and adapted them for
publication here. The range is rich, including a bird of happiness that selects an
ex-slave boy to be king ofJerusalem and a vampire demon contained by Solomon's
ring. Miracles abound but seem as characteristic of general oral tradition as of
Jewish religion, and are thus accessible to a broad range of readers interested in
folklore ("The Language of the Birds") or more specifically in Biblical legends
JANUARY 1996 
* 
171
("The Mountain That Moved"). The format is inviting, with full-page smoothly
stylized illustrations and pastel paper, but the split text may present a dilemma for
inexperienced readers torn between reading the stories themselves and the itali-
cized notes that run in a column alongside; there's no confusion as to which is
which, but there's a simultaneous tug for attention. The access to the stories,
however, and the information about them far outweigh this quibble. At a time
when Middle Eastern politics often dominate the news, it's valuable to explore a
junction of history and story. BH
SHULEVITZ, URI, ad. 
The Golden Goose; ad. and illus. by Uri Shulevitz. 
Farrar,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-374-32695-9 
$16.00 
R 
4-8 yrs
This straightforward retelling of a simpleton's magnetic march to claim the hand
of a princess should attract a new generation of listeners with its challenging chant,
"Hokety, pokety, stickety, stuck, the poor peasant was down on his luck./ Wiggle
and pull, he couldn't shake loose; he, too, had to follow the simpleton's goose."
With eight opportunities to chime in, everyone should catch on by the time the
palace guards bring up the rear. Shulevitz's pied palette and tipsy architecture set
the stage for the angular, crimson-nosed characters who bumble along their jour-
ney in a droll daze. Unfortunately, a few visual glitches mar the effect: some of
the spreads are confusingly composed, and the audience is never treated to a glimpse
of the whole posse connected at once. Nonetheless, this title's sure to incite some
giggles and provide a time-honored lesson in how to "get into a straight line." EB
SPINELLI, EILEEN 
Naptime, Laptime; illus. by Melissa Sweet. 
Cartwheel/Scho-
lastic, 1995 
[24 p]
ISBN 0-590-48510-5 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
18 months-3 yrs
The audience who knows a lot about napping gets a book (with extra-thick pages)
about an assortment of animals taking a mid-day snooze. Spinelli enumerates in
rhyme some of the places animals can be found at naptime: "A patch of leaves
suits three small mice/ And seals like snoozing on the ice." The large and wild
(bears, lions, and sharks), the cozy and domestic (kittens, dog), and critters in
between (snakes, skunks, and birds) are named, concluding with the "spider, in
the kitchen clock," which is right around the corner from the little girl asleep in
her grandmother's arms. Sweet's watercolor and line illustrations capture the gentle,
sleepy mood with tenderness and humor. One textual error, the lions' "jungle"
abode, is defused by Sweet's picture showing the lion in a tree on the plains. The
funny touches, the diverse settings, and the visual joke at the end with the sleepy
little girl surrounded by stuffed animals matching the ones in the story help create
a naptime book that is both soporific and engaging. SDL
TAYLOR, THEODORE 
The Bomb. 
Harcourt, 1995 
197p
ISBN 0-15-200867-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Taylor intersperses his account of a young Bikinian boy's moral coming-of-age
with brief, factual updates on the U.S.'s nuclear rite of passage: the explosions at
Trinity, Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and after the war, Bikini, whose residents would
be exiled to another, poorer, island. Sorry idolizes his uncle Abram and decides to
make Abram's mission-to stop the test bomb and the deportation-his own, a
172 
* 
THE BULLETIN
crusade that acquires even more meaning after Abram is somewhat conveniently
killed by a heart attack. Although the novel is slow to start, the tension becomes
strong once Abram reveals his plan to sail a bright-red outrigger right into the test
site on the morning of the planned bombing, and the last third, in which Sorry
takes over the plan himself, becomes even more suspenseful, with Taylor cutting
more and more quickly between facts and story. The characters are little more
than mouthpieces for a historical event, but it's a piece of U.S. and Pacific Island
postwar history not much written about for young readers, and Taylor does know
how to put them in the midst of it. An afterword explains the results of the blast
and the continuing fortunes of the exiled Bikinians. RS
TESTA, MARIA 
Dancing Pink Flamingos and Other Stories. 
Lerner, 1995 
115p
ISBN 0-8225-0738-2 
$13.13 
R 
Gr. 6-9
In ten stories, Testa writes primarily about kids on the edge of trouble: a boy deals
with the justice system when his friends are caught gambling; a girl faces the anger
of her ex-boyfriend's pals following his death; a young math genius finds that an
encounter with a youthful hood has clarified her life goals. While the stories tend
to thematically weaken at their ends, with resolutions that range from sentimental
to unclear to obviously ironic, they're a generally well-written and appealing lot,
with a gritty and dangerous tang that kids will appreciate. The language is straight-
forward and uncomplicated but still imaginative, and the settings-generally ur-
ban-and the characters-often from the wrong side of the tracks-add a sense of
specific locale. You might try one of these as a readaloud for older kids; this would
also be a good choice for kids not quite ready for the subtleties of short-story
collections such as Judith Cofer's An Island Like You (BCCB 4/95). DS
THOMPSON, JULIAN F. 
The Trials ofMolly Sheldon. 
Holt, 1995 
176p
ISBN 0-8050-3382-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 8-10
Someday children's-book land is going to recognize that book-banners are people
too, but for now, here we go again with a story of enlightened liberals beset by
dumpy, dowdy censors (see also Kathryn Lasky's Memoirs ofa Bookbat, BCCB 4/
94). In this case, they focus their ignorant rage upon the books and video rentals
offered in the delightfully eccentric Vermont country store run by the Sheldon
family; daughter Molly comes in for some even more extreme attention when the
prudes find out she has a gift for psychic healing and decide to try her as a witch.
To his credit, Thompson has fun with the liberals as well, with Molly's dad being
a bit too sure of himself, and he writes here with a light touch (and fewer paren-
thetical phrases than usual). But the witch trial, conducted by fundamentalists
disguised in Dolly Parton and Elvis masks, turns social comedy into burlesque and
throws off the balance of the story. Despite the Lois Duncan-like cover art, Molly's
"trial" only begins at the very end of the book; it's her sweet romance with Eben,
the new boy in town, that will pull kids in, which is A-OK because it's the best
part. RS
Vos, IDA 
Dancing on the Bridge at Avignon; tr. by Terese Edelstein and Inez
Smidt. 
Houghton, 1995 
183p
ISBN 0-395-72039-7 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Vos' title refers to the heartbreaking irony of a false promise made to a Dutch
JANUARY 1996 
* 
173
Jewish family whom the Nazis eventually round up for deportation to Poland and
whose last hope lies in papers issued by a German general who is supposedly grate-
ful for being rescued by the protagonist's uncle. The ending is crucially realistic
and consistent with the story's development, which reflects the uncertainty, vio-
lent mood swings, and erosion of hope among victims of the Nazis' arbitrary per-
secution. Ten-year-old Rosa de Jong, a talented violinist, is especially prone to
depression, regressing into daydreams of a time when she was free to go to school
and play in the street whenever she pleased. Her lessons with a Jewish concertmas-
ter energize her until he is arrested; and it is her visions of him and her playing of
his son's composition that save her life. Yet readers who have become involved
with the sharply characterized individuals of her family and the refugees who find
shelter with them will feel their loss no less sharply for Rosa's escape. The present-
tense narrative lends an immediacy that compensates for the novel's slice-of-life
fragmentation, which in fact contributes to the intended effect of portraying frag-
mented lives. BH
YOUNG, ED, ad. 
Night Visitors; ad. and illus. by Ed Young. 
Philomel,
1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22731-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Kind-hearted Ho Kuan must seal up the family's storehouse walls or his father will
drown the ants who steal the grain. While pondering this dilemma, the young
man is visited at night by the black-clad messenger of a mysterious ruler who
summons him to a beautiful kingdom and even presents Ho Kuan with his daugh-
ter in marriage. An attack by an army of red warriors brings the idyll to an end,
and although Ho Kuan helps his new friends win the battle, he loses his wife and
returns in sorrow to his old home--only to discover it's all been a dream. The
nocturnal visions, however, are reprised in the morning when a line of black ants
leads him to a treasure that will allow him to safely seal the storehouse. The con-
cluding conservationist message ("For the rest of his life ... he taught respect for
all forms of life, no matter how small") flows awkwardly from Ho Kuan's martial
exploits and sad personal loss, and the tale itself is less memorable than the shad-
owy charcoal and pastel renderings through which the ranks of ants parade. An
author's note comments briefly on the sources of this retelling. EB
174 
* THE BULLETIN
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1995
Along with the discussion of the books themselves, our annual in-office
debate over Bulletin Blue Ribbons always includes much wrangling over the defi-
nition of the list itself: what makes a book a Blue Ribbon winner? Oops-not
winner, how about "selection," or "choice," or "recipient"? Is it a list of the best
books, the most interesting books, the most exciting books? All of the above?
Two out of three? After the weeks of wrangling that went on over both the nature
and contents of this year's list, I am tempted to indulge in recursive self-justifica-
tion: the books that got on the Blue Ribbons list are the ones that belong on the
Blue Ribbons list. That said, the twenty-nine books listed below were the ones
this year that most caught and sustained our attention. May they do the same to
yours.
In the five years that the Bulletin has been presenting this list there has
been no attempt to balance the list in terms of genre or reading level, a decision
that is readily apparent below, with fifteen entries in the fiction division, nine
picture books (three of them in one series), and only five works of nonfiction. It is
also the shortest list we've had. Thus, more questions: was it a bad year for non-
fiction? was it just a bad year? where's the poetry? does the Bulletin know what it's
talking about? and so on. None of these questions can be answered without look-
ing at a lot more lists and making one of your own. Then we'll talk; meanwhile,
start your engines.
Roger Sutton, Editor
FICTION
Cameron, Ann. The Stories Huey Tells; illus. by Roberta Smith. Knopf.
(December)
Coman, Carolyn WhatJamie Saw. Front Street. (December)
Conly, Jane Leslie. Trout Summer. Holt. (January 1996)
Curtis, Christopher Paul. The Watsons Go to Birmingham-1963. Delacorte.
(January 1996)
Gantos, Jack. Jack's New Power: Stories from a Caribbean Year. Farrar. (De-
cember)
Hahn, Mary Downing. Look for Me by Moonlight. Clarion. (April)
Hartnett, Sonya. Sleeping Dogs. Viking. (January 1996)
Johnson, Angela. Humming Whispers. Jackson/Orchard. (April)
Lynch, Chris. Slot Machine. HarperCollins. (October)
Mahy, Margaret The Other Side ofSilence. Viking. (January 1996)
Mills, Claudia. Dinah Forever. Farrar. (November)
Pausewang, Gudrun. Fall-Out. Viking. (September)
Stevens, Diane. Liza's Blue Moon. Greenwillow. (March)
Vande Velde, Vivian. Companions ofthe Night. Yolen/Harcourt. (July)
Williams-Garcia, Rita. Like Sisters on the Homefront. Lodestar. (September)
JANUARY 1996 
* 175
PICTURE BOOKS
Perkins, Lynne Rae. Home Lovely; written and illus. by Lynne Rae Perkins.
Greenwillow. (September)
Raschka, Chris. Can't Sleep; written and illus. by Chris Raschka. Jackson/
Orchard. (October)
Schoenherr, John Rebel; written and illus. by John Schoenherr. Philomel
(December)
Scieszka, Jon. Math Curse; illus. by Lane Smith. Viking. (October)
Wells, Rosemary. Edward in Deep Water; Edward Unreadyfor School; Edward's
Overwhelming Overnight; written and illus. by Rosemary Wells. Dial.
(November)
Wooldridge, Connie Nordhielm, ad. Wicked Jack; illus. by Will Hillenbrand.
Holiday House. (December)
Yolen, Jane. The Ballad of the Pirate Queens; illus. by David Shannon. Har-
court. (April)
NONFICTION
Colman, Penny. Rosie the Riveter: Women Working on the Home Front in World
War II. Crown. (July)
Feelings, Tom The Middle Passage: White Ships, Black Cargo; illus. by Tom
Feelings. Dial. (December)
McMillan, Bruce. Nights of the Pufflings; written and illus. with photographs by
Bruce McMillan. Houghton. (March)
Murphy, Jim. The Great Fire. Scholastic. (May)
Rochman, Hazel, and Darlene Z. McCampbell, comp. Bearing Witness: Stories
ofthe Holocaust. Kroupa/Orchard. (October)
176 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Karr
African Americans: Hughes
African Americans-fiction: Curtis;
Rosen
African Americans-history: Katz;
Schlissel
African Americans-stories:
Ringgold
Ants-stories: Young
Art: Hughes; Perry
Atomic bomb-fiction: Taylor
Aunts-stories: Mathers
Australia-fiction: Hartnett; Klein
BEDTIME STORIES: Reiser;
Spinelli
Brothers-fiction: Naylor
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Conly; Hartnett
Censorship-fiction: Thompson
Child abuse-fiction: Hartnett
China-folklore: Lee; Young
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Byalick; Testa
Disasters-fiction: Cooney; Crew;
Levin
Dreams-stories: Ringgold
Ecology: Coombs; Hoffman
Family problems-fiction: Byalick
FANTASY: Avi; Galloway
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Byalick; Mori
Filmmaking-fiction: Karr
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Berry; Grimm;
Shulevitz; Young
France-fiction: Garden
Friends-stories: Heine
Germany-folklore: Grimm
HISTORICAL FICTION: Crew;
Curtis; Garden; Guccione;
Hesse; Karr; Kirkpatrick; Levin;
Rinaldi; Taylor
History, U.S.: Gourley; Guccione;
Provensen; Rinaldi
Holocaust-fiction: Vos
Illness-stories: Mathers
Incest-fiction: Hartnett
Jamaica-folklore: Berry
Japan-fiction: Mori
Jews-fiction: Hesse; Vos
Jews-folklore: Schwartz
Language arts: Petach
Lighthouses-fiction: Kirkpatrick
LOVE STORIES: Crew; Garden;
Hall; Kirkpatrick; Thompson
Maine-fiction: Levin
Mice-fiction: Avi; King-Smith
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Mori
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Mathers
Music and musicians-fiction: Vos
MYSTERY STORIES: Hall
Nature study: Hoffman
Oregon-fiction: Crew
Owls-fiction: Avi
Pacific Islands-fiction: Taylor
POETRY: Hughes
Reading aloud: Avi; King-Smith;
Testa
Reading, family: Provensen
Reading, reluctant: Byalick;
Coombs; Cooney; Hall
JANUARY 1996 
* 
177
Religious education: Kenna;
Schwartz
Revolutionary War-fiction:
Rinaldi
Rivers-fiction: Conly
Rural life: Hartnett; Kenna
School-fiction: King-Smith
SCIENCE FICTION: Bechard
SHORT STORIES: Galloway;
Testa
Slavery-fiction: Guccione; Rosen
Social studies: Hoffman; Kenna
SPORTS STORIES: Hite
Story hour: Berry; Grimm; Heine;
Mathers; Perry; Reiser; Schwartz;
Shulevitz; Spinelli; Young
Suburban life: Naylor
Summer-fiction: Conly
Voyagers and travels-fiction: Curtis
War-fiction: Garden
War-stories: Lee
Water: Coombs
West, the: Katz; Schlissel
Whaling: Gourley
Women's studies: Katz; Mori
World War I-fiction: Hesse; Karr
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION
OF THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS (ISSN
0008-9036), as required by 39 U.S. Code 3685.
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS is pub-
lished eleven times a year (monthly except August); annual subscription price is
$40.00 (institutional, domestic), $47.00 (institutional, foreign), $35.00 (individual,
domestic), $42.00 (individual, foreign).
The owner and publisher is the University of Illinois Press acting for the Graduate
School of Library and Information Science at the University of Illinois, a non-
profit organization. Office of publication is located at 1325 South Oak St., Cham-
paign, IL 61820. The managing editor is Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center
for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51 Gerty Drive, Champaign,
IL 61820. There are no stockholders, bondholders, mortgages, or other security
holders.
The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this organization and the ex-
empt status for Federal income tax purposes have not changed during the preced-
ing 12 months.
Average number of copies printed per issue (net press run) during the preced-
ing twelve months: 6029; number for single issue nearest filing date: 6018. Av-
erage number of copies of each issue distributed by mail to paid subscribers during
preceding twelve months: 4888; number for single issue nearest to filing date:
4836. Average number of copies distributed for free per issue during preceding 12
months: 120; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 95. Average number
of total copies distributed during preceding 12 months: 5008; number for single
issue nearest to filing date: 4931. Average number of copies of each issue not
distributed (office use, unaccounted, spoiled after printing) during preceding 12
months: 1021; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 1087.
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.
Nancy K. Barrett
Assistant Business Manager, University of Illinois Press
September 29, 1995
inner in every way....:Y
r
@
IP OF AESOP
Dlen * illustrated by Karen Barbour
d Barbour prove a dynamite pairing in this
ure book.... [This] could easily outdistance
petition to become the best loved Aesop
e shelf."-Publishers Weekly, starred revie
ems each encapsulate one of Aesor
y rhythmic and neatly apt....Karen
ers the animal cast and its landsca
glowing Mediterranean colors."
-The Bulletin of the Center for Child
32 pages * Ages 5-10 * Hardcover
0-590-47895-8 * $14.95
THE BLUE SKY PRESS
An Imprint of Scholastic Inc.
,~`1IDpa~Bd7~--
I
' 
School Library Journal and Publishers Weekly star
,Pe!14v ChSot'S
"Lear's genius is an inspiration to all, but few illustrators
are talented enough to bring it to life as brilliantly as
Marcellino has in this splendid picture-book edition of
three classic nonsense tales: 'The Pelican Chorus,'
'The Owl and the Pussycat,' and 'The New Vestments."'
-ALA Booklist
'A great treat for lovers of Lear." -The Horn Book
'A visual and verbal feast .. . Marcellino's interpretations
exhibit exuberant joy worthy of Lear's fine word play."
- SLJ
'A must-have for fans of Lear- and of Marcellino."-PW
All Ages. $14.95TR (0-06-205062-1); $14.89LB (0-06-205063-X)
TH6
ATCER SHCLL
GRETCHEN SCHIELDS
K 
ua-i-Helani is a beautiful island paradise protected
from the rage of the Fire Queen by the magic of the
Water Shell. When the Water Shell is stolen, disaster
strikes the island and only the child Keiki survives. It is up to
her to overcome the power of the destructive queen and restore
the beauty and tranquillity of Kua-i-Helani.
This stirring tale of loss and hope based on the legends
and lore of the South Pacific islands will transport readers to a
magical world.
"With The Water Shell, Gretchen Schields proves she is as
wonderfully gifted a storyteller as she is an illustrator. She
has created a classic tale of nature, hope, and regeneration."
-Amy Tan, author of The Joy Luck Club
Ages 6-10 0-15-200404-1 
$16.00
HARCOURT
__ ý B R A (" F
Kirkus Reviews pointer*
E M" a WH 
u 
a 
x 
a M 
I 
Ra 
H
In this novel set prior to Weetzie Bat, teenager Dirk McDonald, who
later becomes Weetzie's best pal, has always known he is gay. What he
doesn't know is how to tell his grandma Ffi-until one night, when all
the wild and powerful story-images from the past begin to flow out
of a magic lamp. "Fleshing out one of the colorful characters introduced
in Weetzie Bat, Block displays the brilliant, original vision that makes all
her books unforgettable."-Kirkus Reviews. "Here, more purposefully
than ever before, Block weaves a safety net of words for readers
longing to feel at home with themselves."-School Library Journal.
Ages 12 up. $13.95TR (0-06-024879-3); $13.89LB (0-06-024880-7)
Joanna Cotler Books
Francesca Lia Block's other Weetzie Bat Novels for Young Adults
WEETZIE BAT 
CHEROKEE BAT AND
$14.89LB (0-06-020536-9) 
THE GOAT GUYS
$3.95PB (0-06-447068-7) 
$14.89LB (0-06-020270-X)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book 
$3.95PB (0-06-447095-4)
WITCH BABY 
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
$14.89LB (0-06-020548-2) 
MISSING ANGEL JUAN
$3.95PB (0-06-447065-2) 
$14.95TR (0-06-023004-5)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book 
$14.89LB (0-06-023007-X)
$3.95PB (0-06-447120-9)
S- H 
T-.. 
lliCh,11,; 7l 
7-/, 
'.
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022 
·
W-' Starred by SLJ
"This collaboration speaks with a graceful simplicity that not only
firmly fixes the relationship between art and science, but also
subtly draws children into the miracles of nature itself. Elegant oils
depict a solitary tree, wrapped round by an expansive sky, as it's
altered by the cycle of the seasons. The tranquil mood of the
artwork carries over into the main text, which provides the necessary
context for the painting.... A fascinating, even glorious celebration
of nature that will stir both children and adults."-Booklist
Ages 5-9. $15.95TR (0-06-024883-1); $15.89LB (0-06-024884-X)
l HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
S10 
East 53rd Street, New York 10022
WHEN
PLAGUE STRIKES
The Aliw DeatAi, SmnatYugz, AIDS
BY JAMEIS CROSS GBIN~d
"While the Black Death, smallpo, and
AIDS may seem to have little in commnon,
Giblin draws paalels between them that
are both stikng and fascinating.... Giblin
moves deftly from one historical highlight
to another, touching briefly, yet thoroughly,
on the major events that make up the history
of each disease. A fascinating read:' -SLJ
"A highly informative, engrossing work:'
--Kirkus Reviews
"Books about disease are supposed to be
informative, helpful, and above all cautionary;
Giblin has the courag to be something else:
interestingl'--"The Big Picture"' The Bulletin
of the Center for Children's Books
Agnes 10 up. $14.95T 
(0-06-025854-3)
$14.89LB (0-06-02863)
Among Jame Cross Gibi's other books from HarperCollins
ThE RIDDLE OF THE ROSETI'A 
BE SEATE
STNIE: KE1Y T ANCIEN 
EGYPT 
A BOOK ABOUT CHAIRS
Photographs, prints, and drawings 
Photographs and drawings
Ages 10 up. $14.89lB (0-690-04799-1) 
Ages 10 up. $15.OOTR (0-06-021537-2)
$5.95PB (0-690-446137-8) 
$14.89LB (0-06-021538-0)
H 
IarperCollins Children 'SBooks
10 E~c 53rd Srreer New York 100122
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETURN PosTAGE GUARATEE
Ul 
EElillU
I
I
I
I:
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
LRNMMEMUEUEEMMU3MAKMAMNMMMUKNR~tlE
Believing Sophie
By Ha7el Htthins llastrated by Dorothy Donohae
a
That Itte g at the door has a packof ough
'ops h• den he 
lt cnd she dd not pay for
herar
ophe canot belee she tse been accused of
hopfting The clerk at Lucas Grocery says
ope moust speak to Mn Luca hiself
ophe feelsver sdnd 
a bit 
cqeasy She tres to a
hink how she w~ make M Luca anderstand that
he d pcy for the cough dops-the first time she
Sin the store.
*POINTER 
Kirkas Reviews
".There sn't a chd on earth who hasn't been
ujustq accused of wrong 
This book gets
al the rcCMes right ad serves tth 
a stoy that
des wil mrne for gokdd
I 
I
SAlbert 
Whitman & Company
63f0 Oakton Street * Morton Grove. Inois 60053-2123
I 
UU UEMEn 
EREE 
MMXU M 
UU UM 
U 
U 
UU U 
U 
UU UU
IUli 
AU IsU Is1 Ai 
|J 
UJ 
AU 
U 
A 
U 
s 
U 
A A A 
U 
IS Is
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
~ ·:·
r
u
I
--
~~-~~---~
~j11~3; 
ir
r
roll 
!i
i
.. 
.~
--···~
p
