ILLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
I 
1l~
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
j/; 
II_
a!::· -i·;
:-:::-
r'
"I 
i 
w
PAUL
GOBLE
-The 
Big Picture starred review /
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
1i'- 
"Goble's storytelling is superb; his illustrations extraordinary
and filled with fascinating detail. From an exceptional talent:
a sure classic." 
-
Starred review / Kirkus Reviews
"[A] tale of generosity, bravery, and forgiveness."
-
School Library Journal
"Once again, beauty and authority distinguish Goble's
presentation of a Native American legend." -The 
Horn Book
All ages. $16.99 Tr (0-06-029813-8)
$17.89 Lb (0-06-029814-6)
;7
Bn
hins 
7 IM ren s ooks
L-I
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
October 2003
Vol. 57 No. 2
i 
LIBRARY OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF ILINOIS
URANA CHAMPAIGN
A LOOK INSIDE
47 
THE BIG PICTURE
Sidekicks by Dan Danko and Tom Mason; illus. by Barry Gott
48 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
52 
* Colibri by Ann Cameron
53 
* Vote! written and illus. by Eileen Christelow
58 
* Boxes for Kaje by Candace Fleming; illus. by Stacey Dressen-McQueen
67 
* One Witch by Laura Leuck; illus. by S. D. Schindler
78 
* Faultine by Janet Tashjian
83 
* Minn andJake by Janet S. Wong; illus. by Genevieve C6td
85 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
86 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
__
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Molly Dolan
Krista Hutley
Hope Morrison
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $70.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2003 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Barry Gott from Sidekicks ©2003. Used by permission of Little, Brown and
Company.
OCTOBER 2003 
* 47
THE BIG PICTURE
Sidekicks
by Dan Danko and Tom Mason; illus. by Barry Gott
Thirteen-year-old Guy Martin wants to be a superhero (as his sidekick name of
Speedy suggests, he's now the fastest person alive, beating out the former Fastest
Man Alive Man), but right now he's serving his apprenticeship as a sidekick to
Pumpkin Pete, hanging out in the Sidekick Clubhouse and waiting for the call to
aid the League of Big Justice in the fight against evil. After three weeks, however,
he's finding that he's mostly aiding them in the fight against household and per-
sonal untidiness as he listens to the complaints of his fellow sidekicks ("That's
what I was thinking. Smash evil and be popular. I had no idea I'd be doing
laundry and listening to people whine all the time"), and he's getting a bit restless.
He's got more than soapsuds on his hands soon enough, though, when the League
of Big Justice Headquarters of Big Justice (there's a lot of redundancy in good) is
blown up by the Brotherhood of Rottenness, and the League members-from
King Justice to Captain Haggis, the Librarian to Ms. Mime-have been captured
by the Brotherhood. Sidekicking being something less than a rigorously screened
calling (Spelling Beatrice has "been a sidekick for almost three years, but what she
really wants to do is act"), it's a rather motley and disunited crew that's left to save
the abducted superheroes and foil Rottenness' plan. Fortunately, Guy's stalwart
efforts are rewarded (and his noble willingness to sacrifice himself proven superflu-
ous), and the world is saved (except for Ohio, whose inhabitants were unfortu-
nately all turned into puppets).
Pastiche is nothing new in children's literature these days, but let's face
it-it's a hard genre to sustain for the length of a novel. Sidekicks pulls off that
difficult task, with lull-free pacing and relentless humor that makes this suitable as
a readaloud or an enticement for reluctant readers (an easygoing format, topped by
Gott's slickly comic black-and-white chapter headpieces, keeps the look unthreat-
ening but sophisticated) as well as kids just looking for an enjoyable literary romp.
Danko and Mason evince the unflagging energy of The Naked Gun's Zuckers and
Abraham-or, rather, an energy that is funny even when it flags, as when the
chapter titles career off into commentary ("Chapter Seven: These Chapter Titles
Make No Sense"; "Chapter Nine: The Ninth Chapter"); another obvious fore-
runner here is the loving mockery of Get Smart or, more recently, The Tick. Here
also is that same blend of genuine intelligence and lovable dorkiness (a mixture
likely to be found in this book's readers as well). On the intelligence side, it's got
a collection of quips larger than a superhero's tights wardrobe and a viewpoint of
the proceedings that's comfortably cynical ("There isn't much science to being a
superhero sidekick. You have to have a legal waiver from your parent or guardian
48 
* 
THE BULLETIN
unless you're eighteen. Ever since that ugly court battle with UnderAge Albert
and the child labor laws, it's just plain impossible to become a sidekick without a
bundle of legal paperwork"); what's more, it even keeps touch with the actual, if
somewhat peripheral, plot throughout. On the other hand, the authors are smart
enough to understand that elevation can be the enemy of enjoyment: the book
understands the importance of cheap laughs (there's a villain, Le Poop, whose
powers are ferocious bodily odors, so that when he unleashes his particular variety
of gas attack "Spice Girl fell before its stinky awesomeness"), and it's also got an
endless supply of dumb jokes about various lame superhero/sidekick names (Bar-
of-Soap Boy "had to move someplace where it didn't rain so much").
Underneath the scoffing and the goofing, however, is some real, if still
humorous, heart. The book nicely plays Guy's daily life at school and home against
his other existence (his parents insist on secrecy about his superpowers, saying "We
don't want some supervillain blowing up our house because you foiled his plan to
rule the world, young man"), and his longing to display his secret brilliance in
order to impress the beauteous Prudence Cane will ring true with every kid, side-
kick or not, who's yearned for the object of his affection to have her eyes opened to
his true worth. Guy's loving mom provides him and another sidekick with a ride
to the Brotherhood of Rottenness (after seeing her son and his colleague safely
belted into the seats of the family Oldsmobile, she warmly demonstrates herself as
an in-touch parent by informing Exact Change Kid that "Guy tells me you throw
pennies"), and in fact she's still patiently waiting in the parking lot for her son at
the end of the book. Amid all the jokes about the embarrassing aspects of
superheroism is genuine appreciation of the phenomenon of bravery, fictional or
real: "And maybe that's what really makes them heroes-because they're not per-
fect or superhuman; because they bleed and break like everyone else; because they
might die, but they still rush into danger." And whether they admit it or not,
that's what draws a lot of would-be sidekicks, who'll be gratified that the book
truly appreciates their pleasures. (Imprint information appears on p. 56.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AGEE, JON 
Z Goes Home; written and illus. by Jon Agee. 
di Capua/Hyperion,
2003 
30p
ISBN 0-7868-1987-1 
$16.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
A big red Z clambers down from the letters identifying the City Zoo and heads
home, but it's got to get through an alphabetical landscape first. A green lien, a
span Bridge, a nibbled-on cake, and a sequence of other items appear on route,
until finally the Z arrives home to the O, W, I, E, and exclamation point that
make up the rest of its zowie! The text is essentially limited to the names of the
alphabetical elements (the last page defines them all, which will help with some of
the lesser-known words), so there's not really a story beyond spotting the Z on its
OCTOBER 2003 
* 49
fairly random travels. The alphabetical items appear in the shapes of the relevant
letters, an approach reminiscent of Stephen T. Johnson's Alphabet City (BCCB
11/95); the effect here is less sophisticated and more whimsical and accessible,
however, especially with entries such as the B-shaped bridge (the Z can be spotted
under one of the arches) and the K-shaped individual throwing a karate kick (which
boots the Z along its way). Agee's multi-tiered lines give his figures a softly fuzzy
edge that gentles the firm solidity of their geometry, and the subdued palette al-
lows the scarlet Z additional prominence. Though this doesn't pull together as
one might hope, it'll still reassure many youngsters with its playful and nonthreat-
ening approach to the alphabet. DS
ALPHIN, ELAINE MARIE 
Picture Perfect. 
Carolrhoda, 2003 
24 4 p
ISBN 0-8225-0535-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
When Ian Slater's best friend, Teddy, goes missing, the ninth-grader is under-
standably unsettled by two undeniable facts: he was the last one to see Teddy, and
his memory is now completely blank regarding several hours of the critical day.
Teddy's boozy mother enlists the school's help in finding her son, and Ian's father,
who is the school principal, complies with public fervor and private reluctance. As
Ian struggles to regain memory of his possible role in Teddy's disappearance, all he
seems to stir up is confusion over his own dual "faces"-good, responsible kid at
school, and worthless son at home. His confusion is augmented by the reemer-
gence of "Luke," once an imaginary childhood friend and now Ian's alternate per-
sonality, who feeds him clues about Teddy's fate and suggestions for action. It
soon becomes obvious that duplicitous Mr. Slater is somehow involved, and Ian/
Luke comes to Teddy's rescue in a harrowing showdown with Dad. Readers may
solve most of the "mystery" long before the melodramatic conclusion of the over-
drawn (and overwrought) tale, but they'll probably hang in till the bitter end as
Alphin reels out deliciously damning evidence against the emotionally abusive Mr.
Slater and rushes Ian through a hasty reintegration of his fragmented psyche.
Mystery fans may roll their eyes, but devotees of the psychological potboiler will
gulp this right down. EB
ALTER, ANNA 
Francine's Day; written and illus. by Anna Alter. 
Greenwillow,
2003 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623937-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623936-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
Comfort-loving Francine does not want to get out of bed, get dressed, and eat her
breakfast, but mostly, she does not want to go to school. The text features gentle
repetitions of what Francine does not want to do followed by compelling reasons
to do them; the familiar clink of dishes pulls her out of bed, and the chill morning
air forces her into her warm clothes. Once at school, the rhythm of the text changes,
and she thinks of the things she does want to do-home things, like picnics with
her mom and art projects on the porch instead of sitting at the art table. In the
end, just as she has taken her thoughts of home with her to school, she brings
school home, reciting a poem for her mother and singing her school songs for her
stuffed animals. Francine, a reddish-brown fox with a white face and pin-dot eyes,
is easily recognizable as a shy, home-loving preschooler who is not quite ready to
be forced into new routines. There are no amazing changes in attitude here; Francine
50 
* 
THE BULLETIN
doesn't so much change her mind or her behavior as she quietly learns to accept the
intrusion of school into her day. The illustrations, like the text, have an unfussy
reasonableness to them, with sepia crosshatching to gentle the already subtle col-
ors, and chunky figures that exude mammalian warmth. Though not overly origi-
nal, the book will go a long way toward damping down back-to-school anxieties.
KC
BANKS, KATE 
Walk Softly, Rachel. Foster/Farrar, 2003 
14 9p
ISBN 0-374-38230-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Now that Rachel is fourteen and her best friend has just moved away, she's think-
ing more and more about her older brother, Jake, who died seven years ago. Rachel
begins to investigate the brother she never really knew, reading the journal she
finds in his carefully preserved room and getting close to Bowman, an older boy
who had worshipped Jake. The farther she gets in Jake's journal, the more she
realizes that her brother's golden facade hid a frightened and self-doubting boy
struggling with the same issues Rachel does, and that her family has hidden the
truth about Jake's death. The point of the burden of family expectations is a
legitimate one, but the narration is so highly polished and adult-oriented that it's
rarely plausible as the voice of a fourteen-year-old, nor, in Jake's journal, as the
voice of an older teen; in fact, the elegant turns of phrase and deliberately compact
sentences distance feeling instead of reflecting it. The constant and detailed paral-
lels between Rachel's thoughts and Jake's every journal entry strain credibility, and
the clear advance telegraphing of Jake's real fate (his car accident was actually a
suicide) undercuts the revelatory impact of the journal. There's more success in
the depiction of Rachel's understated relationship with troubled Bowman and her
quiet alliance with her grandmother, who's trying to dodge the disapproval of
Rachel's mother. Despite these strengths, this fails to rise to the impact of other
sibling-death books, such as Griffin's The Other Shepards (BCCB 11/98), or to the
level of Freymann-Weyr's My Heartbeat (5/02), one of the best recent novels about
family expectations. DS
BARTON, BOB, ad. 
The Bear Says North: Tales from Northern Lands; illus. by
Jirina Marton. 
Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 2003 
[72p]
ISBN 0-88899-533-4 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Canadian storyteller Bob Barton retells ten tales from "northern hemisphere coun-
tries that border on or contain frozen tundra, snowy mountains, dense wilderness
and ice fields," drawing from sources as varied as P. C. Asbjornsen and the Bureau
of American Ethnology. Several stories are reminiscent of familiar pieces: "The
Honest Penny" recalls "Dick Whittington and His Cat"; "Frostbite" suggests La
Fontaine's fable "The North Wind and the Sun." Others give a new vantage point
into traditional folktales: "The Reindeer Herder and the Moon" offers a tricksy
heroine who foils a besotted lunar lover, "Anders' Hat" is the loving story of a little
boy who would rather have a cap knit by his mother than a king's crown, and
"Katya and the Goat with the Silver Hoof" is a bittersweet tale of an orphaned girl
who almost finds her fortune. Barton's retellings are solidly constructed and some-
times lyrically imagined, and while there is a literary formality to their structure,
they still have a solid, effective pace. The art, one full-page oil pastel illustration
for each tale, is uneven; the figures are often clumsily rendered, but there are some
OCTOBER 2003 
* 
51
eerie and evocative images. A concluding page of notes gives specific written refer-
ences. JMD
BEST, CARI 
When Catherine the Great and I Were Eight!; illus. by Giselle
Potter. 
Kroupa/Farrar, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-374-39954-9 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Sara, narrator of Three Cheersfor Catherine the Great! (BCCB 1/00), relates another
tale about her life-loving Russian grandmother. This time around it is summer in
the city, so hot that Sara's friend, Monica, "waters her feet instead of the flowers."
The neighbors in the apartment building are gathered on front stoop and sidewalk
trying to cool off, when a snatch of song ("'I like the beach in June,' sings Mary
Caruso") inspires everyone to jump into Mr. Minsky's old car and head for the
shore, "three in the radio seat, three in the sandwich seat, and two in the carsick
seat in the way, way back." Traffic is terrible, but Grandma Catherine is not to be
deterred from having a good time, despite heat and traffic jam: an impromptu
highway waltz, ice cream before lunch, even a roadside picnic enliven the long, hot
trip. Once at the beach they race into the water, and Sara gets a lesson in floating
"like a flower" from her indomitable grandmother. This summer adventure has
the cumulative momentum of a folktale, with the winning heroine conquering
every obstacle with nothing but determination and a cheerful temperament; the
text has the well-honed ring of a beloved family story (the jacket notes say this tale
was inspired by the author's grandmother). Potter's retro-flavored palette suits the
slightly old-fashioned tone of the text. Compositions have the slapdash irregularities
of children's drawings, the most important features and characters in the foreground,
the backgrounds more suggestive than specific. Round geometric masses add a
comfortable edge to the urban scenes, and the contrast between the rounded bodies
and angular facial features, elbows, and knees of the human figures adds a lively
visual tension. Young readers will recognize the emotional highs and lows of the
tale and delight in the protagonist's good-humored triumphs. JMD
BRITTON, SUSAN McGEE 
The Treekeepers. Dutton, 2003 
245p
ISBN 0-525-46944-3 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Bird is an orphan ("eleven or twelve years old, she didn't know for sure which, and
small for her age") living under the cruel reign of Lord Rendarren. After being
taken under the wing of Farwender, a mysterious man with a talent for knitting
and healing, Bird is sent to live with Soladin, a sad woman with a mysterious past
who harbors three other orphans in her isolated cottage. Bird acclimates quickly
to cleanliness and a full belly as well as to the mystery that surrounds Farwender
and Soladin. She discovers that Soladin's betrayal of a sacred trust put Rendarren
in power and destroyed the Tree That Speaks, which provided spiritual enlighten-
ment and physical health to the people; Bird also discovers that she is the key to
the prophecy, the child who can plant the Seed that will restore the Tree. Britton
draws from standard and specific fantasy tropes-the religious imagery is undeni-
able but not overwhelming, and the soul-sucking powers of Rendarren's anointed
Searchers strongly echo Rowling's dementors. The solid characterizations of the
children offset the iconic archetypes of the primary adults in this fast-paced adven-
ture; unfortunately, the second half of the novel is somewhat shallowly drawn, and
the conclusion is a disappointing rush of end-tying. Still, Bird is an appealingly
scrappy street urchin with a courageous heart, who takes on the task of restoring
52 
* THE BULLETIN
the kingdom with the insouciance of a youth that believes itself invincible; her
journey to the knowledge that this is not so is both stirring and unsettling. JMD
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH 
The Warriors. Darby Creek, 2003 
117p
ISBN 1-58196-002-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Now living with his lawyer mother in a condo in Maryland, Jake Forrest misses
the Iroquois reservation he's left behind, along with his friends, his cultural roots,
and his lacrosse team, the Junior Warriors. Once at school, Jake discovers that one
of the reasons he got into exclusive Weltimore Academy was his high-scoring record
in the sport, but easy acceptance onto the team does little to make the boy feel
comfortable in this different world: "It was crazy, he thought, how so many of
things [sic] they did to show him they liked him and approved of him instead
made him feel uncomfortable. Instead of making him feel included, they made
him feel like more of an outsider." Complicating matters is the fact that his la-
crosse coach/history teacher delights in bloody historic tales of Indian fighting and
views the game as warfare. When the coach is shot while shielding a woman and
child in a holdup, Jake must reconsider his opinion of the man. This measured
novel suffers from some well-intentioned didacticism and a lot of overly conve-
nient plotting and characterization. Despite the purposiveness, this is a useful
sports story accessible to older and younger readers, and complex issues of race,
perception, and individual purpose are couched in understandable terms. Jake is
still a thoughtful and thought-provoking character, and his willingness to recon-
sider his initial impression of his coach is a development worthy of discussion.
Jake's response to the news of his coach's wounding-the organization of a cer-
emonial game of lacrosse-is both culturally specific and culturally inclusive,
an example of balance that deserves emulation. JMD
CAMERON, ANN 
Colibri. Foster/Farrar, 2003 
227p
ISBN 0-374-31519-1 
$17.00 
R Gr. 6-10
At twelve, the narrator has almost forgotten her real name, Tzuntin, after being
called "Rosa" for so long by the man known to her as Uncle. She's been traveling
Guatemala with Uncle for years, assisting him as he pretends disability to beg for
money ("Uncle was good at being deaf and dumb and lame, but he was an artist at
being blind. No one blind ever looked as blind as he did, and no one good ever
looked so good") and hopes for a windfall that will make him rich. When Uncle
involves Tzunun in a plot to steal a centuries-old statue of the Virgin Mary from a
church, she finally turns against him, betraying his plan to the police and fleeing to
the shelter of a kindly wise woman, hoping against hope she can return to her own
family but fearing Uncle's revenge. Cameron effectively articulates the point of
view of a young girl who clings to her sense of self and origins despite a gulf of
years, and her unassuming narration remains credible throughout in its perplexity
and quiet rebellion. Characters are softly but cearly traced, including various
people Tzundn meets on her travels, some of whom surprise her with their kind-
ness and assistance; there are also unstrained and occasional allusions to Guatemala's
history of political upheaval as well as its sometimes edgily multicultural present in
the detailed evocation of the localities through which the girl travels. It's Tzunuin
herself who remains the focus, however, with the wise woman's prophesies-that
Tzunmn will lead Uncle to treasure, and that he owes her a piece of paper-shap-
ing the story much as they shape Uncle's and even Tzundn's actions. This is a
richly imagined account of a world far away from many readers, and the classic
OCTOBER 2003 
* 53
motif of a girl separated from her family and hoping for reunion will draw even
young people skittish about tales of other regions. DS
CAMPBELL, BEBE MOORE 
Sometimes My Mommy Gets Angry; illus. by E. B.
Lewis. 
Putnam, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23972-3 
$16.99 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Annie wakes to the smell of "hot, golden circles" and spends a warm, happy morn-
ing with her mom before going to school. Her school day is ordinary; she gets
teased in a mean way by a boy in her class and in a friendly way by her girlfriends
as they walk to and from school. After school, however, her mother's mood has
changed, and she screams at Annie, not just in garden-variety crankiness but in
full-blown pathological rage. Annie retreats to her room and calls her grandmother,
who reminds her of her action plan for when her mother's anger gets out of con-
trol: she can call her grandmother, go to a neighbor's house if she's scared, eat
from a secret stash of snacks so she doesn't have to bother her mom, and finally,
she "can think happy thoughts" until the rage passes. By choosing a symptom that
is prevalent in many kinds of mental illness, from bipolar disorders to addiction,
and by placing it in the context of a child's everyday life of school, friends, neigh-
bors, and family, Campbell tells a story that will resonate with many children, and
Annie's viewpoint is believably childlike. Unfortunately, there's a lack of perspec-
tive beyond that limited view, and young audiences will have a hard time differen-
tiating this "angry" parent from the normal anger most experience. The plot is
more effective as a setup for discussion than as an explanation or reassurance in its
own right-kids will legitimately inquire why Annie's neighbor and grandmother
don't intervene instead of leaving the child responsible for her own safety with an
apparently dangerous parent. A detailed author's note articulates Campbell's rea-
sons for writing the book and the problems of mental illness that she wants to
foreground; a full page of quotations from mental-health professionals leave no
doubt of the book's special topic. Lewis' illustrations depict a full range of emo-
tions for Annie, from the tentative happiness of the morning, to the fear of the
afternoon, to the more liberated cheer at the end where Annie's fears have been
assuaged. This has too many holes to work as a standalone explanation, but for
children living with mentally ill parents and for professionals who work with them,
this book may open up discussion in a nonthreatening way. KC
CHRISTELOW, EILEEN 
Vote!; written and illus. by Eileen Christelow. 
Clarion,
2003 
[48p]
ISBN 0-618-24754-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
Here's the whole loud and messy business of U.S. politicking and election, trimmed
down to size for young viewers. As a young African-American girl supports her
mother's bid for mayor (Ms. Smith is running on the tax-raising platform of building
new schools), she learns a lot and even teaches a little about the system. She's
outraged at Mom's opponent's less than candid debating style (Mr. Brown, who
favors building a sports stadium, fails to point out that his agenda also requires a
tax increase). She's also troubled by citizens who say they seldom vote, and she
wallops them with a lively, pointed little discourse on darker historical times when
only propertied white men were permitted at the polls. There's solid information
about political parties, secret ballots, political ads, voter registration, recounts, and
54 
* THE BULLETIN
even the ethics of fund-raising ("If you donate lots of money, maybe the candidate
will listen to you more than to other voters. Is that fair?"), all introduced at natural
entry points within the fictional story. The cartoon cast is animated and commit-
ted; speech bubbles capture the voters' reaction to and participation in the cam-
paign: "Remind me, why am I paying $250 for a hamburger?"; "Smith's campaign
needs money. Brown has a lot more for ads." Useful end matter includes a time-
line of voting rights, "More about Political Parties," and a list of Internet resources.
Running commentary by the adorable but largely extraneous Smith family dogs
can be a bit distracting, but this is, nonetheless, an excellent overview of the demo-
cratic process, warts and all. EB
COHEN, PETER 
Boris's Glasses; tr. by Joan Sandin; illus. by OlofLandstrom. 
R
& S,2003 
28p
ISBN 91-29-65942-6 $15.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
When Boris notices that the TV is blurrier than usual, he calls the repairman, only
to find that the problem is not with the set, but with him: he needs glasses. After
acquiring his new specs, he is at first intoxicated by all there is to see. Why, he had
no idea that Gudrun, the bakery owner, was so pretty, or that his own house was so
dirty! He even decides that someone who sees as well as he should get a job. Soon
he realizes that having a job is rather tedious, and that TV actually looked better
before he got his specs. If seeing clearly means taking on the responsibility of a job
and maintaining a clean house, then Boris will take blurry, thank you very much,
reserving his glasses for more important things like courting Gudrun. Boris's large
head, prominent teeth, and tiny legs give him an earnest yet slightly daffy de-
meanor; the cartoon illustrations of Boris' environs show detail without clutter
and fully realize the comic potential of the text without resorting to slapstick.
Despite the appeal of Landstr6m's illustrations, the humor aims a bit high for the
target audience. Young readers, especially those who need their glasses, probably
won't relate to Boris' preference for fuzzy TV, nor will they likely be able to emu-
late his dilettantish attitude toward work that requires decent vision. Nonetheless,
Boris makes a case for the value of seeing things your own way, even if that way is
a bit out of focus. KC
CoY, JOHN 
Two Old Potatoes and Me; illus. by Carolyn Fisher. 
Knopf,
2003 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92180-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82180-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
When a girl prepares to throw out some old potatoes, her father suggests that they
plant them instead. With the telephoned guidance of her grandfather, she and her
father put them in the ground and tend them throughout the summer ("We weeded.
We watered. We waited"), reaping a glorious spud harvest come fall ("I count
sixty-seven and our bucket is overflowing"). That's a solidly enjoyable story in its
own right, but the real highlight here is the blessedly understated background
narrative about the girl's adjustment to her parents' split ("How's your bedroom at
your mom's house coming?" Dad asks as they garden). Allusions to that situation
are naturally interwoven into the dialogue taking place mid-cultivation, reflecting
the real-world tendency for hard topics to be more easily tackled when people are
up to their elbows in an enjoyable task; dialogue and actions are quietly believable
OCTOBER 2003 
* 
55
("When we watered, I accidentally sprayed Dad with the hose"), and it's a particu-
larly nice touch that both father and daughter are proceeding in new territory
together according to Grandfather's telephoned say-so. The overdesigned visuals
unfortunately sometimes overpower the quiet story and the readaloud text tends
to sacrifice visibility for artistry, but the focus on the central pair remains strong.
Paints on cut paper allow for a play of striated textures while still keeping the softly
shaped outlines of father and daughter visually dominant; imaginative use of white
line on red or blue for the figures suggests the changing light of sunset and twi-
light, while in ordinary daylight their skin has warm brown tones that particularly
set off the smiles on both faces. As a father-daughter book, a gardening book, a
making-food book (a recipe for mashed potatoes is included), an adjustment-to-
changes book, this has all the unpretentious savor of a nice plate of spuds. DS
CREECH, SHARON 
Granny TorrelliMakes Soup; illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Cotler/
HarperCollins, 2003 
141p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029291-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029290-3 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
The complex stew of adolescent emotions is just beginning to simmer for Rosie;
fortunately for her, she has Granny Torrelli to help her sort things out with soup,
pasta, and stories. First, there is the boy, Bailey, who has lived next door all her
life. They have been inseparable pals, even through times when their differences
have caused their tempers to flare at each other. Bailey is visually impaired; Rosie
is a tad jealous of all the fuss over his special school and his special Braille books,
but she is also worried that these things might force them apart. Then there is the
new girl, Janine, who has moved in down the street and immediately started mov-
ing in on Rosie's relationship with Bailey. Why is he so eager to teach Janine how
to read Braille, when he was so mad at Rose for learning it? What's more, why is
she so irritated about it? Granny's didactic tales of her own childhood are far too
convenient, and it's more literarily inevitable than realistic that they effect a rap-
prochement between Rosie and Bailey. Despite its sentimentality, though, this
story of nascent romance and intergenerational friendship has genuine warmth
and affection. The prose is strong and simple, and the composition is enhanced
for reluctant readers by spaces between each short paragraph and italics for dia-
logue, making this a quick and affirming (if obvious) read. Raschka adds a bit of
graphic flourish to the package with small chapter headpieces and a couple of
squiggly-lined portraits to open the book's sections. KC
CRONIN, DOREEN 
Diary ofa Worm; illus. by Harry Bliss. 
Cotler/HarperCol-
lins, 2003 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000151-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000150-X 
$15.99 
R Gr. 2-4
Yes, this is the diary of a worm, a young baseball-capped guy noting his under- and
above-ground activities from March to August. Worm Kid studies hard but has a
tendency to eat his homework, he enjoys taunting his sister ("I told her that no
matter how much time she spends looking in the mirror, her face will always look
just like her rear end"), and he plays with his friend Spider, though they have the
occasional falling out ("He told me you need legs to be cool"). There's no real
story arc, and it would be nice to have a fuller explanation of the environmental
importance to which the text often alludes, but the shovelfuls of jokes will squirm
56 
* THE BULLETIN
directly to kids' funnybones: the limitations on worm hokey pokey, the dangers of
hopscotch, and the pleasures of scaring kids on the playground will all make kids
wiggle with giggles. Bliss' earthworms are tidy and personable crawlers in trim
black lines, sporting small individual identifiers such as eyeglasses and hair rib-
bons, with touches of highlighting and shading suggesting wormy segmentation.
The poker-faced juxtaposition of underground habitation with the homey details
of above-ground life adds additional humor for viewers, who will also get a kick
out of the wormy photo album that constitutes the final spread. This will be a
snicker-provoking readalone for readers reluctant and otherwise, and it would also
make a comic readaloud-ifyou're feeling especially wicked, pair it with a fishing
story. DS
DANKO, DAN 
Sidekicks; by Dan Danko and Tom Mason; illus. by Barry
Gott. 
Little, 2003 
97p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-316-16845-9 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-316-16844-0 
$4.99 
R* Gr. 3-7
See this month's Big Picture, p. 47, for review.
DEMI 
Muhammad; written and illus. by Demi. 
McElderry, 2003 
42p
ISBN 0-689-85264-9 
$19.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Extending her works on Eastern spiritual leaders (Buddha, BCCB 6/96; Dalai
Lama 4/98), Demi recounts the life of Muhammad, messenger ofAllah and founder
of Islam. Readers follow the Prophet through his orphaned childhood, his career
as trustworthy merchant in his merchant uncle's employ, and his marriage to widow
Khadijah. The bulk of the text, however, covers the founding and spread of Islam
up to Muhammad's death in 632 C.E.. Demi integrates legend and miracles asso-
ciated with the Prophet (an early prediction that Muhammad would become a
prophet; his journey to Seventh Heaven on "a divine creature called Buraq") into
the historical struggles against Meccan tribal persecution and the mission to preach
"the existence of only one God, the importance of equality for all people, and the
necessity of freedom of thought and speech." Although the picture-book format
may be initially attractive to younger children, the dense, stately text calls for a
focused and more sophisticated audience; despite the foreword's encomium to the
biographical aspect, the personal chronicle here is surprisingly incomplete (none
of Muhammad's other wives are even alluded to). This is, however, a smoothly
written and a respectfully admiring account of the birth of one of the world's
major religions. In deference to Islamic structures against portraying the Prophet
and his family, Demi renders Muhammad as a golden silhouette; unfortunately,
readers who regularly skip forewords may not catch on to the significance of this
convention. Delicate but largely unindividuated figures are deployed in richly
hued, stylized scenes, liberally embellished with metallic gold and framed against
parchment-like backgrounds. A note on the Islamic creed, a map, and a bibliogra-
phy are included. EB
EMERSON, SCOrr 
The Case ofthe Cat with the Missing Ear: From the Notebooks of
Edward R. Smithfield, D.V.M.; illus. by Viv Mullet. 
Simon, 2003 
[240p]
ISBN 0-689-85861-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Walt Disney Studios imagined Sherlock Holmes as a mouse; for Scott Emerson,
OCTOBER 2003 
* 57
he's a dog-a Yorkshire terrier, to be exact, by the name of Samuel Blackthorne.
He and his faithful assistant, Dr. Edward R. Smithfield, meet in a bar on the
waterfront where Blackthorne astounds Smithfield with his powers of deductive
reasoning. From this beginning, Smithfield and Blackthorne take up residence
together, and the peace-seeking Smithfield gets reluctantly drawn into the nefari-
ous underworld of nineteenth-century San Francisco. When a lovely greyhound
persuades Blackthorne to investigate the disappearance of her brother, the detec-
tive quickly learns that the mild-mannered accountant has been shanghaied. Ap-
parently, he has been working on a counting machine that will be of considerable
use to the gaming industry. As it turns out, the man responsible for the kidnap-
ping is a corrupt politician, and the detective temporarily strikes a most unsatisfac-
tory bargain-his silence for the safety of his friends. Dissatisfied with this
arrangement, the good guys and all of their friends and associates put out to sea on
casino owner Big Bill Powell's yacht, while sending their story in installments to
the newspaper, effectively putting the politician out of business. The good charac-
ters may not be the only ones dissatisfied with this resolution to the case; readers
may find that it's decidedly anticlimactic and a tad dull, and the eponymous char-
acter plays only a bit part, hardly deserving top billing for his involvement. There's
still a colorful cast of gamblers and gangsters, however, and the atmospheric detail
and effective parody may be sufficient to please readers biding their time till Stewart's
next Sam the Cat mystery (The Big Catnap, BCCB 11/00). KC
FAILING, BARBARA LARMON 
Lasso Lou and Cowboy McCoy; illus. by Tedd
Arnold. 
Dial, 2003 
40p
ISBN 0-8037-2578-7 
$16.99 
R Gr. 2-4
Since a cowboy hat fits McCoy in the hat shop, he becomes Cowboy McCoy,
ready for ranch action; after he runs into Lasso Lou, the two start at the Bo-Dee-
Oh Ranch together. That's mighty fortunate for McCoy, since he's not quite a
natural at this cowboy thing: 
he at first wants to name his horse
SundayMondayTuesdayWednesdayThursdayFridaySaturday (until with Lou's help
he settles on "Payday"); he has a little difficulty getting the hang of riding ("Payday's
head is missing," complains a distressed-and tail-facing-McCoy); he's alarmed
by the scary bumpy things in his bed (which prove to be his boots). Cheerfully
clueless McCoy is a reliably risible protagonist, and Lou's matter-of-fact yet tactful
assistance ("You're still a real cowboy," he soothingly tells McCoy when bedtime
requires the removal of cowboy hats) adds an affectionate touch without prevent-
ing readers from laughing at McCoy's blunders. Chapteresque sections (unobtru-
sively heralded by an oversized initial letter) provide useful stages for readers or for
readers aloud, and there's a subtle tightening up of the picture-book format into a
more text-emphatic layout that will keep readers from feeling they've strayed into
baby territory. Arnold's comic vision has an inviting roundness but also a certain
subtle up-to-date sophistication in its polished humor. In a genre where protuber-
ant eyes predominate, his characters' peepers are the ne plus ultra of bulgy, perhaps
because their humongous hats are jammed down behind them (the phrase "all hat
and no cattle" has seldom been so aptly visually expressed), and in fact they inhabit
a rather bulgy western landscape, with amiably sausagy horses and puffy little dust
clouds. Like Betsy Byars' Golly Sisters, McCoy is endearing in his obliviousness to
his own folly; also like them, he makes an eminently satisfying early-reader pro-
tagonist. DS
58 
* 
THE BULLETIN
FINE, ANNE 
The True Story of Christmas. Delacorte, 2003 
133p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90156-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73130-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Well, it's the true story of Ralph Mountfield's Christmas, anyway, and the family
strains that make it a panorama of holiday horror. It's bad enough to have the
sheer numbers (Christmas dinner eventually totals sixteen, including little Albert
from next door who "just sort of dribbled over"), but those numbers include such
luminaries as nasty Great-Granny (motto: "If I had my own teeth, I'd bite you"),
spoiled little cousin Titania (who has to be cunningly prevented from inflicting
odiously saccharine song-and-dance fairy princess performances on anything that
stands still), and mischievous Uncle Tristram (who enjoys setting relations at one
another). No matter what Ralph does to try to stay out of trouble, it seems like
there's always somebody who thinks he's doing the wrong thing, which is how he
ends up sent to his room on Christmas day. This runs more towards sitcom con-
trivance than Fine usually does, and there's ultimately not much plot behind the
holiday battling. The uproar is gratifyingly comedic, however, and kids will par-
ticularly enjoy the merciless pillorying of the attended, especially when the targets
are adult-indulged children and less than stellar adults (evil Great-Granny will be
some youngsters' secret hero). The liveliness and quick patter makes this an easy-
to-digest holiday read-or a daring change of pace for a holiday readaloud. DS
FLEISCHMAN, PAUL 
Breakout. 
Marcato/Cricket, 2003 
124 p
ISBN 0-8126-2696-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
As he did in Whirligig (BCCB 6/98) and Mind's Eye (10/99), Fleischman explores
the theme of redemption through art, here the artistic genre of stand-up comedy.
Tired of being bounced from one foster home to another, Del takes the drastic step
of faking her death, only to have her escape from L. A. thwarted by a traffic jam. In
the midst of the jam, she finds herself moving from cynical critique of human
failings, to dispassionate observation, to a desire to connect. Realistically, she doesn't
process her epiphany as she is having it but rather simply performs a spontaneous
stand-up comedy routine that is well received and offers her a sense of connection
with her fellow travelers. Years later, Del transforms the episode into a one-woman
play, where she reveals what she has learned over time. This later performance is
interwoven with segments of real-time narration of Del in the jam, and the back-
and-forth contextualization of present experience with future insight lends cre-
dence to her eventual epiphany. In other words, she doesn't get it, all at once, at
seventeen, in the middle of a traffic jam, but has to wait for it all to make some
kind of sense, which it eventually does. This realistic processing-over-time may
prove helpful to the teen struggling with difficult circumstances; there is potential
here for creative-writing assignments that mirror Del's imaginative activity of trans-
forming suffering into comedic narrative. The text is undeniably didactic, but
there is enough humor and pathos in the stories of the stuck motorists to sweeten
the lesson. KC
FLEMING, CANDACE 
Boxes forKatje; illus. by Stacey Dressen-McQueen. 
Kroupa/
Farrar, 2003 
35p
ISBN 0-374-30922-1 
$16.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
The title page of this story features a freckle-faced Rosie on her way to the mailbox
with a package addressed to Katje Van Stegeran in Olst, Holland. The story proper
OCTOBER 2003 
* 
59
then begins in post-World War II Olst, which, like the rest of Europe, is facing
serious shortages of everyday items. Katje shares the contents of her package with
her mother and the postman-well, she keeps the soap and the socks, but she
shares the chocolate-and writes a letter of thanks to Rosie, explaining that sugar
is not available in Holland. Rosie responds by sending four bags of sugar, and
their correspondence continues. Rosie enlists the help of her townsfolk, and through
food and clothing drives, the people of Mayfield, Indiana help the people of Olst
survive the worst winter of the century. The grateful people of Olst respond by
sending what they do have-tulip bulbs-in return, leading to a flowering of grati-
tude in the Midwest. The endpapers show Mayfield before and after the tulips.
According to an author's note, this touching tale is based on the true experiences
of the author's mother in 1945, and there's also a sweetly folkloric overtone to the
simple exchange. The busy, energetic illustrations reflect the styles and textiles
popular during the period, conveying an exuberant spirit of hope and generosity
despite the privations. Careful atmospheric detail marks both people and objects;
for instance, the authentic ethnic similarity of the folk of Olst is counterpoised
against the diversity of the folk in Mayfield. It will take a storyteller of stern stuff
to maintain dry eyes during a readaloud of this one, but exploring the joys and
satisfactions of grass-roots war relief couldn't be more timely. KC
FLEMING, DENISE 
Buster; written and illus. by Denise Fleming. 
Holt, 2003 
34p
ISBN 0-8050-6279-3 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Buster is a happy dog until his household expands to include a fluffy white kitten
with a pink nose and green eyes: "Buster was not happy. Buster was afraid of
cats." Betty, the kitten, does her best to endear herself to Buster, purring and
winding around his legs, but all Buster can think is "If I ignore her... maybe she'll
go away." Betty doesn't go away, and poor Buster finally reaches his breaking
point, slips under the fence, and runs off to a park. There the dog enjoys himself
until, ready to go home, he realizes he's lost. When he looks up, "in the top of a
tall tree several streets over, Buster saw a waving ball of white fur. The tree looked
very familiar. The waving ball of fur looked very familiar. It was Betty!" Using
the kitten as a beacon, Buster finds his way home, where "he had everything he
could ever want-and more." Fleming's tale of the lovable if kitten-cowed Buster
has a steadily rising momentum that will capture listeners from the opening lines.
The loose division of the text into titled sections suggests a beginning chapter
book without the formality of a traditional format. The fiber illustrations have a
textural solidity emphasized by the richly saturated colors, with the warmth of the
sunny yellow walls balanced by the cool, leafy greens of garden and park. Varied
compositions-full-page, double-page spread, and vignettes-keep the eye busy,
and the changing expressions of the put-upon Buster offer an emotional anchor to
the art. While this title will make a very effective group readaloud it also might
serve as a readalone for those brave just-reading youngsters ready to venture out
onto a slightly challenging literary sea. JMD
FREEDMAN, RUSSELL 
In Defense of Liberty: The Story of America's Bill of
Rights. Holiday House, 2003 
196p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1585-6 
$24.95 
R* Gr. 6-10
Opening with requisite attention to the Founders' misgivings about central gov-
ernment, against which the Bill of Rights would serve as first line of defense, Freed-
60 
* THE BULLETIN
man quickly shifts emphasis to current interpretation of those rights and the piv-
otal Supreme Court decisions that articulated them. The famous citations are, of
course, examined--Tinker and Brown and Island Trees-and particular attention
is paid to how high-court decisions have limited rights of minors or put them on
par with those of adults. The amendments are covered in orderly fashion, but
Freedman is flexible enough to allow more space for multifaceted amendments
such as the first (freedoms of speech, expression, religion, and assembly) and to
trim discussion of the more elusive tenth (powers reserved to the States). Coverage
is generally up to date, including discussion of the unresolved post 9/11 debate on
"mass arrests and secret detentions" of suspected terrorists, and even the thorny
issue of rights of noncitizens is introduced. Ample illustrations include black-and-
white pictures of famed litigants and Supreme Court justices who have written
seminal decisions and dissents; useful end matter includes a general index, index of
Supreme Court cases, notes, bibliography, and the Bill of Rights itself. Readers
eager to join in debate on the day's hot-button legal issues can bring themselves up
to speed, and kids simply cramming for required U.S. Constitution tests will find
Freedman to be a concise and lively tutor. EB
FUQUA, JONATHON SCOTT 
Catie &Josephine; illus. by Steven Parke. 
Houghton,
2003 
[72p]
ISBN 0-618-39403-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 3-5
Catie is lonely in her new home, finding it difficult to make friends in the last week
of school, but she's seen an appealing girl her age around her house and she's
determined to befriend her. She's delighted when she finally manages to meet
Josephine (who shares Catie's interest in Barbies), but it soon becomes clear that
their friendship will have to surmount some unusual challenges, since Josephine is
a ghost. This is a promising setup, and young readers will revel in the notion of
having a secret ghostly friend all their own. Unfortunately, the execution isn't up
to the concept: the writing is flat, and both the realism and the ghostly interac-
tions are strained and unconvincing, with the latter emphasizing special effects
more than atmosphere or plausibility. Color photographs add an interesting di-
mension to the narrative, but they're a mixed bag: some, like the one of a shad-
owed Josephine peering through a doorframe at a pensive Catie, offer texture lacking
in the prose, but others suffer from obtrusive assembly and predictable visual ef-
fects; the pictured girls also look somewhat younger than the readership age the
somewhat dense text suggests. Kids may enjoy flicking through the photos even if
they find themselves skimming over the words; for more successful ghostly prose,
they can turn to one of Betty Ren Wright's junior offerings, or Neil Gaiman's
Coraline (BCCB 11/02). DS
GANTOS, JACK Jack Adrift: Fourth Grade without a Clue. 
Farrar, 2003 
197p
ISBN 0-374-39987-5 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-7
We've seen Jack Henry in four volumes following him from fifth through eighth
grade (Heads or Tails: Stories from the Sixth Grade, BCCB 7/94, etc.), and again
Gantos extends the saga on the front end by taking Jack back to his fourth-grade
year. That year starts with the family move to North Carolina for Jack's father's
work with the Navy, ensconcing the family in a swamp-situated trailer and land-
ing Jack, as usual, in a series of situations that provoke serious, if not always effec-
OCTOBER 2003 
* 
61
tive, thought: he's head over heels in love with his teacher, Miss Noelle; he's
learning about manly ways of dealing with distress from his father; he finds a
surprising amount of satisfaction in caring for a duck who had a bad life start.
This doesn't muster quite the impact of the other Jack entries, since the episodes
vary in effect and never really cohere, but Gantos still retains his humorous and
bracing honesty about Jack's exploration of the world. Jack's struggle with his
father's version of manhood is the strongest theme here, including some authentic
depiction of his flirtation with bullyhood; astute readers will notice that Jack's
father's rather questionable success in the manhood area (he receives an Other
Than Honorable discharge from the Army) adds a troubling shadow to Jack's
explorations. Readers will probably have a better experience starting with another
Jack book and working their way down, but there's plenty here to reward them
when they arrive. DS
GREENBERG, JAN 
Romare Bearden: 
Collage of Memories. Abrams,
2003 
48p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8109-4589-4 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Greenberg, half of the writing team of Greenberg and Jordan (Action Jackson, BCCB
11/02, etc.), here offers a concise overview of the life and work of prominent twen-
tieth-century artist Bearden. The text offers a rich account of the artist's youth in
North Carolina and later in New York, as well as providing a description of his
burgeoning artistic career and his artistic style. The last is even more vividly con-
veyed by the book's strongest merit: crystal-clear, elegantly displayed reproduc-
tions of Bearden's own works serving as illustration for the relevant bits of biography.
Though the prose is thoughtful and informative, this doesn't have quite the tex-
tual energy of Greenberg's other works, since sentences are sometimes choppy and
the focus jumps around somewhat, presumably to better accommodate the rel-
evant artworks. The art itself is quite breathtaking, however, providing impact
that's likely to be apparent to kids from a wide range of ages and viewpoints; the
layout treats page and text as part of the art's frame, using carefully chosen strong
background colors and bold black text to balance out the vivid hues in the works.
The articulation of the art's everyday-life subject matter may encourage readers to
look at their own surroundings with fresh eyes, and the emphasis on biographical
connection may well give young collagistes ideas for their own art. A brief adden-
dum describes Bearden's collage methodology; a timeline, bibliography, endnotes,
glossary, and list of museums containing Bearden's work are included. DS
HALLS, KELLY MILNER 
Dinosaur Mummies: Beyond Bare-Bone Fossils; illus. by
Rick Spears and with photographs. 
Darby Creek, 2003 
48p
ISBN 1-58196-000-X 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Readers hoping for linen-shrouded behemoths, or at least a cache of desiccated but
intact remains, may be momentarily disappointed to find that paleontologists'
definition of a mummy differs from archaeologists'. Here the deceased dino has
been thoroughly permeated by minerals that retain the animal's structure after its
organic matter has decomposed. Any disappointment should soon dissipate, though,
as readers learn just how much fascinating evidence can be gleaned from the
mineralized forms. A thescelosaurus discovered in South Dakota has its fossilized
four-chambered heart still nestled among its ribs; a Chinese sinosauropteryx retains
unhatched eggs within its pelvis and intriguing traces of feathers on its body.
62 
* THE BULLETIN
Hadrosaur "Leonardo" in North Dakota has a whopping seventy percent of its
soft tissue in a fossilized state, with its scaly skin patterns "as easy to see as the nose
on your face." 
Each brief chapter focuses on a particular fossil and includes
information on its discovery, clear but often undersized color photographs of the
remains, a color drawing that reconstructs the dinosaur as it may have appeared,
and sidebars on the scientists now engaged in studying the finds. A final "Bits and
Pieces" chapter highlights other significant discoveries from 1990 to 2002; besides
the customary bibliography, glossary, and index, addenda include listings of kid-
accessible books, videos, websites, and dig-site destinations, all helpfully annotated.
Dig in. EB
HARRIS, ROBIE H. 
Go! Go! Maria!: What It's Like to Be 1; illus. by Michael
Emberley. 
McElderry, 2003 
32p 
(Growing Up Stories)
ISBN 0-689-83258-3 
$16.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
Harris and Emberley, who covered a baby's first year in Hello Benny!(BCCB 11/02),
now explore the realm of toddlerdom, where energetic little Latina moppet Maria
reigns as fictional queen. The fun starts soon after her first birthday, when she
pulls herself up to standing position, turns on the TV, and shrieks "Hola!" As
soon as she's mobile, look out. She can open big brother Percy's drawer and put
his underwear on her head, she can stand up in bed and howl at night, she can
throw off her clothes and unroll the toilet paper, she can lurk behind the sofa for
hide-and-seek. And then speech kicks in: Maria accurately mimics Percy's indeli-
cate vocabulary, she freely mixes Spanish and English words in short sentences,
and she loves to say "No!" Harris is, of course, addressing concerned siblings who
might wonder if it's really normal for a younger brother or sister to be so maniacal;
yes, Harris assures them, it's normal and it's temporary and, although she never
prescribes specific defensive behavior, her text strongly suggests that it's pointless
to yell at or even reason with toddlers (advice that, along with the rest of the book,
may be helpful to prospective babysitters as well as siblings). Again, as in Benny,
substantial sidebars comment on the range of normal behaviors within this age
bracket, and the cartoonish cast of effervescent tykes demonstrate that, from one
to two years, perpetual motion is the name of the game. Since many toddler
milestones involve emergent social skills, the text here seems a bit more scattershot
than that of Benny, with its more linear trajectory of physical development in the
first year. "Scattershot" isn't a bad descriptor for toddlers, and this raucous ac-
count should leave the audience justifiably nervous about the Terrible Twos just
around the corner. EB
HERMAN, JOHN 
One Winter's Night; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. 
Philomel,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23418-7 
$16.99 
Ad 4-7 yrs
Martha, a solitary cow about to give birth to her first calf, trudges through a snowy
winter night in search of shelter. "She walked to the barn but the door was closed.
She pushed against it with her nose. But no one was there to help." At last she's
taken in at a small shed, where a human couple has also taken shelter while await-
ing the birth of their first child. The man prepares a bed of hay for Martha, then
turns his attention to his wife and the coming of their own baby. He's reminded
of their animal companion when Martha suddenly lows: "And beside her, just
beginning to stand on spindly legs-a beautiful calf." Martha, sweet-faced and
almost dainty considering her substantial girth, claims the full-page color illustra-
OCTOBER 2003 
* 63
tion on the right of each double-page spread, while a narrower monochrome rect-
angle atop the left facing page of text depicts the progress of Mary and Joseph as
they make their way to crude accommodations in American farm country. The
night is appropriately luminous, with moonlight reflected on snow-softened hills
and lantern light casting a gentle glow in the shadowy shed. The Dillons' Mary
and Joseph are an especially handsome and appealing pair, with smoky skin, deli-
cately sculpted features, and obvious compassion for a creature who shares their
current hardship. Unfortunately, the simple coincidence of Martha's arrival at
Jesus' birth contributes little to the Nativity story, and but for Joseph's offhand
remark, "Well, now, two glorious babies on one winter's night," the event offers
no obvious significance. 
After admiring the Dillons' artwork, children might
prefer joining the Christmas animals in Michael Foreman's The Cat in the Manger
(BCCB 11/01). EB
HIRSCH, ODO 
Hazel Green. 
Bloomsbury, 2003 
190p
ISBN 1-58234-820-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Hazel Green is an enthusiastic child with an enthusiastic following among the
local children, at least when they're not following her rival, Leon Davis. Hazel
knows that if she is going to get the kids behind her to create a float for the Frogg
Day parade she needs Leon, so she initiates an alliance, agreeing to Leon's terms:
"All right, here's the deal: we'll organise it together. You won't do anything I
don't agree with, and I won't do anything you don't agree with. When we march,
we'll both march together at the front. Neither one ahead of the other." The two
reluctant allies negotiate with the adults organizing the parade, agree on a concept
for the float, and start construction, but when Hazel discovers (informed by gifted
kid mathematician Yakov Plonsk) that the float is too high for its base, Leon re-
fuses to change the design and gets Hazel kicked out of the parade as a trouble
maker. Subplots involving Yakov and the origin of his despised nickname ("the
Yak" ), a secret pastry recipe, and the rivalry between neighborhood bakeries fill in
the gaps between uneasy alliance and celebratory parade; ultimately all ends well,
although the float is a little shorter than originally anticipated. This novel has the
mannered restraint of an earlier age that will please those ready to relax into the
novel's wholesome nostalgia. The characterizations are unfortunately sketchy-
the adults especially are just collections of quirky characteristics-and the
understatedness of the action means that the conflict is never tense enough to
result in any real suspense. Still, there is a Disneyesque, old-fashioned tone to this
novel that will appeal to many adults seeking gentle readalouds for younger chil-
dren. JMD
HOOPER, MARY At the Sign of the Sugared Plum. 
Bloomsbury, 2003 
169p
ISBN 1-58234-849-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Hannah is delighted to escape the narrow scope of her family's farming life to join
her entrepreneurial older sister in London, where she will assist Sarah in her
confectioner's shop. Hannah couldn't have picked a worse time to arrive, though,
as the city succumbs to the bubonic plague of 1665. At first the two young women
seem relatively safe-the worst of the epidemic skirts their neighborhood, business
remains brisk, and there's even time for Hannah to launch a romance with the
chemist's apprentice and visit with her old friend Abby, who is now a maid to the
wealthy Beauchurch family. All too soon, though, the gentry flee the city, business
64 
* 
THE BULLETIN
drops off, and the dreaded quarantine locks appear on doors up and down their
own street. The sisters keep trade alive by concocting herbal comfits to ward off
disease, admitting to themselves that although the sweets are probably worthless,
they are certainly no worse than other remedies hawked to desperate citizens. Abby
and her employers are stricken, but their deaths offer Hannah and Sarah an unex-
pected chance to leave the city illegally if they agree to take the Beauchurch in-
fant-whose health is obviously questionable---with them. Hooper builds suspense
steadily, contrasting the sisters' successful enterprise with the threat of the advanc-
ing plague, and even as Hannah and Sarah try to reassure themselves that infection
is not inevitable, the reader knows as well as they do that odds are not in their
favor. An abrupt ending, which hints at but does not guarantee happier days
ahead, strikes a sour note, but fans of historical disaster fiction will accept that
uncertainty is a hallmark of the genre. EB
JACKSON, DONNA M. 
Hero Dogs: Courageous Canines inAction. Tingley/Little,
2003 
48p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-316-82681-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-7
Most people who followed the events of September 11th heard about the search
and rescue dogs who, under the guidance of their handlers, combed the sites for
survivors and for bodies of the victims. Jackson (author of The Bone Detectives,
BCCB 4/96) gives more information on the hard-working search dogs and ex-
pands her treatment to cover other canines who helped in the process, such as
therapy dogs, who comforted the rescue workers and the bereaved at the World
Trade Center. She also discusses the veterinary support provided for the animals
on location and then branches out into discussion of various canine workers, both
trained and untrained. The stories are often compelling ones, especially with the
September 11 focus; some of these canine careers may also be new ones to young
readers who are likely already familiar with guide dogs and bomb sniffers. Unfor-
tunately, the overbroad focus results in distractingly scattered organization, since
the book skips from general career canines to September 11 work and back again
(and then digresses to untrained dog heroes and returns to trained canine work-
ers), when either subject would have made a fine topic that could have been more
thoroughly examined on its own. Many basic pieces of information are missing
from the accounts. How many dogs were involved in the various efforts post
September 11? How long were they there? Did the search dogs make any live
finds? How many victims did they discover? Even the back cover is confusing,
since some of the dogs in its gallery are profiled within the book while others are
not (one even has a job not mentioned in the text). Some of the photos are a bit
unclear (often because the situation likely complicated the effort), but there are
plenty of attractive dogs romping through the pages for viewers to enjoy. A list of
resources and a glossary are included. DS
JENKINS, A. M. 
Out of Order. HarperCollins, 2003 
247p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623969-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623968-0 
$15.99 
R Gr. 7-12
Sophomore Colt Trammel loathes the school part of school, since he's terrible at
academics and he has spent years lying and cheating his way out of the conse-
quences. He loves baseball, however, where his talent brings him satisfaction and
a sense of control; he also loves Grace, his girlfriend of several years, but beautiful,
OCTOBER 2003 
* 65
intellectual, conflicted Grace brings him helpless frustration more than satisfac-
tion. When his terrible English grades jeopardize his baseball participation, he
figures he can convince new girl Corinne (whom he calls "Chlo," short for "chlo-
rophyll," on account of her green hair) to steer him through English, but instead
of a free academic ride he finds some genuine education and a strange and prickly
friendship from his free-spirited classmate. He's going to need that friendship,
because Colt's relationship with Grace is slipping away from him, leading him to
grief and desperation. Jenkins, author of Damage (BCCB 7/01), deftly allows
Colt to reveal himself in his own narration; he's a guy whose tendency to push
himself up by stepping on others makes him the antagonist in many of his class-
mates' personal dramas, but there's enough insight gleaned from his own words to
elicit sympathy for his anguish (though readers will still likely feel it's his due when
he finally gets a stapler to the forehead from one of his regular victims). The book
is particularly articulate about limitations of different kinds, especially Colt's diffi-
culty in using his limited self-knowledge to change his behavior (as well as his
continued self-deception about some of his behavior) and Grace's starry-eyed naivete
(she leaves Colt for an upperclassman with baser intentions than Colt but a nice
line in poetry). Chlo is slightly less successful as a character, since she's preternatu-
rally wise and balanced, but there's a platonically romantic aspect to her role as
Colt's matter-of-fact and unwilling redeemer that adds a different kind of appeal.
Ultimately, this is a compelling story of a kid who's both worse and better than he
thinks, and whose growth is realistically moderate but hard-won all the same: "All
I can say," says Colt, with a ruefulness that will strike a chord with teens, "is that I
picked a really stupid time to grow up." DS
JENKINS, 
MARTIN 
Grandma Elephant's in Charge; illus. by Ivan
Bates. 
Candlewick, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-2074-2 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The family life of elephants is the subject of this nonfiction picture book, which
follows the format of successful Candlewick titles such as Wallace's Think ofan Eel
(BCCB 5/93) and Davies' Big Blue Whale (10/97). Large-print text explains be-
havior and family structure in simple terms ("Most elephant families are big")
while smaller text offers slightly more sophisticated tidbits of relevant information
that help fill in the picture. Though there's a touch of personification in the
narrative, it's mostly just cheerfully informal, discussing elephant actions in terms
youngsters will easily understand, and the combination of the digestible factual
details and the engaging familial examination makes this a rich introduction to
pachyderm biology. The watercolor and colored-pencil art is lighthearted and
affectionate, but the pale tones are bland and the elephant expressions grossly an-
thropomorphized into cutesy smiles, undercutting the genuine natural fascination
of the animals. This is still a gently informative introduction to a very popular
creature, though, and youngsters will appreciate its cozy approach. DS
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
A CoolMoonlight. Dial, 2003 
133p
ISBN 0-8037-2846-8 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Eight-year-old Lila has xeroderma pigmentosum, a rare allergy to the sun and
certain other kinds of light. She also has a mother who home-schools her year-
round, a father who races shopping carts with her in the grocery store after dark,
and a remarkably attentive older sister who takes Lila and her friend David to hip
66 
* 
THE BULLETIN
coffee shops in the city late at night. She plays outside in the moonlight, some-
times sleeping in the clubhouse her family has made for her in the backyard. De-
spite her fully accommodated lifestyle, she decides that she wants to feel the sun on
her face. With the help of two mysterious friends, Alyssa and Elizabeth, who visit
her only at night, she assembles a collection of random treasures into a "sun bag"
that she thinks will somehow protect her as she ventures into the light. Although
Johnson's icy-cool ethereal prose styling and her avoidance of capital letters may
have found its ideal subject in Lila's subdued and dimly lit existence, not enough
happens in this story to keep the narrative light glowing. Once the reader figures
out the scant mystery that Alyssa and Elizabeth are imaginary, all that's left is a girl
with an unusual condition who contemplates doing something dangerous, and
then doesn't do it. Everyone's calm embrace of the inverted lifestyle necessitated
by her condition may seem a bit idyllic, but Johnson is convincing in her portrayal
of the way disability becomes business as usual in the families it affects; readers
may even find themselves a bit envious of Lila's cool nocturnal world. KC
KOSCIELNIAK, BRUCE Johann Gutenberg and the Amazing Printing Press; written
and illus. by Bruce Koscielniak. 
Houghton, 2003 
32p.
ISBN 0-618-26351-9 $16.00 
R Gr. 3-6
Ask a child about Gutenberg, and they'll probably identify him (if at all) as the guy
who made the first book .. , invented the printing press ... or even made the first
Bible. Without trivializing Gutenberg's accomplishments, Koscielniak sets the
record straight on just what the fifteenth-century German printer did do-de-
velop in the West a system of cast-metal movable type and a hand press to make
the printing process easier and the product more consistent. As this title makes
clear, parallel systems had already arisen in Asia: "Europeans may have heard of
metal type-making techniques in use in Korea, but they had to devise their own
working methods independently." Koscielniak also fits Gutenberg's achievement
into the larger history of European bookmaking, reviewing the steps involved in
producing hand-lettered, illuminated parchment tomes and showing how
Gutenberg's page design, with familiar Gothic script and space for embellishment,
eased the transition from hand crafting to mass production. The colorfully tunicked,
square-jawed printers are rendered in a spidery line-and-watercolor style reminis-
cent of a somewhat more stolid Robert Andrew Parker. This neatly balanced
account earns its shelf space anywhere books are important ... in most libraries,
for instance. EB
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
The Night the Martians Landed: Just the Facts (Plus the Ru-
mors) about Invaders from Mars; illus. by Christopher Santoro. 
HarperTrophy,
2003 
[80p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17247-4 
$15.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-688-17246-6 
$4.25
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Orson Welles' Halloween broadcast of H. G. Wells' The War of the Worlds may
seem like a piece of ancient history to young readers, but it's had its effect on much
contemporary sci-fi and it still makes for a fascinating tale. Krull gives a capable
overview, evoking the broadcast itself with sufficient drama to make the ensuing
listener response plausible while providing background information on Welles,
Wells, and radio (concise sidebars offer compact details), then going on to discuss
OCTOBER 2003 * 67
subsequent advances in knowledge about Mars as well as hoaxes in general. The
author's real achievement here (and in the companion volume, What Really
Happened in Roswell?) lies in her reasonable and readable exploration of the
phenomenon; she's managed to tackle the complicated issue of people's beliefs
clearly and logically, but without making debunkage less appealing than the original
story. Though she's more accepting of the standard account of the panic than
some current views would justify, she doesn't take it at face value, either, noting
that reports on the response are significantly variable and sometimes interestingly
contradictory (especially Welles' own statements). There's a subtle message here
about people's tendency to believe based on fears and desires rather than evidence,
and the matter-of-fact exploration helps offer some modeling of a more reliable
approach, making this a useful counteractant to the more credulous works on
various subjects. Santoro's black-and-white drawings have a campy and amusing
flavor that suits the subject; source notes point readers to some generally thought-
provoking material about hoaxes and belief as well as including material on the
broadcast itself. DS
LESTER, HELEN 
Something Might Happen; illus. by Lynn Munsinger. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-25406-4 
$15.00 
R Gr. 1-3
Joining the widening cast of eccentric and comical animals created by Lester and
Munsinger is lemur Twitchly Fidget, a master at imagining worst-case scenarios:
he can't eat cereal because the loud crunching might scare him into bumping his
head on a lamp, he can't wear shoes because he might put them on the wrong feet
and have to walk cross-legged, etc. When his friends invite him to a Fourth of
February celebration, he can't go, of course, because of any number of mishaps
that might befall a lemur at a parade. Fortunately for Twitchly, his no-nonsense
Aunt Bridget appears on the scene to shape him up. She gives him a bath, feeds
him cereal, and makes him put on his sneakers, which he does in fact put on the
wrong feet. To his surprise, nothing happens. This unexpected reprieve from
disaster gives Twitchly new confidence, and a reformed Twitchly goes forth to
greet the world. Twitchly's hyperbolic sense of doom is sure to bring some giggles,
especially as his imaginary fears are brought to life by Munsinger's energetic illus-
trations. Let's face it, lemurs are funny-looking on their own, and Munsinger
craftily exploits their googly eyes and ringed tails to great comic effect. Twitchly
may not be as fully developed nor heroic a character as Tacky the Penguin, but
fans of Lester and Munsinger will welcome this personable animal antihero. KC
LEUCK, LAURA 
One Witch; illus. by S. D. Schindler. 
Walker, 2003 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8861-0 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8860-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-6 yrs
A lone witch puzzles over an empty cauldron ("One witch/ on a hill/ had an empty
pot/ to fill"), but not for long, because her friends are happy to help: "Two cats/
inside a pail/ gave the witch/ a fish's tail.// Three scarecrows/stuffed with straw/
gave the witch/ a blackbird's claw," all the way up to "Ten werewolves in a group/
/ [who] gave the witch some spider soup." While her mix is properly brewing, the
witch sends her "trusty bats" out with invitations, and all who contributed come
to sample the potluck soup: "What did all/ her good friends do?/ They came and
68 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ate/ that gruesome brew.// (Everybody/ loved it too!)/ They saved the last bowl/
just for ... // YOU!" Leuck's cadenced counting rhyme is a winning readaloud,
and the unappetizing donations of the scary creatures to the witch's brew are just
enough to get the groans going among young listeners. The line-and-watercolor
illustrations are crisply drafted, with enough tiny details (slugs and spiders with
personality, for example) in their monstrously whimsical envisionings to keep even
close observers busy. (The bat endpapers alone will inspire both perusal and imi-
tation.) This is one Halloween readaloud that puts the trick right into the treat.
JMD
LITTLE, JEAN 
Emma's Strange Pet; illus. by Jennifer Plecas. 
HarperCollins,
2003 
64p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028351-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028350-5 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 1-2
Though clearly happy in his new family (see Emma's Yucky Brother, BCCB 5/01),
Max is displeased to discover that Emma's allergies prevent the family from getting
a furry pet; since Emma too longs for an animal, she decides that "a strange pet will
be just fine," and she selects a cute little anole, a lizard, for the new addition to the
family. Stranger, as Max dubs him, proves to be quite a hit, eliciting affection and
care from Max as well as Emma (as Max points out, "You adopted me... and you
sort of adopted him"), so much so that Emma wisely arranges for Max to receive
his very own "strange pet." The pet topic is a natural, and even in restricted text
Little manages both easygoing charm and conveyance of authentic sibling irrita-
tion. There's a pleasingly natural treatment of Max's adopted status, even includ-
ing Emma's jokes ("I'm glad you are not an anole. I would not want a green
brother"), but that issue never threatens to overpower the pet dilemma that's cen-
ter stage. Plecas' characters are minimally drafted (two dots and a pen-stroke for
eyes and nose), but no less vivid for that, and the anole is cute in a lizardesque way
without being depicted as a more dramatic creature than reality allows. Readers
drawn by the pet theme won't feel lost because they missed the previous Emma
books, but the warm and authentically prickly relationship between Max and Emma
may nonetheless lure them into reading more of their story. DS
LUBAR, DAVID 
Flip. TOR/Tom Doherty Associates, 2003 
[25 6 p]
ISBN 0-765-30149-0 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
Eighth-grader Ryan McKenzie is as unproductive as his twin sister, Taylor, is pro-
ductive: a poor student, an unwilling athlete, and a thorn in the side of his perfec-
tionist father, Ryan seeks only survival, not achievement. A collection of
entertainment disks featuring great moments from the lives of Earthly heroes falls
off an alien spaceship and offers Ryan a chance to experience something of which
he has little knowledge: success. Ryan steps into the virtual shoes of Babe Ruth,
Albert Einstein, Elvis Presley, and Queen Victoria, but it's when he takes on the
persona of legendary gladiator Spartacus that he really gets into trouble. The dis-
covery of the disks and their properties is set amongst plot threads involving the
relationship between Ryan and Taylor, and their dysfunctional relationships with
their overbearing father and passive mother. Ryan is so troubled that he seeks
solace in the disks the way other kids seek solace in drugs and alcohol; he is on the
verge of academic failure and his father is on the verge of having him medicated
OCTOBER 2003 
* 
69
just to get some peace and quiet. An additional subplot involving a bullying bor-
derline psychotic at school adds the real risk of physical as well as emotional dam-
age. There are too many threads here to make a cohesive novel, and the disks'
personae are overly convenient and underexplored; the pace is quick, however,
and changing points of view keep the pages turning. The humor doesn't always
balance the truly troubled home life of the twins, but the premise is a lively one,
and readers may well close this book considering possible responses to the grafting
of heroic characteristics onto their own personalities. JMD
LUBKA, S. RUTH 
Pupniks: The Story of Two Space Dogs; written and illus. by S.
Ruth Lubka. 
Cavendish, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5137-4 
$16.95 
M 
4-7 yrs
Dogs in space-real dogs in space. So alluring a topic should send kids scurrying,
book in hand, to a parental lap, but get ready for a disappointment. Information
children will not learn about Belka and Strelka, the first living creatures to return
safely from an Earth orbit, includes the dogs' breeds; how two trash-sniffing, rab-
bit-chasing strays were selected for the prestigious Soviet Sputnik program; how
Belka and Strelka "did their usual dog business in space"; what happened to Belka
after her return; where the offspring of the "pupniks" (Strelka's grand-puppies,
born to daughter Pushinka, a gift to President Kennedy and family) are today.
Children will almost certainly, however, be confused by awkwardly cartoonish
colored-pencil pictures of tangled dogs, rabbits, mice, bugs, and plants spilling out
from the window of Sputnik 5; the mythical firebird, who literally accompanies
the Vostok rocket into space and greets it on reentry; the underexplained space suit
whose emerging rear tube could arguably supply air or confine a waggly tail; the
fuzzy purple-spiral aura that surrounds dozing Strelka. Lubka never explains how
the creatures survived blast-off: "Their eyeballs jammed against their skulls ...
Heat from the rocket sizzled their paws. . .. It roasted the rabbit's whiskers and
wilted the plants." After viewing vignettes of the flame-engulfed, traumatized
crew, kids will hardly be reassured by the ludicrously understated denouement,
"After so much excitement, Belka and Strelka fell into a deep sleep." Addenda
include further information about Strelka's Pushinka in the U.S., other animals in
space, photos of Belka and Strelka, and of the Kennedys with their pets, and a
glossary/pronunciation guide of Russian words. Abort this mission. EB
MACKLER, 
CAROLYN 
The Earth, My Butt, and Other Big Round
Things. 
Candlewick, 2003 
[256p]
ISBN 0-7636-1958-2 
$15.99 
R Gr. 7-10
Virginia is lonely and uncertain; her best friend has moved across the country, her
talented brother has gone off to college, and her gifted sister has gone off to the
Peace Corps, leaving overweight, unaccomplished Virginia with her hard-driving
parents. She's so convinced that her weight makes her unworthy that she's got a
list, "The Fat Girl Code of Conduct," which bitterly sets out her limited expecta-
tions and firmly decrees that her exciting sexual grapplings with one Froggy Welsh
III ("Go further than skinny girls. Find ways to alert him to this") can never
translate into any public relationship ("Any sexual activity is a secret"). When her
brother gets kicked out of college for date-rape and her family struggles to adjust,
however, Virginia realizes that her perfect family is itself deeply flawed, that she's
not the sole fallible member, and that she has a right to find her own persona even
70 * THE BULLETIN
if it conflicts with her parents' expectations. This isn't exactly untrodden ground,
plot- and character-wise, and some of the proceedings are a trifle cliched, but Mackler
writes with a clarity and impact that lifts her material above the ordinary ("Some-
times my parents are so sure of what's best for me that I don't stop to think about
what I really want"). The book is knowing about the relationship between image
and self-image, and there's genuine understanding and a welcome absence of con-
descension in Virginia's exhilarating change of style as she moves from being her
formerly fat mother's frumpy plus-size proxy to a cool chick at her current size,
complete with piercings, purple hair, and thrift-store wardrobe. It's no particular
surprise that Virginia has underestimated Froggy and his genuine affection, but
Virginia's gone through so much to become her own kind of princess that readers
will be pleased to see her find her frog. DS
MARTIN, 
JACQUELINE 
BRIGGS 
On Sand Island; illus. 
by David
Johnson. 
Houghton, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-23151-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Carl is a young boy on Sand Island in Lake Superior, growing up in a small fishing
community in the early twentieth century. It's understandable that in such a place
"Carl wanted a boat of his own more than a new bicycle," not just to take his place
as a fisherman but also to give him some peace and healing he can't always find at
home since his mother's death. He's thrilled when he finds boards enough to
make a boat, but the sawing task is a bit beyond him, so he swaps his labor for one
neighbor's sawing assistance; he trades work with another neighbor for nails and
with a third for paint, while his father provides him with a pair of oars. Finally
Carl hits the water and catches "three fish as long as his arm," and the island
celebrates "the newest boat on the island" and the newest boatman. Martin's
quiet, confiding tone matches the quiet island life, and Carl's bartering of one task
for another adds a nicely folkloric touch. The slow pace rather lessens the story's
impact, however, and the structure of Carl's barters inform only a few pages, leav-
ing the rest of the book more dependent on atmosphere than plot. Johnson's
watercolors rely on pale, mottled tones punctuated with fine yet crisp black lines;
this technique results in an interestingly translucent, Japanese aura in the scenes of
nature. The human scenes are unfortunately less successful: the faces, especially
Carl's, are diminished to doll-like cutesiness, and the dark lines tend to fade the
muted pastels almost into invisibility. This doesn't make the splash it might, but
readers who enjoy quieter literary backwaters may appreciate this affectionate tale
of island life. DS
MATTHEWS, ANDREW 
The Flip Side. 
Delacorte, 2003 
147p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90126-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73096-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Blame it on Shakespeare-fifteen-year-old Rob had never thought much about
gender presentation until his class began to study As You Like It. He's thrilled to
be chosen to act a scene with Milena, the girl of his dreams; when his inventive
teacher decides to explore the play's gender-bending by making the two swap roles,
Rob is startled to discover how exciting and liberating he finds posing and dressing
as a girl. Things become more intense when he discovers that Milena is not only
interested in him, she's also a partner in exploration, drawn by the idea of appear-
ing as a male; Rob's best friend, Kev, also confesses his secret about sexual identity
OCTOBER 2003 
* 
71
and orientation: he's gay. The transvestitism side of gender issues doesn't turn up
much in literature for young people, and at its best this British import treats the
subject with an irreverent and reassuring humor (Rob decides not to answer his
dad's polite query about his day with "I asked this girl out and she said yes. Oh,
and by the way, I found out that wearing women's clothes really gets me off.").
The honest acknowledgment both of Rob's private questions about his impulses
and his lack of skill in following through (his initial attempt at makeup is horrible
indeed) is believable as well as unsensational. Unfortunately, there's a wardrobe
full of contrivance in the convergence of everybody's gender issues, and the book
becomes heavy-handed when Rob turns from uncertain exploration to lofty wis-
dom, helping his frightened gay friend with self-esteem homework and comment-
ing sagely that a jeering classmate "had a lot of issues he hadn't confronted yet."
The resolution is also yanked out of nowhere, ignoring the complicated and inter-
esting questions raised. Despite the drawbacks, however, this is an often percep-
tive treatment of a largely undiscussed subject. DS
MCCAUGHREAN, GERALDINE 
Casting the Gods Adrift: A Tale of Ancient Egypt;
illus. by Patricia D. Ludlow. 
Cricket, 2003 
103p
ISBN 0-8126-2684-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
When their boat founders in the Nile, narrator Tutmose, his father Harkhuf, and
brother Ibrim abruptly come to the attention of pharaoh Amenhotep IV, whose
pleasure craft comes along just in time to pluck them out of the crocodile-infested
water. The family finds favor with their gracious ruler and all are assigned roles at
court-Tutmose and Ibrim as apprentice craftsman and musician, and Harkhuf
as supplier of exotic fauna for the pharaoh's private menagerie. While the boys
flourish, the father seethes over Amenhotep's religious revolution; taking the name
Akhenaten (Spirit of Aten), the pharaoh suppresses worship of all gods but the sun
god. Harkhuf's resentment, even terror, over this deposing of the gods impels him
to an attempt on Akhenaten's life, and only Tutmose's bravery and quick thinking
save the pharaoh and mask his father's crime. Although the assassination attempt
and Tutmose's intervention are dramatically drawn, it takes a long time to get
there, and readers who aren't enthralled by palaver about religious reform may
wonder when the action will get going. Moreover, McCaughrean's romanticized
and unnuanced portrayal of Akhenaten as monogamous family man (unless alert
kids pick up on the reference to his daughter marrying her stepbrother) and mono-
theist is somewhat misleading, and Tutmose's referral to the new capital, Akhetaten,
by its current name (El-Amarna) is unnecessarily imprecise. However, readers who
only envision pharaohs wrapped in linen might want to cast a glance at a living,
and still highly controversial, member of their ranks. Black-and-white pictures
featuring a doe-eyed, overemotive Tutmose appear throughout, and a glossary of
terms closes the title. EB
MCPHAIL, DAVID 
Big Brown Bear's Up and Down Day; written and illus. by David
McPhail. 
Harcourt, 2003 
4 8p
ISBN 0-15-216407-3 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 2-3
Early one morning, a bleary-eyed Big Brown Bear notices one of his slippers wan-
dering away, a result of Rat's determination that one of Big Brown Bear's slippers
would make a dandy bed. Big Brown Bear will have none of that, so Rat has to
abandon his larcenous activity-at least temporarily. In Chapter Two, Rat at-
tempts to trick Big Brown Bear into giving up his slipper by promising him a free
72 
* THE BULLETIN
trip wherever he wants to go, just so long as he doesn't wear or take his slippers.
Big Brown Bear sees through this ploy, but he begins to warm toward the little
schemer and invites him to breakfast. In the final brief chapter, Big Brown Bear
drops his baseball in a box full of discarded things. While looking for it, he finds,
among other things, a small wind-up car, just the right size for a rat, and a lonely
old slipper, which he is glad to share with his new friend. McPhail's debt to
Sendak is happily evident in the illustrations, which feature subtly hued watercol-
ors fuzzed over with pen and ink crosshatching to provide texture and soften edges.
Uncluttered compositions with just the right amount of detail to support the text
are set on white backgrounds that allow the characters to take center stage, which
is fortunate since both Rat and Big Brown Bear are, visually speaking, fully devel-
oped characters with predictable postures and characteristic expressions that track
through the episodes. However, it is Big Brown Bear's open-hearted generosity
that generates the real warmth in this text as he practices the age-old wisdom of
returning a bad deed with a good one, winning over both Rat and the reader in the
process. KC
MILLS, CLAUDIA 
Gus and Grandpa Go Fishing; illus. by Catherine Stock. 
Farrar,
2003 
48p
ISBN 0-374-32815-3 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 1-3
In the latest entry in Mills' popular chapter-book series, piscatorial ability seems to
have skipped a generation, originating with Grandpa, bypassing Mommy (who
screams at the sight of a wriggly fish) and Daddy ("He was still trying to figure out
all the fancy features of his new fishing rod"), and settling on Gus. At first the
family fishing trip doesn't look too promising for Gus; his casting is problematic,
patience is a hard taskmaster, and Gus' first bite escapes from the hook. After a
picnic lunch that "would have tasted better ifGus's fish hadn't gotten away," Gus
is ready to try again; this time it's the big one, and Gus and Grandpa are the
uncontested sultans of the shoreline. Mills has the family dynamic down pat:
Daddy's infatuation with gadgetry, Mommy's whirlwind management of the day's
activities ("Gus and Grandpa and Skipper knew it was best to stay out of Gus's
mother's way when she was getting ready to go somewhere"), and the stubborn
hopefulness of the two real fishermen of the crew. Stock's line-and-watercolor
scenes, in woodsy greens and river blues, capture the warmth of a close-knit family
without betraying a hint of schmaltz. Young fisherkids are an underserved reader-
ship, and they'll be glad to find an author who shares their appreciation of the
graceful arc of a perfect cast, the silken movement of a trusty reel, and, although
artificial lures seem to be in play here, the bittersweet demise of a sacrificial worm.
EB
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
Breath. Atheneum, 2003 
[272p]
ISBN 0-689-86174-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Salz has trouble breathing, and he is alive only because his grandmother is a healer
wise in the ways of herbs and tinctures. The boy does not drink the beer that is the
staple of his family's diet because Grossmutter forbids it; he's therefore spared the
sickness that befalls cattle, farmers, and townsfolk when a fungus taints the grain
used for feed and beer. When his brother, Bertram, goes into a hallucinogenic
rage and attempts to murder Salz as the source of the illness, Grossmutter inter-
OCTOBER 2003 
* 
73
venes and dies instead. At Bertram's trial, he insists that Saint Michael told him to
kill Salz, who is the source of the illness that plagues the town. Suddenly Salz is on
trial instead, and it is only through the intervention of the town priest that he is
released. The townsfolk believe that the rats are the source of the sickness, and
when Salz tells them of meeting a piper with mysterious musical powers, they send
for the musician, promising a fortune in gold for a rat-free town. The piper comes,
the rats go, but the townsfolk refuse to pay the amount promised, and the piper
pipes the children out of town and into K6ppen Hill. Napoli sets her tale in the
legendary town of Hameln in the thirteenth century, but the setting and the leg-
end are peripheral to the action. The real story is about Salz, the way he copes with
his illness, and his struggle to overcome the superstitions of his day and replace
them with the logic of ecclesiastical enlightenment. Napoli does an exemplary job
of depicting the mindset of the period and the superstitious beliefs that hampered
progress-Salz is particularly moving in his struggle to see more than a glimmer of
what might lie beyond the world his family knows and accepts. The pace is very
slow, however, and a fair amount of historical context is necessary for readers to
appreciate how firmly the author places her main character within his time; the
legend of the Pied Piper is also awkwardly tacked onto the main frame of the story.
A concluding note explains the ergot-induced sickness of livestock and folk and
gives the nature of Salz's illness. JMD
O'CONNELL, REBECCA 
The Baby Goes Beep; illus. by Ken Wilson-Max. 
Brodie/
Roaring Brook, 2003 
[28p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2867-X 
$21.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1789-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
1-3 yrs
A lively toddler interacts with every conceivable noisemaker in its day-to-day world:
the horn on its car seat ("The baby goes Beep"), a wooden spoon ("The baby goes
Boom"), his own voice ("The baby goes La"), food ("The baby goes Yum"), etc.
This is a dandy lap book or even lapsit storytime item for those tiny ones just
delighting in their own audible creativity, and little listeners will find lots to do
along with O'Connell's effectively repetitive ("The baby goes Smooch The baby
goes Smooch Smooch The baby goes Smooch Smooch Smooch Smooch") text.
Wilson-Max's vigorous paintings offer a dashingly exuberant baby happily explor-
ing his world. The foreground-focused compositions, with figures strongly out-
lined in black, lead the viewer into the scene. Those grownups ready and able to
endure a rousingly raucous toddler storytime should put this title on their pro-
gramming shelf. JMD
PATTOU, EDITH 
East. Harcourt, 2003 
496p
ISBN 0-15-204563-5 
$18.00 
R Gr. 7-12
"East of the Sun and West of the Moon" offers just as rich a source for transformation
into fiction as its related tale "Beauty and the Beast," which Robin McKinley and
others have already mined in several novels. Pattou uses five voices to tell the story
of the heroic girl who journeys away with a magical bear in return for his promise
to provide for her destitute family. Rose, her brother Neddy, her father, the White
Bear, and the Troll Queen lend different perspectives to this drama set in the far
north. Extending the original motifs, the plot is cleverly elaborated to support the
action without distracting from it. Rose's father is a mapmaker who names her for
74 
* THE BULLETIN
"the symbol that lies at the center of the wind rose." Her mother believes in the
old superstition that children's temperaments and destinies are determined by the
direction in which they are born-north, south, east, or west. Despite her mother's
pretense that Rose is born facing east, she is actually a north-born baby, restless
and stormy. The only quiet activities at which she excels are sewing and weaving,
skills that save her life several times. After she betrays her enchanted bear-host by
lighting a lamp that reveals him to be a man lying beside her every night, she
undertakes the dangerous quest of finding and freeing him from the Troll Queen's
enchantment. Pattou has kept faith with the story's antiquity and taken it seriously
enough to ground the fantasy in patient detail, never indulging in a portentous
style or coy contemporary self-consciousness. Instead, the writing is as steady in its
perseverance through complexities as the heroine is. Interpretatively, Pattou
emphasizes the heroine's choices and decisions (including mistakes) rather than
obedience to a magical force of destiny. The characters are a credible cross between
archetypes and idiosyncratic individuals, while the cliffhangers function effectively
to lure readers from one scene to the next faster than a great white bear can traverse
the landscape. Erstwhile fairy-tale readers will find themselves enchanted. BH
PINKWATER, DANIEL 
The Picture of Morty &r Ray; illus. by Jack E.
Davis. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623786-6 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623785-8 
$15.99 
R 7-10 yrs
A scary movie (The Picture ofDorian Gray) inspires Morty and Ray to some dia-
bolical activities of their own: they paint each other's portrait ("We tried to paint
each other as handsome as we could") and then they play mean tricks on their
friends to see if the painting gets uglier. Sure enough, a day of nasty pranks results
in the painting getting "maybe just a little uglier," but it's only when they stuff
pickles down the front of their friend Oscar's pants that the painting gets so dis-
gusting that even Morty and Ray are sick of it. Not so their friend, however:
"'Neat!' Oscar said. 'Neat, neat, neat! This is the coolest thing I have ever seen!'"
The friendship is patched up when Morty and Ray give Oscar the painting ("He
likes the picture," says Morty. "Go figure," says Ray) and the three walk into the
sunset. If listeners don't know Wilde, will they get the joke? Well, they may not
get the reference, but they'll definitely get the idea-between the painting and the
pranks (sticking their butts out the window of the school bus, calling people names
like "Lard Head" and "Bubble Butt," etc.), Pinkwater reduces Wilde to the parts
that matter to grade-school boys. This literary license is given laugh-inducing
support by Davis' over-the-top illustrations. Images from the movie are depicted
(almost entirely) in black and white, with the big-headed (but suave) Dorian all
toothy smile and slicked-back hair. Davis' drafting is meticulous, and there is
humor in the details: trails of cheese puffs, the bat light pull in the basement, the
bored cat in the litter box, etc. Readers who snorted over O'Malley's Velcome
(BCCB 11/97) may just give up a guffaw over this literary send-up. JMD
ROBERTS, LYNN, ad. 
Rapunzel: A Groovy Fairy Tale; illus. by David
Roberts. 
Abrams, 2003 
34p
ISBN 0-8109-4242-9 
$16.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Rapunzel lives with her Aunt Esme in an abandoned apartment building in the
middle of an unnamed city: "The elevator was always broken, and there were
OCTOBER 2003 
* 75
hundreds of stairs to the ground." Esme therefore uses Rapunzel's long red braid
to go in and out, but since Rapunzel can't climb down her own hair, she is a
prisoner. Inevitably, Aunt Esme is observed making her usual exit and entrance by
Roger, "the singer in the local school band, Roger and the Rascals," who deter-
mines to get to the bottom of the braid, so to speak. Roger and Rapunzel hit it off
as fairy-tale lovers are wont to do, but Esme finds out, cuts Rapunzel's braid, and
sends her off to fend for herself in the city. Roger subsequently climbs the de-
tached braid and is sent tumbling to the ground, cushioned by abandoned mat-
tresses on the sidewalk. He loses all memory of Rapunzel but regains it when he
sees her in his band's concert audience: "Rapunzel and Roger were best friends
from that moment on and as happy as could be." Lynn Roberts' retelling of this
traditional tale has a dash of humor and a dose of sweetness that turns this into an
airy tale of teen romance, divorced from traditional shadows and sexual overtones.
David Roberts sets the story in the urban seventies, complete with furniture, mu-
sic, and fashions of the day: geometric designs, paper lanterns, Saturday Night
Fever and Kate Bush posters adorn the apartment; platform shoes, bell-bottom
jeans, and miniskirts adorn the characters. This doesn't have quite the decorative
elan of the Robertses' previous collaboration, Cinderella: An Art Deco Love Story
(BCCB 1/02), but it does have a buoyant, seventies nostalgia that suits this some-
what fractured (but definitely not broken) tale. JMD
RODOWSKY, COLBY 
Not Quite a Stranger. Farrar, 2003 
[192p]
ISBN 0-374-35548-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Tottie's main annoyance in her relentlessly normal life is her mother's tendency to
put her children's private life in her newspaper column-until seventeen-year-old
Zachary appears at their home. Four years older than Tottie, Zachary is the result
of a brief fling Tottie's father had before marriage; though his parents had agreed
to put him up for adoption, Zachary's mother instead raised him until her recent
death from cancer. Tottie's mother takes him in immediately, Tottie's little brother
is thrilled to have a brother, Tottie's father pulls strings to get Zachary into a good
school, and even Tottie's grandparents on her mother's side welcome him as a new
member of the family, leaving only Tottie furious at her father's betrayal and wish-
ing desperately that Zachary would disappear forever. There's a touch of melo-
drama in the plot (especially in the culminating event of a suspected theft), but
Rodowsky, a good, solid writer on human dynamics, doesn't milk the drama but
instead uses it as an occasion to examine family workings under stress. The alter-
nation of the narration between Tottie and Zachary is an effective device, giving
readers a fuller view of the situation as well as making clear that both of them are
only seeing small parts of each other's lives. The setup practically booktalks itself,
and there's a well-turned family story behind it that should satisfy many readers.
DS
ROSE, DEBORAH LEE 
One Nighttime Sea: An Ocean Counting Rhyme; illus. by
Steve Jenkins. 
Scholastic, 2003 
40p
ISBN 0-439-33906-5 
$16.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Rose and Jenkins team up for another deep sea exploration that youngsters will
want to dive into. Like Into theA, B, Sea: An Ocean Alphabet (BCCB 12/00), this
book features some of the more strange and wonderful creatures of the ocean in
76 
* THE BULLETIN
textured cut-paper collages that are as evocatively beautiful as they are recogniz-
ably realistic. Whereas the first book was a bit vague and encompassing in its
categories, however, this book is much more specific. Belugas, parrotfish, coral
polyps, nudibranchs, spider crabs, firefly squid, and sea-turtle hatchlings are among
the featured creatures busy in their nocturnal occupations. Though structured as
a counting-rhyme book that goes from one to ten and back down to one, the book
defies fixed categorization. The rhyming text and deep ocean colors make this a
gentle readaloud for bedtime, while the notes included on each animal at the end
of the book invite the budding oceanographer to pursue further research. The
notes also explain and contextualize in more detail what each animal is doing in
the illustrations, thus enriching the experience for older readers and providing
more information for those sharing the story with younger listeners. KC
SCHREIBER, ELLEN 
Vampire Kisses. 
Tegen/HarperCollins, 2003 
197p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009335-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009334-X 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Sixteen-year-old Raven Madison is a Goth Girl in a Tommy Hilfiger world, and
she battles conformity with reckless abandon. Her running feud with snobby
golden boy Trevor Mitchell takes second place to her fascination with the mysteri-
ous Sterling family, recently moved into the town's old (and presumed haunted)
Mansion on Benson Hill and rumored to be vampires. Her fascination with the
Mansion and seventeen-year-old Alexander Sterling ("Gothic Guy") leads her to
true love with her "Knight of the Night" and to a showdown with Trevor at her
high school's Snow Ball. Raven is styled as a wiseacre with a mordant wit, but the
dialogue never quite rises to the promising occasions, and convenience drives a
shallow outsider-insider, pop-romance plot. Be that as it may, Raven is a fluid
narrator with a fast line of patter whose fascination with the dark side will attract
like-minded readers. Horror hooks such as a haunted mansion, a romantic teen-
age vampire, and a dark heroine who wins against the golden guys make this a title
that readers will bite into with Goth gusto. JMD
SINGER, MARILYN 
How to Cross a Pond: Poems about Water; illus. by Meilo
So. 
Knopf, 2003 
4 1p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92376-4 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82376-X 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-9
In this followup to Footprints on the Roof. Poems about the Earth (BCCB 7/02),
Singer presents nineteen playful, poetic musings about the doings of water. Verses
(some free, some rhymed) examine water in large quantities ("Ocean Checklist"),
water in human hands ("Water Guns"), water in solid state ("How to Cross a
Pond"), water long gone ("The Moon's Gravity"), and other driblets and sprays.
The entries display a genuine and eloquently articulated appreciation of the ele-
ment ("To appreciate water/ you must work for it,/ Pump, hoist, and haul"-
"Wells") and also an obvious appreciation of the poetic medium ("Something in
water loves/ the curve," begins "Meandering," in a gentle echo of the frozen-water
poet, Frost), while remaining accessible to youthful readers. Like the first title,
this is elegantly designed, with both type and illustrations a monochromatic blue
on creamy, vertically oriented pages; So's watercolors employ splashes, washes,
liquid flourishes, and feathery scribbles, displaying a remarkable variety of textures
and effects within the constraints of color and medium. This would be an intrigu-
OCTOBER 2003 
* 77
ing addition to earth science or ecological explorations, and thirsty poetry readers
will gulp it down. DS
SOTO, GARY 
TheAfterlife. 
Harcourt, 2003 
161p
ISBN 0-15-204774-3 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Chuy's a normal seventeen-year-old with an ordinary life ("I ran cross-country, ate
my lunch with friends, and with those same friends, all average looking like me,
crowded around the fountain eyeing girls"), a life that comes abruptly to an end
when he's stabbed in the men's room at a dance. Now he's a ghost soaring through
Fresno, visiting family and friends responding to his murder, and encountering
other new spirits. Soto's gift for easygoing everyday-life depictions extends to,
well, everyday death as he convincingly portrays Chuy's wanderings as a blend of
existential exploration and teenage glee at the possibilities afforded by his new
situation (he finally gets to see a Raiders game at the Coliseum, for instance).
There's some genuine poignancy in the pointlessness of Chuy's fate (he's knifed
for sincerely admiring the shoes of the guy next to him), in his awareness of what
he's lost ("I ain't a part of a family, either, just a word on my parents' lips-Chuy,
Chuy, Chuy. I was a sad chant one day after I got killed"), and in his following of
his family's responses, especially his mother's surprising attempt to incite Chuy's
cousin to pay back her son's loss with another murder. It's a bit disappointing that
the book doesn't make more of that plot thread, since it ultimately falls short on
shape (in contrast to Shearer's similarly themed Great Blue Yonder, BCCB 6/02);
Chuy's pairing up with a newly passed-on girl doesn't quite satisfy as a resolution.
This is, however, more of an Our Town treatment of the dead's realization of the
vitality of life (in fact, the two works would make a usefully complementary cur-
ricular pairing) than a story about events in that life, and as such, it's an easily
readable, gently thoughtful imagining. DS
SPIEGELMAN, ART, ed. 
Little Lit: It Was a Dark and Silly Night...; ed. by Art
Spiegelman and Franroise Mouly; illus. by Martin Handford, William Joyce, KAZ,
et al. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 2003 
48p
ISBN 0-06-028628-8 
$19.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Following the path forged by the two previous entries in this series (Little Lit:
Strange Stories for Strange Children, BCCB 1/02, etc.), this is a collection of comic-
book-style tales built around a theme. Lemony Snicket, Neil Gaiman, and eleven
others all take a crack at creating stories that begin with the fateful words, "It was
a dark and silly night." The sophisticated graphics boggle the eye: from Richard
Sala's wandering Yeti to William Joyce's boy crimefighter to Gahan Wilson's ghouls
in the graveyard, this is a variegated visual feast, each artistic interpretation stylis-
tically unique from the others. Comic-book frames keep the action under compo-
sitional control while saturated colors add a rich depth to each entry. Though the
tales by Neil Gaiman, Lemony Snicket, and Patrick McDonnell have both narra-
tive thrust and emotional payoff, overall the stories are merely vehicles for the art,
the events fragmented and inconclusive and the narrative lacking sufficient cohe-
sion to carry even their brief plots. Browsers who open Spiegelman's dramatic
cover to reveal Martin Handford's Where's Waldo-style endpapers will nonetheless
be catapulted into this comic-book creation, and the madly energetic graphics may
be enough to keep them there. JMD
78 
* THE BULLETIN
TAMAR, ERIKA 
Venus and the Comets. Darby Creek, 2003 
93p
ISBN 1-58196-007-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Venus Macguire's mother once won the Miss Texas Oil Well pageant, and Venus
has subsequently been saddled with the responsibility of living out her mother's
dream of becoming a supermodel, spending her days on stage or in front of a
camera-until now. Tired of smiling with glycerin on her teeth and pretending to
be younger than her nine years, Venus signs up for soccer. When her first game
conflicts with a modeling gig, she makes the drastic decision to chop off her cam-
era-ready curls. Her mother, realizing the depth of her daughter's discontent,
capitulates, and Venus begins her new life as a normal girl among some remark-
ably kind and patient teammates (with two nasty ones thrown in for credibility).
Considering the depth of Mrs. Macguire's commitment to her vision of Venus'
future, her quick and relatively calm acquiescence to Venus' life-changing decision
strains belief. The happy ending comes with too few residuals, especially as we
learn that Venus is as good at soccer as she was at modeling. Her competitive spirit
remains intact, however, and she has some believable struggles learning to be com-
petitive on behalf of the team rather than for her own glory. The format is inviting
and accessible for reluctant or just new readers; short chapters, large print, and
generous spacing reduce intimidation. Disgruntled mama's darlings will take heart
in her rebellion and in the realization that when you come down off your pedestal,
you just might land in the midst of some really nice people. KC
TASHJIAN, JANET 
Faultline. Holt, 2003 
24 8p
ISBN 0-8050-7200-4 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Becky is a senior, trying to figure out her college plans and, more importantly to
her, trying to get a career in comedy going, when she meets Kip. Usually the girl
standing next to the girl who gets noticed, Becky is thrilled when funny and inter-
esting Kip falls for her, and soon the two are engaged in a happily mutually ab-
sorbed love affair. It's not that long, though, until Becky starts encountering more
and more situations where she's disappointed Kip, where her devotion has fallen
short of his-and of his standards, where he's upset when she has independent
pleasures and achievements. Finally Kip injures Becky in a way that can't be ex-
cused as clumsiness or accident, and she refuses to see him any more-but will she
reconsider after Kip has undergone treatment, and is that a mistake? Tashjian has
refreshingly stayed pretty clear of the traditional problem-novel cliches about abu-
sive relationships, instead drawing a situation in which many readers would be
able to see themselves. There are initially tremendous rewards to this relationship
for Becky, and her uncertainty about her own culpability in the emotional friction
and about the implications of Kip's gray-area behavior isn't implausible, nor even
particularly naive; this isn't a girl who's ended up with a troubled guy because of
her own self-esteem issues. While Kip's ongoing journal entries are a bit too con-
veniently explanatory, they also make him a three-dimensional character in his
own right, who knows better than he behaves and who may one day, with help,
control his impulses as he wishes to. The book is also insightful about Becky's
humiliation at feeling like she was supposed to have known better ("I felt full of
shame for letting myself get sucked into something like this") as it quietly suggests
-that hindsight is always clearer than foresight; it also keeps Becky's comedy career
a focus, refusing to define her solely by her experiences with Kip. This is a thoughtful
OCTOBER 2003 
* 
79
and involving work on a complicated subject, and it'll set a lot of readers talking.
DS
TESTA, MARIA 
Almost Forever. Candlewick, 2003 
69p
ISBN 0-7637-1996-5 
$14.99 
R Gr. 3-6
An unnamed narrator remembers 1967 as the year her father was called to serve in
Vietnam. Although he promises his six-year-old daughter it will only be for one
turn of the school calendar, she intuitively senses the true span of a year: "that
second grade/ was half a hallway/ and a whole world/ away from first,/ that seven/
was everything/ six was not." The milestones of that pivotal year are sharply ob-
served with realistic child acuity. Mail, once ignored, now includes regular mes-
sages from Daddy. Trips to the post office are marked by safety suckers and Mama's
anxiety. Mama's rapt attention to the evening newscasts seems to indicate she's in
love with Mr. Roger Mudd. Older brother offers his bedtime prayers for Mickey
Mantle's home run and Daddy's safe return, but the narrator can only beg to hold
onto her fast fading memories. The mail suddenly stops, newscasts talk about the
missing and the prisoners, demonstrations escalate, but the epic tragedy of 1968
registers with the narrator only in confusion and quiet heartache: "My father/ was
missing in Vietnam,/ and I had heard/ my mother/ cry/ for the first time/ in my
life,/ and I/ didn't know/ what/ to do." This particular war story, thankfully, has
a happy ending, not only in Daddy's safe return, but just as important, in the
family's fidelity. Incorporate this accessible, easily excerpted readaloud in a Veter-
ans' Day program as testament to spouses and children left stateside, but don't
expect to make it through with dry eyes. EB
WALLACE, RICH 
Losing Is Not an Option. 
Knopf, 2003 
127p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91351-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81351-9 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Restless: A Ghost's Story. 
Viking, 2003 
167p
ISBN 0-670-03605-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
Wallace returns to the fictional small town of Sturbridge, Pennsylvania with two
new novels of sports-obsessed teens. Losing is the stronger of the two entries,
comprising nine short stories that mark milestones in the teen years of gifted run-
ner, Ron. Readers meet him as a sixth grader, sneaking into a football game with
his best friend and realizing that he's soon to take second place to Gene's new
interest in girls. When Ron's hormones kick in, nearly all of his non-sporting
energy seems to be taken up by his own pursuit of girls, from his painfully embar-
rassing come-on at artists' camp, to an eye-opening evening at a gay party, to a
promising connection with a girl on his track team. It's his all-out dedication to
running, which culminates in triumph at state finals in the concluding story, that
drives Ron and ultimately sustains reader interest. Restless focuses on another
athlete, Herbie, whose training runs through a cemetery lead him to a series of
encounters with the ghost of a nineteenth-century Irish laborer, who fell to his
death from a nearby cliff. Narration is provided by Herbie's deceased brother,
Frank, who has unresolved issues of his own-from his concern for his grieving
family, to his frustration at dying a virgin, to his complex afterlife relationship
with the ghost who haunts his brother. Although the ghost premise is a powerful
draw, Wallace seems to make up metaphysical rules as he goes along, and the
80 
* 
THE BULLETIN
power of the brothers' enduring bond dissipates in a mishmash of Western ghost
lore, Eastern spiritual philosophy, and amateur chat-room physics. Wallace's char-
acters swap insults and gross-outs with the casual informality of trading brown bag
lunches, and readers who stereotype teen guys as having little on their minds but
sex and sports won't find much evidence here to the contrary. Still, Wallace works
magic on track, court, and gridiron, and many YAs will appreciate his efforts. EB
WATTS, LEANDER 
Wild Ride to Heaven. 
Houghton, 2003 
[176p]
ISBN 0-618-26805-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Hannah's father, a charcoal-maker who dreams and schemes over mythical trea-
sure that will lead them to luxury's lap, has bartered away much of his land and all
of his adolescent daughter, signing her over as house drudge to the brutish Barrow
brothers in exchange for ready cash to purchase a magical amulet. Her arrival
amplifies the discord between the brothers, and while Noel tries awkwardly to win
her as a wife, Leon is convinced that Hannah, with her mismatched eyes, is a witch
who has cursed their household. Only the nocturnal appearances of Brother Boy,
the youngest Barrow, who has been disowned by his elder brothers because he
cannot physically tolerate sunlight, offer Hannah solace. When Noel and Leon
confront Hannah with a pitiless choice-her freedom or her life-Brother Boy
buys her time until her father comes through with enough cash, sweet dealing, and
glib reasoning to redeem his daughter from her tormentors. Again, as in The
Stonecutter (BCCB 11/02), Watts sets her Gothic tale in sparsely settled back-
woods New York state, which serves as both a literal wilderness fraught with natu-
ral hazards and as a metaphor for the dark tangle of societal entrapments that
confine legally powerless young women during the nation's earliest days. Unlike
myriad feisty fictional gals of the 1800s who manage to flee the farm to join an
avant-garde of professional women, Hannah is realistically limned-a teen who
daydreams of running off to the city or into the woods but who knows her best bet
lies in entrusting herself to the kindest man available, be it husband, father, or
friend. Readers who look beyond the relief of Hannah's "happy ending" may
recognize her chilling paucity of choice. EB
WESTON, TAMSON 
Hey, Pancakes!; illus. by Stephen Gammell. 
Silver Whistle/
Harcourt, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-15-216502-9 
$16.00 
R 4-6 yrs
The strident "Rrrrrrriiiiinnnnnggggg .. " of an alarm clock wakes sleeping chil-
dren who ask the logical question, "Why get up,/ for goodness' sake?" The answer
comes on the morning air: "Wait... that smell... / could it be ... ? Pancakes!"
Sure enough, a cheerful bathrobed girl in fuzzy slippers stands precariously on a
four-legged stool and pours batter into a hot skillet, flipping pancakes from pan to
plates: "A pancake flip,/ a pancake flop,// pancake bottom/ over pancake top."
Blueberries, butter, and syrup complete the sticky but satisfying breakfast, after
which all the children clean up, and "with a little dab of maple/ behind each ear,//
go out into the world and/ give a pancake cheer!" Weston's paean to pancakes has
a bouncy breakfast beat that lends itself to reading aloud. While the scansion is
.sometimes bumpy and the train of thought sometimes jumps the culinary track,
eating is one of preschoolers' favorite topics, so this title ought to work well in a
food-themed storytime. GammellU's pastel, pencil, and watercolor illustrations swirl
OCTOBER 2003 
* 
81
around like food coloring in an enthusiastic blend, with colors splashing around
the compositions like flecks of batter flying out of the bowl. Weston even includes
a closing recipe for "Grandma's Pancakes," with the admonition "And remember
to wash your hands before mixing, and leave the cooking to the big kids, please.
Love, Grandma." They may wash their hands, but be ready to oversee the pancake
pouring and flipping inspired by this enthusiastic morning mix. JMD
WILHELM, DOUG 
The Revealers. 
Farrar, 2003 
[224p]
ISBN 0-374-36255-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Seventh-grader Russell Trainor is a blip on the radar of an eighth-grade bully, and
he teams up with Elliot, long-suffering schoolyard prey, and Catalina, a Filipina
transfer student who's being harassed by a clique of popular girls, to study their
predicaments scientifically and devise a defense. Catalina's plan actually works.
She issues a statement of fact about her past to all seventh-grade students through
the school LAN, and her simple, dignified approach quickly catches the attention
and respect of many classmates. Elliot follows with an impassioned, if inaccurate
and vitriolic, counterattack on the guys who bully him and, again, students take
notice and begin to respond with their own horror stories. Thus is born The
Revealer, an electronic airing of the school's dirty laundry that rockets the three
friends to near respectability. Catalina's nemesis, however, counts on the kids'
publishing nalvete and sets up a sting that lands them on the brink of a libel suit
and results in the revocation of LAN privileges for the whole school. With the
help of a sympathetic English teacher (whose dewy-eyed idealism and classroom
cluelessness is a total hoot) and a technophilic LAN administrator (whose bum-
bling, guffawing kid camaraderie is nearly as funny), the trio sets the Parkland
Middle School world back to rights. Although Wilhelm stretches events out a bit
longer than necessary and squeezes some discussion into programmatically con-
structed assignments on Anne Frank, he shines a harsh light on many facets of
bullying and never, even at the novel's rosiest moments, implies that every bully is
a good kid just waiting to be redeemed. Middle-schoolers will appreciate the hon-
esty. EB
WINKLER, DAVID 
The Return of Calico Bright. Farrar, 2003 
344p
ISBN 0-374-38048-1 
$19.00 
R Gr. 7-10
Things appear to be looking up for Callie Weston: she's losing weight, capturing
the attention of the school's most popular heartthrob, and developing a devoted
audience for her website version of her great-great-great-great-grandmother's jour-
nal. The legendary Calico Bright, for whom she was named, was a fascinating
character who single-handedly fought off a Cheyenne war party, killed her snivel-
ing husband, had an affair with a preacher, fought a grizzly bear, and rescued a
town from a cholera epidemic by delivering, at the cost of her own life, a lifesaving
serum. Callie's mother wants Calico to take her great-gran as a role model; when
Callie's life falls apart, that desire is realized with a vengeance. Upon finding out
that the journal is a fraud, her mother is having an affair, and her boyfriend was
using her, Callie is desperate to get away. Embarking on a "hands-on geography"
trip into the Madras Mountains with an unlikely companion, a biracial boy named
Trotter, she stumbles upon a neo-Nazi hate group that has taken up residence in
the mountains. In a climactic scene, she manages, with the help of the mysterious
82 
* THE BULLETIN
character McStew, to uncover their criminal activities, hold off their murderous
intentions against Trotter, and bring the group to justice. Like Holes, this blurs
the lines between fiction and history and lends itself to cross-curricular projects,
but it more self-consciously develops adolescent themes of racism, body image,
predatory relationships, the power of language, and intergenerational connections.
Winkler's prose is textured and full-bodied, with a keen ear for nuances of dialect,
and his Callie is a decidedly likeable heroine-naive and hopeful enough to be
duped, but wise and brave enough to confront injustice when it really matters.
KC
WOLF, ALLAN 
The Blood-Hungry Spleen and Other Poems about Our Parts; illus.
by Greg Clarke. 
Candlewick, 2003 
50p
ISBN 0-7636-1565-X 
$17.99 
R Gr. 4-7
Thirty-five poems treat the wonders of anatomy from head to toe with a multitude
of stops between. Entries are grouped into relevant sections, such as "On the Face
of It," "The Circulation Department," "The Control Center," and "The Ins and
Outs of Eating." Scansion glitches mar some poems, but Wolf has a sprightly
voice and a divertingly pell-mell approach to his lines, packing a lot into each
verse; there are plenty of comedic turns, as with the anus which "loves its job/
(though most of us poo-poo it)," and also creative acknowledgment of the impor-
tant roles various physiological components play. The illustrations offer some
lively personified body bits, with the streaky acrylics giving their subjects an over-
stuffed solidity, tamed by the subdued palette of slate blues and flat creams. This
still offers some meaty opportunity for poetic expansion in a biology class (a choral
reading of "Kidney Trouble," a poem for two voices, will wake 'em right up), and
the up-close and very personal nature of the verse will intrigue some otherwise
poetry-shy readers. Notes explain a bit more of the biology (and a few examples of
poetic license), and a list of titles for further reading is included. DS
WOLF, BERNARD 
Coming to America: A Muslim Family's Story; written and illus.
with photographs by Bernard Wolf. Lee & Low, 2003 
4 8p
ISBN 1-58430-086-8 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 3-7
Eight-year-old Rowan Mahmoud didn't get to know her father, Hassan, until she
and her mother (Soad) and siblings (Amr and Dina) left Egypt and joined him in
New York four years ago. Hassan, like many immigrants, had traveled ahead of
his family to secure a toehold in his adopted country, and now the family is adjust-
ing steadily to American life, while preserving their Muslim faith and practices. In
crisp, informal color photographs, readers observe activities in their modest apart-
ment, public schools, neighborhood shops, Queens streets, and local mosque. A
particular strength of Wolfs consistent approach (e.g., Homeless, BCCB 3/95) is
examining the impact of a family situation on all its members, not just the photo-
genic kids. Hassan's long hours of night work clearly take a physical and emo-
tional toll, as he is often absent or too tired to spend much times with his children;
Soad's anxiety over her husband's exhaustion and her own minimal English lan-
guage skills are also poignantly portrayed. Wolf tends, at times, to substitute adu-
lation for information ("Soad is a patient, warmhearted woman who binds the
family together with her love and constant care"), and such shadowy corners as the
family's reunion after four years apart are left unexplored. Only a brief look at
Rowan's homesickness implies that their homeland, indicted in the text for strict
OCTOBER 2003 
* 83
school discipline and low wages, could have anything going for it. Still, this is a
sensitive look at a family that struggles and largely succeeds, and the very ordinari-
ness of their daily job of getting by will make them comfortable new acquaintances
for middle-grade readers. An afterword on the basic beliefs of Islam is included.
EB
WONG, JANET S. 
Minn and Jake; illus. by Genevieve C6td. 
Foster/Farrar,
2003 
14 6p
ISBN 0-374-34987-8 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-6
Minn begins this free-verse story "feeling very empty,/ and very tall,/ and very
odd,/ and very pigtailed,/ and very lizardy,/ and very much alone." So tall that her
head is missing in the fifth-grade class picture, Minn is unexpectedly forced into
the company of a new boy, Jake, who is so short he could be a kindergartner. This
is the story of their developing a relationship despite deep differences of taste and
background, not to mention teasing by some mean-spirited classmates who trick
them-at the end-into a dangerous situation. The nonstop action and child-
tuned humor will lure even readers who claim not to like poetry. In fact, Wong's
carefully patterned repetition of words and phrases is especially suited to reluctant
readers. Each of the thirty-six poetic "chapters" is only a few pages long, and
cleverly exaggerated full-page illustrations complement plentiful white space for
an unintimidating format. Characterizations are swift and sure: "I dare you is
Lola's favorite line." Gender dynamics resonate with accurately awkward preado-
lescent expressions of affection: " . .. everyone knows/ that the only reason/ for
eating a worm/ is to prove you don't love/ someone you really do." Lizard-hunt-
ing is a big motif here, and Minn is clearly on her way to becoming a world-class
biologist, while Jake's capacity to make money by selling secondhand goods may
qualify him to support her scientific habit. To booktalk this one, just read the
scene where Minn accidentally breaks an aquarium, and Jake frantically gathers up
his fish-Angelghost, Flick, Disposal, Plunderface, Ick, Uck, and the $2.99 Blue
Kind "which are so hard to grab/ without squishing"-from the fuzzy carpet and
runs them to watery shelter in the toilet. In fact, maybe the best plan is to read the
whole thing out loud. BH
YATES, PHILIP 
Ten Little Mummies: An Egyptian Counting Book; illus. by G. Brian
Karas. 
Viking, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-670-03641-2 
$15.99 
R 3-7 yrs
There's just not much fun to be had "deep underground in a dreary old tomb," so
ten tightly wrapped denizens of the dark make a break for the daylight. Their
ranks steadily thin as one by one the mummies meet misadventure. Most of their
exploits take a decidedly Gorey-esque turn-heat stroke, crocodile attack, even
arrest for graffiti-ing the Sphinx. The mood is, overall, more goofy than macabre,
as each mummified miscreant plays the scene for laughs-hanging upside down
from the Sphinx's nose, modestly running (well, reaching) for cover when he comes
unwrapped on a pyramid slide, or ropin' and ridin' a hippo down the Nile. When
the last, lonely mummy makes her way back to the tomb, she's greeted by her
buddies: "10 little mummies' adventures are done./ Let's hope tomorrow is twice
as much fun!" The rhythm isn't always smooth, and the happy reunion is a little
unlikely given the mummified individuals' fates, but the storytime set is bound to
applaud the mischief afoot. Karas' earthtoned desert scenes are the real stars here;
84 
* THE BULLETIN
streamlined compositions make the art bold enough for group viewing, and the
hilariously hapless mummies will induce audience giggles. Though not all of the
facts are correct (the old "visible from the moon" canard rears its head), endpaper
tidbits about pyramids and mummies add further interest. For a duo of funny/
spooky countdowns, pair this with Leuck's One Witch (reviewed above). EB
ZEMACH, KAETHE 
The Question Song; written and illus. by Kaethe
Zemach. 
Tingley/Little, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-316-66601-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
A family (brother, sister, father, mother) has a unique way of dealing with every-
day problems: whenever anything goes wrong, they sing "The Question Song."
Each problem brother or sister has is repeated in a question on the verso ("It's
mine, it's mine! I had it first! What are we going to do?/ It's mine, it's mine! I had
it first! What are we going to do?") and answered on the recto ("Look at this, here
is another!/ One for the sister, and one/ for the brother./ That's what we will do!")
with just the right solution to defuse the situation. The difficulties are small (feel-
ing cold, running out of games to play, being caught in the rain) and the rhyming
answers are simple (put on a sweater, read a book with dad, get an umbrella), and
everything works out to everyone's satisfaction every time. The repeated problems
and questions and their predictable answers get somewhat wearing and go on for
an awfully long and repetitive time; since everything follows the same formula and
always turns out just fine, there is no real tension or momentum to keep the pages
turning. Still, this is an upbeat book with a deliberately cheerful outlook on every-
day conflict, and the simple lesson-that a little effort and a little compromise can
make the day go smoother--is one worth repeating. The optimism of the text is
reflected in Zemach's sunny illustrations in stenciled oils on velveteen, featuring a
perky mixed-race family. The surface nap gives the images an unobtrusive depth
that helps offset the blandness of the images, and the white space between the
stencil planes adds a lightness that contributes to the clarity of color and the strate-
gically balanced compositional arrangements. Trying to find a way to painlessly
communicate the need to share and share alike? This upbeat approach will pro-
vide role-playing opportunities that may just do the behavioral trick. JMD
Scholastic Press wishes to announce that the title of Minfong Ho's new book,
reviewed in the 4/03 Bulletin under the title Gathering the Dew, has been changed
to The Stone Goddess.
OCTOBER 2003 
* 
85
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
BROMANN, JENNIFER 
StorytimeAction!: 2,000+ Ideas forMaking500 Picture Books
Interactive. Neal-Schuman, 2003 
295p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55570-459-X 
$45.00
While experienced librarians and program providers might take issue with
Bromann's assertion that traditional storytimes discourage interactivity, the prac-
tical intent here is to give librarians some tools to help enliven their storytime
programming. The book does just that with an alphabetical-by-author list of 500
picture books (with minimal summaries) followed by suggestions for activities to
promote listener involvement. The author explains the inclusion of not-so-stellar
titles, but librarians may question the value of using a mediocre book when so
many fine ones are available. The stated audience for these books is 3-5 year olds,
but that range is fairly flexible, and some titles could go as high as first grade.
Suggested enrichment activities include creative dramatics, props, puppets, cut-
outs, props, music, dance, props, modified call and response, video-viewing, and
props. Experienced programmers may not find Bromann's approach unique, but
they will surely find a suggestion (or two or three) to refresh their enthusiasm for
programming; new librarians and novice programmers will find here a plethora of
suggestions for expanding their storytime activities. Alphabetical theme and title
indexes are included. JMD
ODEAN, KATHLEEN 
Great Books for Babies and Toddlers: More Than 500 Recom-
mended Books for Your Child's First Three Years. 
Ballantine, 2003 
337p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-345-45254-2 
$14.95
The subtitle indicates that the primary audience for this book is parents and caregiv-
ers of young children, but librarians seeking collection-development advice and
programming hints will find the information contained in the extensive introduc-
tion and the annotations for the suggested titles most helpful as well. From the
benefits of reading aloud to the acquisition of language to the importance of a
print-rich environment, Odean offers a well-defined context for reading aloud as a
literacy-nurturing activity. The author identifies elements of successful books for
young children, gives ideas for introducing new books and rereading old favorites,
and provides pointers on what to do when reading aloud isn't working. The anno-
tations are succinct and informative, balanced between the descriptive and the
critical. Complete bibliographic information is included for each book, as well as
a note as to whether or not the book is recommended for group readalouds. Over-
all, the compilation reveals a broad knowledge of the available literature and an
understanding of how to successfully introduce that literature to children. A con-
cluding section, "Resources and Tips for Parents," includes Tips on Reading Aloud,
Books in Spanish, Organizations and Web Sites Concerned with Babies, Tod-
dlers, and Books, and more. Author-illustrator, title, and subject indexes are in-
cluded. Buy two of this useful title: one for professional reference and one for the
parenting shelf. JMD
86 * THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Soto
Adoption-fiction: Little
ADVENTURE: Britton
African Americans: Greenberg
African Americans-fiction: Johnson
African Americans-stories:
Campbell
ALPHABET BOOKS: Agee
Animals-fiction: Cronin
Animals-stories: Lester
Archaeology: Halls
Art: Spiegelman
Art and artists: Greenberg
Art and artists-stories: Pinkwater
Babies-stories: Herman; O'Connell
Beaches-stories: Best
Bears-fiction: McPhail
BEDTIME BOOKS: Rose
BIOGRAPHIES: Demi; Greenberg
Biology: Harris
Biology-poetry: Wolf, A.
Boats-fiction: Martin
Books and reading: Koscielniak
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Banks;
Little; Mackler; Rodowsky
Brothers and sisters-stories: Zemach
Bullies-fiction: Wilhelm
Cats-fiction: Emerson
Cats-stories: Fleming, D.
Christmas-fiction: Fine
Christmas-stories: Herman
Civics: Christelow; Freedman;
Jackson
Computers-fiction: Lubar; Wilhelm
COUNTING BOOKS: Rose; Yates
Cowboys-fiction: Failing
Cows-stories: Herman
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Alphii; Cameron; Winkler
Dating-fiction: Jenkins, A.
Death and dying-fiction: Banks;
Soto
Dinosaurs: Halls
Disabilities-fiction: Johnson
Disasters: Jackson
Dogs: Jackson; Lubka
Dogs-stories: Fleming, D.
Ethics and values: Hooper; Jenkins,
A.; Soto; Watts; Wilhelm;
Winkler
Egypt, ancient-fiction:
McCaughrean
Elephants: Jenkins, M.
Enemies-fiction: Schreiber
Families-fiction: Alphin; Fine;
Johnson; Rodowsky
FANTASY: Britton; Pattou; Soto
Fathers-fiction: Alphin; Gantos;
Testa
Fathers-stories: Coy
Fears-stories: Lester
Fishing-fiction: Mills
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Barton; Napoli; Pattou; Roberts
Food and eating-fiction: Creech
Food and eating-stories: Coy;
Leuck; Weston
Foster care-fiction: Fleischman
Friends and friendship-fiction:
Creech; Fuqua; Jenkins, A.;
Johnson; McPhail; Wong
Friends and friendship-stories:
Pinkwater
Gardening-stories: Coy
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Matthew
OCTOBER 2003 
* 87
Gender roles-fiction: Matthews
GHOST STORIES: Fuqua; Wallace
Restless
Gifts-stories: Fleming, C.
Glasses-stories: Cohen
Government: Christelow; Freedman
Grandfathers-fiction: Mills
Grandmothers-fiction: Creech
Grandmothers-stories: Best
Growing up-fiction: Gantos;
Jenkins, A.
Guatemala-fiction: Cameron
Halloween: Leuck
Health: Wolf, A.
HISTORICAL FICTION: Hooper;
Martin; McCaughrean; Napoli;
Testa; Watts
History, European: Koscielniak
History, U.S.: Freedman; Krull
History, world: Demi
HUMOR: Cronin; Danko; Failing;
Fine; Fleischman; Gantos;
Pinkwater; Roberts; Spiegelman
Identity-fiction: Lubar
Illness-fiction: Hooper; Johnson;
Napoli
Immigrants: Wolf, B.
Inventors and inventing: Koscielniak
Islands-fiction: Martin
Journals-fiction: Banks
Kidnapping-fiction: Cameron
Latinos-fiction: Soto
Lemurs-stories: Lester
LOVE STORIES: Roberts
Magic-fiction: Pattou
Media: Krull
Medieval life-fiction: Napoli
Mental illness-stories: Campbell
Mothers-fiction: Tamar
Mothers-stories: Campbell
Mummies-stories: Yates
Muslims: Demi; Wolf, B.
MYSTERIES: Alphin; Emerson
Native Americans-fiction: Bruchac
Nature study: Jenkins, M.; Rose;
Singer
Orphans-fiction: Britton
Parades-fiction: Hirsch
Pets-fiction: Little
Physical education: Tamar
POETRY: Singer; Wolf, A.; Wong
Reading aloud: Cronin; Danko;
Failing; Fine; Hirsch; McPhail;
Mills; Singer; Testa; Wolf, A.;
Wong
Reading, beginning: Fleming, D.
Reading, easy: Cronin; Failing;
Lester; Little; McPhail; Mills
Reading, reluctant: Cronin; Danko;
Jackson; Spiegelman; Tamar
Religion-fiction: McCaughrean
Religious education: Demi; Wolf,
B.
RHYMING STORIES: Leuck;
Weston; Yates; Zemach
Romance-fiction: Mackler;
Schreiber
Royalty-fiction: McCaughrean
Relationships-fiction: Soto
School-fiction: Bruchac; Jenkins,
A.; Schreiber; Wong
School-stories: Alter
SCIENCE FICTION: Danko;
Lubar
Science: Halls
Self-image-fiction: Mackler
SHORT STORIES: Wallace Losing
Social studies: Christelow; Freed-
man; Jackson; Krull
Sounds-stories: O'Connell
Space travel: Lubka
SPORTS STORIES: Bruchac;
Tamar; Wallace Losing; Wallace
Restless
Storytelling: Barton
Storytime: Alter; Cohen; Fleming,
C.; Fleming, D.; Jenkins, M.;
O'Connell; Weston; Zemach
Summer-stories: Best
SUSPENSE: Alphin
Teachers-fiction: Gantos
TODDLER BOOKS: O'Connell
Toddlers: Harris
Transvestism-fiction: Matthews
Vampires-fiction: Schreiber
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Cameron; Fleischman; Winkler
Voyages and travel-stories: Agee
Vietnam War-fiction: Testa
Water-poetry: Singer
Women's studies: Watts
World War II-stories: Fleming, C.
S 
"Bravissima." -The Horn Book
A~hR&
Writ
a?
llust
by
to
:y
s6-10.
.99 Tr
6-028719-5)
7.89 Lb
6-028727-6)
4- 
"This enjoyable title ... should lead young music lovers back to
the shelves to find out more." 
-
Starred review / School Library Journal
"Aliki takes on the whole of music-its origins, its history, its necessity to
the human spirit. As simply as possible, she explains everything from
rhythm ... to harmony and tempo. No one else captures the power of
music as Aliki." 
-
ALA Booklist
"Accompanied by Aliki's child-friendly illustrations ... there is something
here for anyone interested in finding out more about a familiar art form."
-
Kirkus Reviews
IIt 
I 
ar'r 
II 
'ns 
11 
v 
ýB o 
,
C0oo'e Right,
Writing Fiction f
Stories Or
J
"[The exercises] will help both novices and sea
insight and move forward with their writing." -
author of Crazy Lady!, a N
www.press.uillir
Choosing 
HmiDo
n 
-f- r 
iTI
wBetsy 
Heae 
[[e]]s1 
[LuI 
----
B e t s H 
e a r n e* 
I L L Iw 
w w .p r e s s .u i l l i n o i s .e d u
o aC Ia 
Jjl-r VVv/ln 
I 
11I I 
L 
.
-Jack Zipes
$42.00 hardcover
The Johns Hopkins University Press * 1-800-537-5487 * www.jhupbooks.com
Kiddie Lit
The Cultural Construction of
Children's Literature in America
BEVERLY LYON CLARK
"Beverly Lyon Clark has succeeded
admirably in portraying children's
literature as a contested cultural field and
revealing changes in the meanings and
relevance in children's books over the
course of 150 years. Her research is
impeccable; her general perspective,
sound; her arguments, provocative. This
;i -
m 
;nr 
i 
n 
,rlr 
in 
t+h 
fI ]A
I--
r";
~~e~
EDITED by
SMichael Cart
ORIGINAL STORIES by
Joan Bauer 
Lois Lowry
Michael Cart 
Walter Dean Myers
Emma Donoghue 
Sonya Sones
Nikki Grimes 
Joyce Carol Thomas
Norma Howe 
Rita Williams-Garcia
'*"These short stories by recognized young adult
authors are compelling examples of contemporary
literature dealing with all types of family
issues . .. The stories are tight,
characters are realistic, and situations
are all too familiar for today's teens.
Witnessing these characters as they
resolve their problems will enable students
to give voice to their own 'necessary noise.'"
-Starred 
review / School Library Journal
"3 
"Some of YA fiction's best voices are
collected in this anthology of 10 stories about
what it means, these days, to be in a family ...
[A] first-rate collection, which is on the leading
edge of YA fiction." 
-
ALA Booklist
Teen Fiction. $15.99 Tr (0-06-027499-9); $16.89 Lb (0-06-027500-6)
PATRICIA 
EMILY
MacLACHLAN 
MacLACHLAN
Illustrated by KATY SCHNEIDER
" 
"The young narrator... recounts how four painters
paint the same island. By observing each artist closely,
he hopes to discover how to paint the wind. ... 
The
gentle prose [by the Newbery Medalist and her
daughter] pairs well with the handsome artwork [and]
gets to the heart of creativity in a way children will
understand." 
-Starred 
review / ALA Booklist
'~ 
"This elegantly conceived picture book... makes
art seem accessible for children of all ages."
-Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly
"Schneider's masterful paintings are light-splashed
gems ... 
[in this] amazing marriage of text and
illustration." 
-School Library Journal
Ages 4-8.
$15.99 Tr (0-06-029798-0)
$16.89 Lb (0-06-029799-9)
ClmC 
nnoins
~eAng.I
:,011Co 
rB 
k 
A 
im 
itf-.rcClis·lieS
A
WoderfuIl, i
Eng osing:·-::~ -:·~
-
ee
Sby K. L. Going 
:" :iaja""i·si
0-399-23990-1
SAges 14 up * $17.99
*k "Going draws her characters with compassionate acuity."
-- The Bulletin for the Center of Children's Books, iStarred ~r~eview
*" "An impressive debut that offers hop fo l kids."
-- Booklist, starred reviewi 
i~:-ii ·
* "The opening lines immeiately 
hook readers....
Troy's voice is cand id, irreverenjt, 
realistic, and humorous."
-- School Liraryouralstarred review 
*
"in's~ 
edgy and realistic characterization .
w~ii~~'- 
lll resonate with readers." -
VOYa
;·~ 
"[A] gritty and intense novel."
-The Horn Book
G. P. Putnam's Sons
A division of Penguin Young Readers Group * www.penguin.com
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
0008-9036(2
1 -MI
0008-9036(20031 0)57:2; 1 -M
g
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
