ILLI NI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
$A 
W,
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
a S 
A
4 
o 
* 
I
Q 
aLDl 
BE 
,EO 
-
Dear Peter Rabbiit
by Alma Flor Ada * illustrated in full color by Leslie Tryon
SERIES OF LIVELY LETTERS penned by
d storybook characters tells an entertaining
nd imaginative tale ... Children will be
enchanted by this opportunity to meet
familiar faces in new settings."
-Starred, School Library Journal
"Tryon's ink-and-watercolor
illustrations are a delightful
complement to the letters, fresh
and filled with the detail that
brings a reader back for a second a
third look." 
-Booklist
"The events in four familiar tales are cleverly intertwined ... Tryon
visualizes them in an inviting fairy-tale world." -Kirkus Reviews
Ages 5 - 8 / 0-689-31850-2 SBE / $14.95
SBE INDICATES A REINFORCED HARDCOVER EDITION.
Also available in Spanish from Libros Colibri:
Querido Pedrin
TRANSLATED BY ROSA ZUBIZARRETA 0-689-31915-0 $14.95
ATHENIUM BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
An aiprer ofSimon dlShest Chldra's PubsSing 
Dviumm
866 Third Avenue * New York, NY 10022
SIMoN k ScHUSTIa i THE ruSLISHINC 
OtrTION Of VIACOM 
INc.
I
THE
B UL L BT IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
November 1994
Vol. 48 No. 3
A LOOK INSIDE
77 
THE BIG PICTURE
Bing Bang Boing written and illustrated by Douglas Florian
78 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
86 
* Guests by Michael Dorris
90 
* Swamp Angel written by Anne Isaacs; illustrated by Paul O. Zelinsky
93 
* Coyote written and illus. by Gerald McDermott
97 
* The Glory Field by Walter Dean Myers
107 * When She Hollers by Cynthia Voigt
111 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
112 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1994 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Douglas Florian, from Bing Bang Boing ©1994 and used by permission of
Harcourt Brace.
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 77
THE BIG PICTURE
Bing Bang Boing
written and illustrated by Douglas Florian
While you won't find the euphonious title among the poetry here, this approach-
able collection contains a multitude of musical mouthfuls. Some poems here ask
questions ("Do commas have mommas/ Who teach them to pause,/ Who comfort
and calm them,/ And clean their sharp claws?... "-from "Commas"). Some are
natural history, sort of ("I know a little mermaid,/ Her father is a man./ Her mother
is a sardine stuffed/ Inside a sardine can."-"Little Mermaid"). Some-most-
are stories ("Mother made a birthday cake,/ For icing she used glue./ The children
sit so quiet now,/ And chewandchewandchew."- 
"Cake Mistake").
There are no officially titled chapters or sections, but subjects seem to
cling together loosely, with each double spread sharing a general drift and one
seeming to mutate into another with a certain peculiar logic. "Pages," "Book
Crooks," and "Mr. Cook" ("Mr. Cook's in love with books," and disappears among
them) give way to "Strange Change" ("An enterprising wizard/ Turned Aunt Fay
into a lizard .... ") and to "What a Mad Magician Did to Me." "I'm in the Mood
for Mud" shares a spread with "Sloppy Girl" and "Trouble Bubble Gum," which
leads into "If I Eat More Candy" on the next page. The combination of interde-
pendence and independence makes this an easy book to read right through as well
as to pick poems out of at random.
And many kids who would ordinarily find a whole book of poetry in-
timidating will relish reading or browsing here. Florian displays himself a master
of poetic compression and easy phrasing which, combined with a keen sense of the
ridiculous, makes this book a natural for fans ofX. J. Kennedy's Brats. At his high
points, he achieves the inventiveness of Ogden Nash and the rhythmic rightness of
children's playground chants; some of the verses here respond to folklore favorites,
such as "Pease-Porridge Not" and "Shoe View" ("There was an old lady who lived
in a shoe/ Pew/ Pew/ Pew/ Pew/ Pew/ Pew/ Pew"), and many sound like naturals
for writing in autograph albums, on desktops, or on bathroom walls. While the
tone stays light and zingy, the poet varies his verse structure from poem to poem,
including time-honored forms such as the limerick as well as poems with longer
lines that create a comically grave effect. There's even a concrete poem or two and
some games with formatting, as when the thieves of "Book Crooks" "stol some
let ers/ From th s verse." Visual effects aside, there are also a plethora of entries
that beg to be read aloud and could find even younger audiences.
At first glance, Big BangBoing may pale in comparison to flashy multihued
poetry collections: the illustrations here are drawings, with a smudgy feel and
thick lines that make them resemble prints; appearing on every page, they have a
appealingly childlike awkwardness and a Thurberesque warp to their attitude. The
understatedness of the visuals, however, not only helps sustain their likability over
78 
* THE BULLETIN
the course of a ninety-six page book, it also allows the words to stay in the fore-
front, so that the lines which dominate the book are those of the poetry rather than
of the draftsmanship. These inspired doodles recall the kind of thing kids draw on
their own; their presence here brings the poetry they illustrate closer.
This might inspire some copycat class projects of poem and picture; it
might also make a felicitous introduction to the time-honored art of recitation, if
adults don't mind the giggles such performances would induce. Tart, clever, in-
ventive poems such as these are one of the best ways for kids to explore the won-
derful flavors of language. Indices of titles and of first lines are included.
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AARDEMA, VERNA, ad. 
Misoso: Once Upon a Time Tales from Africa; illus. by
Reynold Ruffins. 
Apple Soup/Knopf, 1994 
88p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-93430-8 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-83430-3 
$18.00 
R 
5-10 yrs
This handsome volume includes fables, folktales, and authored tales, retold from
early English translations or revised from early Aardema collections from the 1960s
and representing ten different sub-Saharan cultures. Each was selected primarily
for its entertainment value (misoso is a Mbundu word describing tales told for
entertainment), and secondarily to "teach a lesson" or "illuminate the culture of a
people." Tested against this standard, most of the tales succeed admirably, if not
necessarily with the same audience. "Leelee Goro," which explains how hugging
came into the world, and "Anansi and the Phantom Food," with its anthropomor-
phized edibles, are good picks for preschool story hour. "The Boogey Man's Wife"
and "Hapendiki and Benti the Bibi," both of which deal humorously with marital
discord, may sail right over younger heads, only to be picked up by the post-
picture-book set. Two cumulative tales ("Goso the Teacher" has been recast in
rhyme) are challenging enough to invite a broad spectrum of listeners to join in.
Glossary, pronunciation guide, and afterword discussing the tale's cultural setting
accompany each entry, and are a boon to the reader/storyteller. Several bright
acrylic-and-pencil pictures illuminate each tale; the layout is spacious and attrac-
tive; detailed source notes are provided. Update Aardema's shopworn Story Hat
titles with this bright new collection. EB
ADLER, DAVID A. 
Hilde and Eli: Children of the Holocaust; illus. by Karen
Ritz. 
Holiday House, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1091-9 
$15.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
In a followup to their picture-book biography of Anne Frank (BCCB 3/93) Adler
and Ritz here present the stories of two other young Holocaust victims, Hilde
Rosenzweig, a German Jew who was gassed in a boxcar at the age of eighteen, and
Eli Lax, twelve when he was taken from his Carpathian home to be murdered at
Auschwitz. From accounts given by the two children's siblings, Adler explains
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 79
simply the facts of their lives and the concurrent events of the Nazi rise and World
War II that determined their fate. With a similar simplicity and restraint, Ritz's
watercolors manage both gentle scenes of family life and more scary images of
book-burning and of men inside a gas chamber. While the portrayal of two vic-
tims suggests the range of destruction of the European Jews, the narrative might
become confusing to younger children when it switches from Hilde's to Eli's story
halfway through; parents and other caregivers may also need to explain such sen-
tences as "Prices went up so fast that no one wanted to hold onto German money,"
a confusing definition of inflation. But those will be the easy questions, and the
book gives plenty of scope to begin working on the harder ones. RS
AUCH, MARY JANE 
Monster Brother; written and illus. by Mary Jane
Auch. 
Holiday House, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1095-1 
$15.95 
Ad 4-7 yrs
Like many preschoolers, Rodney has a problem with monsters coming into his
room and disturbing his sleep at night. Although his parents try innovative solu-
tions, such as lots of light to keep the monsters away, the monsters come up with
their own solutions, such as sunglasses. When Rodney hears he can expect a new
baby brother soon, he happily expects that monsters will be scared to enter a room
with two kids in it, but when he overhears relatives talking about the baby having
"scrawny chicken legs" and growing like a weed, he begins to envision a baby that
looks like a monster itself. Auch uses a wide array of colors so bright they are
garish in places, and her people have the exaggerated features of caricatures with
huge eyes, bee-stung lips, and goofy, gangly, or lumpy bodies. Her comic style
will strike some as stylish and funny, while others will find it unattractively
cartoonish. Younger children may have difficulty understanding that the mon-
sters are in Rodney's imagination, since this is never stated in the story, but all ages
will laugh at the progressively more frightful pictures of the baby as Rodney over-
hears additional comments. The story is nicely resolved, with the baby (who turns
out to look like Rodney) protecting him in an unexpected way. SDL
BACHRACH, 
SUSAN D. 
Tell Them We Remember: 
The Story of the
Holocaust. United 
States 
Holocaust 
Memorial 
Museum/Little,
1994 
112p 
illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 0-316-69264-6 
$19.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-316-07484-5 
$10.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Liberally illustrated with maps and photographs from the United States Holocaust
Memorial Museum, this history of the Holocaust accents an unemotional histori-
cal account with sidebars following several young people's stories from 1933 until
after the war. Blending topical and chronological approaches, the book follows
the course of the tragedy, with each double spread focusing on a single concept or
event, such as The Nuremberg Race Laws, The Night of Broken Glass, At the
Killing Centers, Jewish Partisans, The Survivors. The sidebars are patterned after
the Holocaust Museum's "identity card" program, where visitors follow the fate of
one person throughout the Museum; here, the stories of twenty children and young
adults-some of whom were killed, some of whom survived-give faces to the
numbers. While Bachrach properly places the Jews at the center of the genocide,
she also includes coverage (and stories) of other victims: Gypsies, Catholics, ho-
mosexuals, and the disabled. The factual tone of the text balances the historical
80 
* 
THE BULLETIN
photographs, which rely on a sobering documentary effect rather than sensational-
izing the grisly details. An extensive reading list, chronology, and index make the
book an excellent resource for research; the complementing overview and mini-
biographies lend both perspective and immediacy. RS
BLOS, JOAN W. 
Brooklyn Doesn't Rhyme; illus. by Paul Birling. 
Scribners,
1994 
86p
ISBN 0-684-19694-8 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
The students in Miss Edgecomb's sixth-grade class, most of whom are immigrants
like Rosey Sachs, write family stories rather than essays this year (1907) because, as
their teacher explains, "knowing about your family will help you to know your-
self." Rosey's eleven stories collectively paint a portrait of her Polish/Austrian-
Jewish family, which is securing a toehold in the American economy and culture
while helping more recent immigrants to follow in its path. With sensitivity, can-
dor, and humor Rosey relates how Uncle Mendel hires a taxi for his hat to ride in,
so that he can briefly live like a Rockefeller; the housemaid Bogdana anxiously
awaits the summons to join her husband in Chicago, where all American dreams
come true; the doctor's stylish wife hooks Mamma on attending women's suffrage
meetings; and everyone learns to use the telephone. Stories are randomly arranged,
as one might expect a series of classroom compositions to be, but a family chronol-
ogy is appended to help sort events. Blos conveys Rosey's character chiefly through
Rosey's own rhetoric, that of a gifted young writer not yet fully in command of
standard English; only rarely does Blos' own polished prose ("The sound of our
shouts and laughter curved and crossed in the middle of the air like fireworks in the
night") intrude into the compositions. Black-and-white line-and-wash sketches
are included. EB
BREATHED, BERKELEY 
Red Ranger Came Calling; written and illus. by Berkeley
Breathed. 
Little, 1994 
42p
ISBN 0-316-10881-2 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Breathed has found in his father's tale of a boyhood Christmas in 1939 a storyline
admirably suited to his stardingly surreal signature paintings. America endures the
Depression, Europe is at war, and the Weltschmerz has even affected Santa Claus,
who is rumored to be "living in secretive retirement" on the very island in Wash-
ington State where nine-year-old Red Breathed spends his Christmas holidays with
Aunt Vy. For Red, Santa is a cruel myth, but his disbelief is shaken when he meets
the mysterious Saunder Clis who actually makes Aunt Vy's dog fly-in a clumsy
fashion. Red stakes the paltry sum of his credulity on Cl6s' ability to deliver an
Official Buck Tweed Two-Speed Crime-Stopper Star-Hopper bike; when the old
man does-again clumsily-Red becomes a fierce believer, and a Santa recharged
by the child's faith is ready to ride again. Does the reader doubt the veracity of this
tale? Well, Breathed does offer a photograph of a rusted red bike lodged perma-
nently in the tree in which Santa accommodatingly landed it. The adult Red's
somewhat windy narration pokes fun at his past disbelief; stumbling once (the
climactic appearance of the two-wheeler turns on a lame pun as Santa delivers a
"treed" rather than a "Tweed" bicycle), it recovers its footing as Red speculates that
the bike was "placed there by a strange old man whose ears failed him before his
heart did." The author/illustrator's shadowy, often grotesque scenes evoke an at-
mosphere of pervasive disillusionment; the balloon-headed, bug-eyed hero is a clever
caricature of the real Red, whose youthful snapshot appears with the book's dedi-
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 
81
cation. Middle-schoolers too tough for Santa stories will be drawn to Breathed's
looming images and cynically edged humor. EB
BRENNER, BARBARA 
Mr. Tall and Mr. Small; illus. by Mike Shenon. 
Martin/
Holt, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-2757-2 
$14.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
From the moment they meet, Giraffe and Mouse argue over their own merits:
"'Small fry,' said he,/ 'It's too bad you're/ not big like me'"; "'You big Giraffe,/ I'd
like to see/ You crawl into a hole, like me!'" But when a pipe-puffing hunter
carelessly drops a match nearby, Small and Tall quickly cooperate to save them-
selves-Mouse, with an ear to the ground, detects the rumble of fleeing animals,
and Giraffe, with his head in the air, spots a safe lake beyond the trees. Danger
past, the companions now disagree over who was the true hero-and each credits
the other. Brenner's rhymed verse is as much fun for reader as it is for listener, and
should set everyone bouncing: "Mouse ate seed./ Giraffe ate trees./ Giraffe had
enormous/ Knobbly knees,/ Mouse had whiskers, they both had fleas-/ Both
Tall and Small." Listeners may hear a familiar tone in the animals' largely good-
natured boasting and will recognize that these rivals are really good friends; they
will also feel smugly superior to the irresponsible adults who don't know fire safety
(and don't even carry their rifles properly!). Shenon's light-hearted paintings fea-
ture simple outlined shapes, clean composition, and large areas of matte color,
slightly smudged for texture. A story hour winner. EB
BROWN, MARc 
Arthur's First Sleepover; written and illus. by Marc Brown. 
Little,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-316-11445-6 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
In this, the twentieth episode of Arthur's adventures, Arthur is wildly excited to be
having his friends Buster and the Brain over to sleep in a tent in his backyard.
They are all a little nervous, however, about newspaper reports of a man in town
spotting an alien spaceship, and Arthur's younger sister D.W. makes the most of
it. By the end of the story, the boys have turned the tables on D.W. and are shown
on the last page dancing into the night inside the tent. Exuberant watercolor
pictures are filled with funny asides, such as the many bags of chips the Brain has
brought, contrasted with his simple statement, "I brought a few snacks." 
Some
young readers will be able to make little sense of the opening scenes when they
talk about an Elvis sighting and refer to the "National Requirer," but most of the
humor is right on target. SDL
BUETTNER, DAN 
Sovietrek: A Journey by Bicycle across Russia; written and illus.
with photographs by Dan Buettner. 
Lerner, 1994 
104 p
ISBN 0-8225-2950-5 
$17.21 
R Gr. 4-8
Bicyclists and armchair travelers alike will enjoy this account of the transglobal
journey, beginning and ending in St. Paul, Minnesota, taken in 1990 by a team of
two Russian and two American cyclists. As the title indicates, the book focuses on
the Soviet leg of the trip, with the men traveling from Odessa (now in Ukraine)
across southern Russia to Vladivostok, a distance of 7,353 miles. The book is
stronger on bicycling particulars than on Russian culture or society, but the style is
livelier than National Geographic (of their meager rations in the Siberian wilder-
ness, Buettner writes "breakfast, lunch, and dinner consisted of the same meal-
82 
* THE BULLETIN
pig fat porridge and muddy water. Yum") and there's a good sense of the grind
that such a journey can be. Informal color photos provide a picture of Russian
roads and landscapes, and each chapter includes a map that will allow readers to
follow along. Does the book make you want to go there?-not really, but Buettner's
intrepid enthusiasm will win him fans. A pronunciation guide, glossary and an
index are appended. RS
BUNTING, EVE 
Night of the Gargoyles; illus. by David Wiesner. 
Clarion,
1994 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-395-66553-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Bunting sets the scene for an expose on the midnight rites of the grotesque title
beasts. Free verse that tolls as steadily and solemnly as a church bell is rich with
moody imagery: "... rain/ that pours in torrents through/ their gaping lips/ and
chokes their throats/ with autumn's leaves") and the promise of some child-pleas-
ing menace. But when it comes to the big question-What do gargoyles do in the
dead of night?-the answer is disappointing. They lurk and they creep and they
peer and they swoop, and then they gather and complain about the weather, make
rude faces at the museum guard, and go home. Wiesner, with his sharp insight
into the nocturnal antics of frogs (see Tuesday, BCCB 5/91), seems the ideal artist
to illuminate Bunting's theme. Indeed, his grainy, deeply shadowed charcoal im-
ages, which are bound to be compared with Van Allsburg's Conte pencil work,
expertly blend frolic and fright; vertical panels cleverly incorporated into the book's
design offer an appropriately Gothic look. But absence of plot provides Wiesner
little to work with, and so his stone figures mostly pose and mug. A provocative
title and enticingly creepy cover art are certain to attract and even please browsers,
but youngsters looking for a good scare will only find a mild shudder. EB
BYARS, BETSY 
The Dark Stairs: A Herculeah Jones Mystery. 
Viking, 1994 
130p
ISBN 0-670-85487-5 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Following in her mother (private investigator) and father's (police detective)
gumshoes, Herculeah Jones can't resist a mystery, and the creepy old house, nick-
named Dead Oaks, down on Antique Row, is presenting a host of sinister possi-
bilities. Her father is looking into a break-in there, and her mother has a strange
new client who seems to have a connection to the property as well. This is more of
a semi-serious suspense novel than a procedural mystery, so while genre fans may
be disappointed in the weak ending, where a killer is exposed but unaccountably
not arrested, they can still enjoy Herculeah's investigative verve, her sometimes
unscrupulous tactics, and the bumbling "help" of her sidekick, Meat. While the
book isn't as all-out funny as some of Byars' comedies, there's enough witty digres-
sion (such as the story about the origin of Herculeah's name) to keep the prose
perking along with the story. RS
CARTER, ROBERT 
The Collectors. Lothrop, 1994 
288p
ISBN 0-688-13763-6 
$14.00 
M 
Gr. 5-7
Edwud K and his friend Nolan, insects, are dissatisfied with the increasing depri-
vation of their lives; food for the collectors (as the insects, possibly cockroaches,
call themselves) is growing scarce, increasing violence is being legally wrought upon
the powerless, and their "Orijin" story promises spiritual fulfillment that they cur-
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 
83
rently do not receive from their existence. Edwud and several of his friends go off
on a pilgrimage to find the sacred Monoocal. The renegade collectors' journey
brings them strength, self-knowledge, and occasional tragedy, but eventually they
return to their now-devastated home where they intervene in a tribal war and
finally realize their legendary destiny. There have certainly been successful stories
about small creatures whose lives are richer than humans imagine, but this one
suffers from some major flaws. Edwud's darker other personality, called Lennod,
is insufficiently justified and pointlessly included, and the rest of the characters'
psychology is oversimplified; it's not clear why the Longleys, the human family
upon whose leavings the collectors depend, disappear from their house; the use of
footnotes to explain coined terms and the idiosyncratic misspelling are jarring rather
than atmospheric. Most importantly, the making of the book's world overshad-
ows the force of the plot, so that the story never collects enough momentum to
overcome the reader's disbelief-and disinterest-in a book about bugs. The put-
ting-together of the pieces of the Orijin myth and Edwud's growing attachment to
feisty Jinni instead of the weak Sera provide some interest for those devoted to
anthropomorphic animal stories, but most readers would be better off with Mary
James' witty Shoebag (BCCB 3/90). DS
CHOI, SOOK NvUL 
Gathering ofPearls. Houghton, 1994 
163p
ISBN 0-395-67437-9 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Continuing the autobiographical story begun in The Year ofImpossible Goodbyes
(BCCB 10/91) and Echoes of the White Giraffe (6/93), Sookan leaves Korea to
attend Finch College, a Catholic women's school in New York. She finds the
adjustment to a brash new culture difficult but exhilarating, and for the first time
she begins to question the future her older sister Theresa has planned for her, that
Sookan will come back to Korea after graduating and become a nun. Bossy, disap-
proving letters from Theresa arrive with depressing regularity, as well as loving,
encouraging ones from Sookan's mother, but Sookan feels she can tell neither of
them about her difficulties with the language, the workload, and a continuing
shortage of funds. While Choi's style is sometimes flat and overexplanatory ("When
I was in Korea, I thought everything my sister said was right. But now I find that
I don't always agree with her, and I resent the way she tries to control every aspect
of my life"), the figure of outsider Sookan is a potent if somewhat saintly one, set
against an appealing, girls'-story background of dates, dances, friendly roommates,
and caring professors that provide an innocent picture of a 1950s college campus
that younger teens will find engrossing. Though there is sadness, this hasn't the
drama and tragedy of the first book; still, followers of the series will be reassured
that Sookan, who has seen so much terror, successfully gets through a difficult but
rewarding freshman year. RS
CISNEROS, SANDRA 
Hairs/Pelitos; illus. by Terry Ybtfiez. 
Apple Soup/Knopf,
1994 
25p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-96171-2 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-86171-8 
$15.00 
Ad 3-6 yrs
Bilingual text-English atop the illustration, Spanish below-reproduces the sec-
ond chapter of Cisneros' adult novel The House on Mango Street. Removed from
the context of the original work, Hairs stands on its own as a brief lyrical tribute to
diversity within families (in this case, a Mexican-American family), with each
84 
* THE BULLETIN
member's peculiar hair style offering a sly comment on his or her personality. The
concept itself is thin as a hair, but the excerpt engages the senses, presenting a cozy,
comforting picture of an loving family and concluding with the young narrator
being lulled to sleep surrounded by Papa's "snoring, the rain, and Mama's hair
that smells like bread." Ybaiiez paints each family member as a solitary, stylized
form afloat in bright, swirly rectangles, bordered by bands of contrasting color
which are peppered with images supposedly related to the character (although why
Papa has dice, little Kiki has clowns, and Mama has bicycles is anyone's guess).
But the problem with Hairs lies in its relation to the parent work. Within Mango
Street, this chapter is a fleeting counterpoint to the unromanticized portrayal of an
impoverished environment, and thus the excerpt distorts Cisneros' larger story of
Esperanza, "a girl who didn't want to belong" to the desolate world this picture
book idealizes. Esperanza's surroundings are deteriorating brick and concrete, not
Ybafiez' circus colors; and the cozy nighttime scene depicted in Hairs occurs in
the single bedroom shared by all six family members. No notes, apart from the
obligatory publication history, connect the two works; Hairs'audience will find
Mango Street inaccessible; Mango Street's readership is long past picture books.
EB
CONNELL, DAVID D. 
Mathnet Casebook: #4 The Map With a Gap; written by
David D. Connell and Jim Thurman; illus. by Danny O'Leary. 
Scientific Ameri-
can/Children's Television Workshop/Freeman, 1994 
64p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7167-6527-6 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7167-6523-3 
$3.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Mathnet is the high point of PBS's hip math program for kids, Square One TV,
and the adventures of the Mathnet team have now been chronicled in Mathnet
Casebooks. In this one, the partners-straight-arrow Kate Monday and dopey
George Frankly-help a ten-year-old buckaroo puzzle out an old treasure map, en
route employing multiplication, knowledge of the troy weight system, geometry,
triangulation, and a few more mathematical functions, as well as some good old-
fashioned library research. The fun of the Mathnet show is that the mathematical
information fits smoothly into a witty story. Here the book does not quite have
the motion of the television adventures, and the math is more difficult to apply
here since the words don't demonstrate its use and importance as well as do im-
ages. It's still an entertaining read, however, because of the partner's warm rap-
port, the clever Rocky-and-Bullwinkle-type allusions (Rommel the desert rat, cousin
of Rommel the desert fox, is a key player in the story), and the funny dialogue
("Horses don't like me. They resent my sitting on top of them. I don't know how
to drive them," George cries). Librarians will be pleased at the downfall of a bogus
librarian, who was perpetuating the uptight librarian stereotype much to the dis-
gust of the Mathnetters. This would make a nice change of pace for a math class,
or even a parent-child math-game, as the concepts are reiterated in additional ques-
tions in a section at the back, followed by the answers. Beady-eyed, sharp-featured
people appear in black-and-white new-wavy illustrations, keeping the book's so-
phistication level up without increasing its difficulty. DS
COOKE, TRISH 
Mr. Pam Pam and the Hullabazoo; illus. by Patrice
Aggs. 
Candlewick, 1994 
26p
ISBN 1-56402-411-3 
$14.95 
M 
4-7 yrs
"Mr. Pam Pam comes to my house, Mr. Pam Pam and the baby," and the young
narrator loves the visits from the flamboyant man, whose favorite food is banana
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 
85
ice cream with gravy. And now Mr. Pam Pam is talking about someone called the
"Hullabazoo," who bounces and twizzles and has a polka-dotted face, and who
eventually shows up for a visit himself. It's hard to know just what the point of
this story is. If we're meant to share the boy's anticipation of finally meeting the
Hullabazoo that Mr. Pam Pam has told him so much about, then we should at
least be rewarded with some kind of twist or surprise, but nope, the Hullabazoo is
just some guy with a polka-dotted face who comes in and dances around the living
room. The text is bumpy and repetitive, but the watercolor pictures (featuring an
African-American cast) have the snap and bounce the words seem to be looking
for. Perhaps the book is a subtle complement to Daddy's Roommate-particularly
seen in the last picture of the two men walking off together with the baby, the
Hullabazoo's hand on Mr. Pam Pam's shoulder. That possibility would at least
give the book the raison d'etre it seems to be missing. RS
CUTLER, JANE 
My Wartime Summers. 
Farrar, 1994 
153p
ISBN 0-374-35111-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Ellen's summer of '42 starts out well when, in the midst of feverish battle fanta-
sies, she imagines that a young Jewish refugee girl who has moved in down the
street is actually a spy and grabs her. But with the resilience of youth, she and Lisa-
Lotte (who brags that her father once saw Hitler "before he was Hitler") become
best friends and see the war out together in their (unspecified) small midwestern
city. Ellen, eleven when the book begins, is a charismatically headstrong narrator,
tomboyish, impulsive, repentant but heedless: "I always was sorry. But that didn't
change anything. My mind went where it wanted to, and I had to go along."
While the story focuses on Ellen's between-school summers from '42 to '45, sev-
eral narrative threads take her all the way through, most notably, her love and
worry for her charming Uncle Bob, who goes from boot camp to Britain to the
Battle of the Bulge as the war wears on. And no, he isn't killed, but he does come
back a strange, sad man. Cutler easily makes both the sadness and the wartime
enthusiasm ("My friends and I never got tired of the war") parts of the same story
and handles period details with a lighter touch than does Mary Downing Hahn in
her otherwise superb Stepping on the Cracks (BCCB 12/91). Like that book, this
one works from a context of everyday girl-life that will attract graduates of the
American Girls series who are ready for something less generic, written with a lot
more vivacity. RS
DAY, ALEXANDRA 
Carl Makes a Scrapbook; written and illus. by Alexandra Day
and with photographs. 
Farrar, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-374-31129-3 
$12.95 
NR 
4-7 yrs
Carl fans (see Carl's Masquerade, BCCB 12/92) will be disappointed with this self-
indulgent installment of his adventures: the big activity here is Carl and his young
charge perusing and pasting into their scrapbooks while mother, as ever, is away.
The girl's scrapbook has photos of family and friends, postcards, ribbons and fa-
vorite poems; Carl's is filled with dog variants of the same things. Most of the
book consists of the album pages themselves, which are filled with pictures and
souvenirs that may mean a great deal to Alexandra Day herself, but will be boring
to children and any adults outside the author's immediate circle. "Stephen and his
college chums," captions one photo. Who is Stephen? Who cares? Carl's pages
are more engaging in that they contain cute photos of dogs whose appeal tran-
scends the fact they we don't know them either. RS
86 
* THE BULLETIN
DOHERTY, BERLIE 
Street Child. Orchard, 1994 
154 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08714-X 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06864-1 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Jim Jarvis' widowed mother is ill and no longer able to take care of Jim and his two
sisters; she manages to find servant jobs for the girls but dies soon after, and in
Victorian London that leaves Jim nowhere to go but the workhouse. The horrors
of the workhouse eventually drive Jim to escape, and for awhile he helps his mother's
friend Rosie hawk her salmon and shrimp. Rosie's greedy grandfather, however,
sells him off to the cruel owner of a coal boat, who nearly works Jim to the bone
before he escapes from there too. FinallyJim meets up with the kind Dr. Barnardo,
who will help not only Jim but many of his fellow street boys. This is every bit as
Dickensian as it sounds, and kids with the interest but not the stamina for Oliver
Twist will appreciate the more condensed desperation and melodrama of Jim's
story. Although the world sometimes treats him brutally (and these brutalities are
realistically and frighteningly-though not sensationally-depicted), Jim remains
plucky and sincere, a protagonist to root for. Dr. Barnardo was a real person, and
Jim Jarvis truly did inspire his work for the welfare of children; the book's end is
rather abrupt but segues neatly into the actual history as described in Doherty's
adjacent note. DS
DORIS, MICHAEL 
Guests. Hyperion, 1994 
119p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2036-5 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0047-X 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Preparations are going on all around him for the great harvest feast, but Moss is
perturbed that his father invited strangers to join them. Declaring "if they come,
I won't stay," he runs off, where he is surprised to meet Trouble, a girl about his
age from the other side of the village. He recklessly tells her that he is going into
the woods for his "away time," his first time in the woods alone, and then feels
compelled to follow through. Although he is gone only an afternoon, this quiet
period spent in the forest brings Moss to some important realizations about him-
self. During that time, his senses become greatly heightened, and he encounters a
porcupine who seems to be speaking to him. Dorris finely balances Moss's quiet,
thoughtful experiences and his encounters with others, so while the book is some-
what static, it maintains interest. Woven in are three folk-like tales, which have
parallels to the ongoing story of Moss, Trouble, and the feast with the strangers.
Possibly the finest feature of Guests is that although the strangers are clearly the
Pilgrims, making this historical fiction, the writing is so immediate that one is
barely aware the story is taking place over three hundred years ago. Dorris also
does a fine job of presenting the Indian's view of the Pilgrims without burdening
the story with inappropriate foreshadowings of the future. SDL
DRUCKER, MALKA, comp. 
The Family Treasury of ewish Holidays; illus. by Nancy
Patz. 
Little, 1994 
180p
ISBN 0-316-19343-7 
$21.95 
R* All ages
Nine holidays of the Jewish year, from Rosh Hashanah in the Autumn to Yom
Ha'atzmaut (Israeli Independence Day), which takes place in the Spring, are thor-
oughly covered in this large, well-designed volume, with a final section on the
weekly celebration of Shabbat. Each section begins with an explanation, varying
in length, of the meaning and rituals of the holiday. These holidays are deeply
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 
87
meaningful but can be difficult to explain, yet Drucker does so simply, clearly, and
tenderly; for instance, the section on Yom HaShoah (Holocaust Remembrance
Day) begins, "A terrible event doesn't always end when the moment passes, be-
cause every time we remember what happened, we relive the pain." A wide variety
of literary excerpts and pieces follows each explanation, with poems, stories, songs,
and even a play for Purim, by writers such as Isaac Bashevis Singer, Barbara Cohen,
e. e. cummings, and Myra Cohn Livingston. These are mostly well chosen, al-
though using Janice Udry's A Tree Is Nice without its original illustrations is less
successful. Finally, each section has activities, such as crafts, games, or cooking.
Hebrew terminology is used (with explanations) throughout, with a glossary in-
cluded. The artist's notes indicate that the ink-and-watercolor illustrations of chil-
dren and adults show clothing worn by Jews across the ages around the world, and
the borders are based on Hebrew manuscript paintings. Exuberant in places, more
dignified in others, they add great appeal to a well organized book. Intended for
use by Jewish parents with their children, this will also be a good source of infor-
mation for anyone wanting more information on the Jewish holidays. A bibliog-
raphy is included. SDL
ELZBIETA 
Jon-Jon andAnnette; written and illus. by Elzbieta. 
Holt, 1994 
34 p
ISBN 0-8050-3299-1 
$12.95 
M 
5-8 yrs
With its short words and big print, this looks like a beginning-reader, but caveat
emptor-it's actually one of those little allegories that, like The Butter Battle Book,
attempt to frame problems of the adult world in a "childlike" way to point out the
wisdom of youthful innocence and the folly of adult experience. Jon-Jon and
Annette, bunnies, are best friends and even promise to marry each other when they
are "big." But then war comes, and a thornbush (barbed wire in the sketchily
sentimental torn-paper illustrations) comes between the two: "'Hush!' said Mama.
'You mustn't speak of Annette. It's forbidden!'" Eventually, the war "sleeps"
("His father sighed. 'War never dies, my little Jon-Jon. It just sleeps from time to
time'"), and Jon-Jon and Annette make a hole in the wire and are together once
more. Such abstractions as "The war was too big. It didn't listen to anyone. It
came and went as it pleased," are not only conceptually at odds with the intended
audience, they're cheap, implying that war is in fact a force independent of human
responsibility. Its highminded intentions aside, all this book does is prove that
you can make anything look easy. Kids who have been in a war-or even just a
fight-will know better, and so should adults. RS
FLORIAN, DOUGLAS 
Bing Bang Boing; written and illus. by Douglas
Florian. 
Harcourt, 1994 
144p
ISBN 0-15-233770-9 
R* Gr. 3-6
See this month's Big Picture, p. 77, for review.
Fox, MEM 
Sophie; illus. by Aminah Brenda Lynn Robinson. 
Harcourt,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-15-277160-3 
$13.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"Once," this picture book about life cycles begins, "there was no Sophie. And
then there was." Sure enough, there's Sophie ("Grandpa and little Sophie loved
each other"), growing bigger, "big enough to look Grandpa in the eye," as Grandpa
diminishes ("Sophie and little Grandpa loved each other") and eventually dies;
88 
* 
THE BULLETIN
now-grown Sophie is sad until her tiny baby holds her hand and "filled the world
with sweetness, once again." This is a more successful effort than Sue Limb's Come
Back, Grandma (BCCB 2/94) on the same theme-the sense of movement that
Fox's text conveys focuses and clarifies the concept. The artwork is rich, expres-
sionist, heavily lined oil reminiscent of Steptoe but with a looser and less literal
line. Although they are sometimes visually overwhelming, the oversized hands
depicted in many drawings exemplify the handholding theme, and the sunny hues
of earth and garden convey with warmth a loving and extended African-American
family. DS
FRANK, JOHN 
Erin's Voyage; illus. by Dena Schutzer. 
Simon, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-671-79585-6 
$15.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
Erin has just become the owner of a delicate doll, discovered long ago by her great-
great-grandmother as it lay wedged among the shore rocks. Awakened by the wind
that night, Erin carries the doll to the attic window and sees a red sailboat bobbing
on the pond. Doll in tow, Erin hurries into the night to pilot the skiff out to sea,
drawn by the sound of a name called on the wind; she then encounters a ghostly
vessel with a single passenger-a little girl who claims the doll: "My sweet Ann,
I've been calling you for the longest time." Erin navigates safely home, where
grandfather dismisses her fanciful tale of the night's adventure but is puzzled by
the smell of the sea in Erin's hair. Frank's narration is tightly woven and imbued
with tension; stunning expressionist-style oils at first seem too aggressive for a girl-
and-her-doll story, but as the tale's suspense builds, Schutzer's thick and turbulent
swirls of paint perfectly capture the wind-tossed sea. A caveat: don't pigeonhole
this title as a "girl's book"; even primary-grade boys who prefer keelhauling to
listening to a doll story will be impressed by details of Erin's skillful seamanship
and the eerie suspense of her journey. EB
GARFUNKEL, TRUDY 
On Wings ofJoy: The Story ofBalletfrom the 16th Century to
Today. 
Little, 1994 
194 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-316-30412-3 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 6-12
"Born over four hundred years ago at a royal French court, ballet remains a popular
entertainment today," the author says, and this book traces that art form nearly
every step of its four-hundred-year journey. She discusses its origin and use in
early forms such as the courtly masque, its eighteenth-century development, nine-
teenth-century apotheosis, and twentieth-century growth and experimentation,
looking en route at its history in countries as varied as Italy, Russia, and the United
States, and giving brief glimpses of its major stars, ranging from Marie Taglioni to
Darci Kistler, Antoine Bournonville to Mark Morris. This is a competent and
admirably complete survey of a subject whose history is often as interesting as its
performance; while most terms are explained, it's often not on their first use, so
there's an assumption of basic knowledge, but young dancers and balletomanes
who want information as well as atmosphere will find much to applaud. The text
is attractively laid out, with relevant poetry introducing each chapter, occasional
sidebars (which aren't always as secondary as the format would suggest) in smaller
print, and black-and-white photographs and reproductions of art (disappointingly
small and dark) appearing occasionally. There is a glossary with pronunciation
guide, a bibliography, and an index. DS
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 89
GIBBONS, GAIL 
Emergency!; written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. 
Holiday House,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1128-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"Emergency! Sometimes people need help," begins the newest informational pic-
ture book by prolific author/artist Gail Gibbons. In her usual crisply professional
style, Gibbons covers emergency vehicles, from ambulances and fire engines to
helicopters, boats and planes, distinguishing nicely between the different types of
fire trucks and including utility trucks sent out after storms. However, the book
is sometimes unsatisfying despite its clean, bright artwork and potentially interest-
ing subject. These things make emergency vehicles exciting: they are fast, they are
loud, they have flashing lights, and they are brought into scary situations. Noises,
speed, and flashes of light are difficult to convey in pictures, and while Gibbons
does a good job of showing rescues without being frightening, she then has to do
without the consequent excitement. The artwork (markers, watercolors and crayon)
is mostly flat, boxy surfaces of vehicles and buildings, with fairly similar-looking
people pointing at the vehicles. The text is flat as well: "The ambulances are
staffed with highly trained people called paramedics who give medical help. Am-
bulances are equipped with medical equipment to care for and transport patients
to hospitals or medical centers as quickly as possible." The final pages are a brief
history of emergency vehicles. SDL
HICKMAN, JANET 
Jericho. Greenwillow, 1994 
135p
ISBN 0-688-13398-3 
$14.00 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
In alternating present-tense and past-tense scenes that never seem contrived for
coordination, on the one hand, nor disjointed in transition, on the other, Hickman
reveals the concurrent emotional stages of twelve-year-old Angela and her great-
grandmother, Min, whose mind has faded into the past. The irony of neither
character relating to the other-Angela because of immaturity and Min because of
senility-despite remarkable similarities generates a kind of suspense that sustains
the complex narrative. Realistically, Angela never penetrates GrandMin's forget-
fulness even in the moving death scene, but the reader has seen parallels in the two
characters' lives and thus experiences with double force Angela's own unexpected
realization "of a sense of connection so strong and so unsettling that she thinks she
cannot bear it." Secondary characters are well sketched without loss of focus on
the main dynamic; Angela's best friend Tessa, for instance, does not appear until
the end of the book but is clearly developed through Angela's thoughts about her.
Similarly, Angela's mother and grandmother form a distinct presence without dis-
tracting from the primary figures in this perceptive four-generational portrait. BH
HORVATH, POLLY 
The Happy Yellow Car. Farrar, 1994 
151p
ISBN 0-374-32845-5 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-7
It's the Depression, and Betty Grunt and her family are dirt-poor-what, then, is
her father doing buying a shiny yellow car? And Betty has been elected Pork-Fry
Queen but must cough up a dollar for flowers-where will she obtain that princely
sum? This is a fizzy comedic story with more than a touch of cartoon energy to it.
The Grunts (Gunther and Althea, their children Gretel, Grant, Betty, and Garth),
their interfering Aunt Lolly, and their quiet uncles Willy and Herman are broadly
and entertainingly drawn. The quest for Betty's dollar leads her and her cohorts to
90 
* 
THE BULLETIN
chase after buried family money-fruitlessly, as it turns out for the failed Pork-Fry
Queen, but there is the consolation of her sister Gretel's marriage to a college boy,
even if its foundation is somewhat rocky (Betty ponders "her sister's ignominious
fate when Clarence discovers his test rats are smarter than his date"). The opening
episode, where oversized Aunt Lolly plummets through the porch stairs into Betty's
secret hiding place, will make a great booktalk and is an effective introduction to
the protagonist. The reader and smart one of the family, Betty is a forceful and
funny heroine ("Someday," she thinks, looking at the teacher thrilled to be award-
ing the Pork-Fry Queen crown to a wealthy schoolmate instead of to Betty, "I will
be a great, world-famous something, and I will come back to this little two-bit
burg and I will squish you like a bug"), and the slapstick of the story combines
nicely with gentle reminders of harder Depression realities. Horvath's pointed wit
will gratify readers who can never think up their own rejoinders in time, and the
anarchic yet inexorable progression of events makes for effervescent reading. DS
ISAACS, ANNE 
Swamp Angel; illus. by Paul 0. Zelinsky. 
Dutton, 1994 
40p
ISBN 0-525-45271-0 
$14.99 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Angelica Longrider hardly seems special for a newborn baby, "scarcely taller than
her mother and couldn't climb a tree without help. Although her father gave her
a shiny new ax to play with in the cradle, like any good Tennessee father would,
she was a full two years old before she built her first log cabin." Never mind.
Children grow up, and Angelica is soon lifting wagons out of Dejection Swamp
and tossing the giant bear Thundering Tarnation straight up into the sky ("he
crashed into a pile of stars, making a lasting impression") before she lays him low.
It's a tall tale in the best backwoods tradition, and Isaacs gets the intonation just
right, breezy but straightfaced, leaving it for the kids to catch on. The homespun
heroine herself, though wildly exaggerated in the text, acquires a humorously de-
mure quality in Zelinsky's oil paintings on wood, which are dominated, naturally,
by forest browns warmed with russet. Angelica's traditionally aproned dress, neat
red braids, and sensible sunbonnet are spoofed by the largesse of her motions-
also the largesse of her feet, always bare and offering considerable stability both for
her outsize physique and for the grand sweep of the action-packed compositions.
We've heard and made a lot of justifiable complaints lately about picture books
with lavish illustration weakened by inconsequential texts. Well, here's one with
GREAT BIG PICTURES and a GREAT BIG STORY. It's feminist and it's
funny and it's supported by some of the subtlest effects in Zelinsky's noteworthy
artistic repertoire. BH
JAMES, MARY 
Frankenlouse. Scholastic, 1994 
[176p]
ISBN 0-590-46528-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The goofy title belies a meaty tale of aspiring cartoonist Nick Reber, marking time
at Blister Military Academy where his father is commanding officer. The academy's
atmosphere is not hospitable to the artistic Muses, and Nick's mother, a free-
spirited dancer, has already bailed out of the oppressively stolid, regimented sur-
roundings. She gently tries to lure Nick to join her in New York; there he could
develop his skills, which are now confined to doodling away secretly at a comic-
strip character named Frankenlouse, who is loosely based on Nick's "control freak"
father. James (M. E. Kerr's alter ego) elevates Nick's dilemma beyond a fun-loving
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 91
Mom/repressive Dad family sitcom, for Nick clearly realizes that Mom has an
unsettled streak which could be difficult to live with, and that General Reber is
honorable and more deeply loving than his austere demeanor indicates. Nick's
ultimate decision, which is in doubt until the novel's final pages, is at once el-
egantly simple, believable, and satisfying. Subplots involving Grandfather's ro-
mance, a female cadet's unrequited crush on Nick's friend, and a frame-up that
results in a student's expulsion keep the pace brisk, and General Reber's character
is especially well drawn in spare, sure-handed strokes. A subtle counterpoint to
Jules Feiffer's more frenetic portrayal of a would-be cartoonist in The Man in the
Ceiling (BCCB 12/93). EB
JANOVITZ, MARILYN 
Is it Time?; written and illus. by Marilyn Janovitz. 
North-
South, 1994 
25p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-332-7 
$12.88
Tradeed. ISBN 1-55858-331-9 
$12.95 
R 2-5 yrs
A wolf cub gets ready for bed with help from its dad in this gentle, rollicking
rhyme; "Is it time to run the tub? Yes, it's time to run the tub. Is it time to rub-
a-dub-dub? Yes, it's time to rub-a-dub-dub." The adult wolf (who we are told on
the flap is a father) keeps checking his watch as the cub brushes its fangs, puts on
paw-print pajamas, climbs into bed and goes to sleep. White backgrounds and
soft, light, watercolor-with-colored-pencil drawings make this unusually sunny-
looking, contrasting with the dark, deep colors more commonly used in bedtime
books. The wolves-who are ordinarily clad in their own fur, but don pajamas at
night-are finely balanced between their wolfy qualities, with teeth, claws, and
fluffy tails, and more human facial expressions which are fetching and comical (the
goodnight smooch is particularly humorous). After just a few readings, this rhyme
will begin to work its way into a family's bedtime vocabulary. The only drawback:
why don't the wolves read a bedtime story? SDL
KILBORNE, SARAH S. 
Peach &' Blue; illus. by Steve Johnson with Lou
Fancher. 
Knopf, 1994 
33p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-93929-6 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-83929-1 
$15.00 
M 
5-8 yrs
Poor Peach. Ripe and ready to fall from a tree, she wishes "to see what the rest of
the world is like. I want to feel grass. I want to touch animals. I want to lie down
and look up at the stars." What she doesn't wish is to be picked and made into
dessert, or "eaten all at once by some stranger," so an obliging frog, Blue, rescues
her, sets her up in a nest alongside the pond, where she in turn teaches him the
beauty of his everyday life: "The green of the moss, of the reeds of the grass,/ the
red of my skin, of the ladybug's back . . . the silver of trout, of the damselfly's
wings-/ the beautiful colors of beautiful things!" Blue moves her around ("I will
be your legs") to see even more, but if this is a metaphor for helping the handi-
capped, the disability-rights movement is in big trouble. Despite the poetic tone
and tenderly whimsical paintings, this book is anthropomorphic in a way that
would be seen as superficial and sentimental had the story featured human charac-
ters. It's not that you can't successfully anthropomorphize animal (or vegetable)
characters-Frog and Toad and The Wind in the Willows are obvious examples
that you can-but it's a problem when the device is used to excuse a feeble parable.
RS
92 
* 
THE BULLETIN
KROLL, STEVEN 
Lewis and Clark: Explorers of the American West; illus. by Rich-
ard Williams. 
Holiday House, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1034-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Squeezing the Corps of Discovery's event-filled trek to the Pacific into a thirty-
two-page picture book format is a daunting challenge, which Kroll meets by sacri-
ficing exciting detail in favor of achieving clarity and balance. This bare-bones
account traces the two-year journey from its inception by Jefferson through the
party's return to St. Louis. The main players are spotlighted-Lewis, Clark, York,
Sacagawea; Big White, the Mandan chief who returned to Washington to meet
the White Father, earns a single line's mention. In effort to cover the salient points
of the expedition, so little space could be spared to expound on individual events
that a dry narrative results: "It rained all winter. ... Everyone was bored and ill";
"Blackfeet Indians tried to steal the rifles belonging to Lewis's party. Two of the
Indians were killed." The presence of a chronology and index imply that this work
is aimed at primary-grade researchers, yet the large, detailed paintings which con-
sume valuable page space are geared toward recreational readers; of the compara-
tive illustrations which might have been useful to report writers, boats used by the
expedition are drawn out of scale, and the scowling Indians representing four im-
portant tribes are interchangeable except for their headdress. Although the accu-
racy of this work makes it acceptable to meet information needs of young readers,
children old enough to handle Blumberg's more detailed account (BCCB 1/88)
would be better served by that title. EB
LESTER, JULIUS, ad. 
The Man Who Knew Too Much: A Moral Tale from the Baila
ofZambia; illus. by Leonard Jenkins. 
Clarion, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-60521-0 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
The voice of the storyteller is clear from the opening of this tragic folktale in which
the first murder is committed: "The woman had a child. The simple events are
not simple." An African woman tries to work in the field, but her baby keeps
crying and stopping her work. She is horrified at first when a mighty eagle swoops
down and rests on her child, but the baby is soothed to sleep and doesn't have a
scratch. She decides not to tell her husband, in part because "she needed time to
be alone with the wonder of what she had seen." But on the second day that it
happens, she cannot resist telling her husband, who thinks she has lost her mind.
He returns to the field with her and keeps watch. Remembering the times he has
seen eagles kill, he tries to protect his child by shooting the eagle with an arrow,
but the arrow instead kills the child (an event not shown in the picture). The story
concludes "And that is how murder came into the world. The man knew too
much, because he thought he knew what he had never seen and never experi-
enced." Lester notes his sources and adaptations and explains that the tale teaches
us not to "kill wonder and awe and the marvel that living could be." The story
stands alone, but the illustrations do it justice with a combination of soft-edged
background objects and sharply illuminated people, with the heat and direction of
the sun visible in each picture. The final picture of the two parents, seen as dark
shapes in the distance, walking home in the bright sunshine and casting long shad-
ows, is very moving. SDL
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 93
LYNCH, CHRIS 
Gypsy Davey. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023587-X 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023586-1 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 8 up
Sneaky Pete and Lois, as much in lust as the day they met, can't stay married but
can't leave each other alone. Their eldest son Gary is in prison for murder; Jo and
Davey live with Lois, who tries to recapture her youth with pick-ups from the bar;
Pete occasionally blows in on a visit to spoil his offspring with cheap presents and
regale them with sordid tales of the good old days. Jo, while actively seeking her
own ticket out of the house, protects her younger brother from life's cruelties as
much as she can, for Davey is... slow? retarded? emotionally handicapped? But
as Davey's voice breaks into the narration it becomes clear that he is also a survivor
and the only family member to try to break the cycle of parental neglect after his
sister, a mother at seventeen, begins to repeat Lois's mistakes with her new baby
son Dennis. Davey's touching efforts to care for his nephew are ultimately thwarted
when a mysterious man, possibly a social worker or a new lover, drives off with Jo
and the baby. Davey deludes himself that Dennis will be okay, and ends the novel
with his plaintive optimism, "I'm gonna have my own find somebody who's gonna
love me and we're gonna have some babies and I'm gonna love 'em like hell to
pieces like nobody ever loved babies before." While adults who deplore bleak
themes in YA literature may bash this relentlessly depressing portrait of a dysfunc-
tional family, young adults will appreciate its honesty and fast pace. Lynch steers
clear of sensationalism and paints characters who, in their trite dissipations, ring
true every time. EB
LYON, GEORGE ELLA 
Here and Then. Jackson/Orchard, 1994 
114p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08716-6 $14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06866-8 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 5-8
After spending a weekend as a "re-enactor," playing the role of a Civil War nurse at
a Kentucky battle site, seventh-grader Abby finds herself haunted by the spirit of
the nurse, Eliza Hoskins, who conveys to Abby that she wants her to bring medical
supplies back to the site for Eliza to use on the wounded. The premise is dramatic,
but the novel is sketchily outlined. With as much space devoted to the fund-
raising scheme that Abby and her friend Harper dream up to get money for the
supplies as there is to Abby bringing them back to the historical house Eliza nursed
from, there's a dissipation of the necessary tension that would make the haunting
spooky and the timeshift motif credible. (You also wonder what Eliza would do
with the aspirin and contemporary diarrhea remedies, and why the course of medi-
cal history had not changed upon her use of them.) There are also some confusing
shifts between Abby seeing Eliza and Abby being Eliza, and the book as a whole
resists logical development in favor of a dreamy ambiguity that ultimately fails to
justify its mystery. Abby's present-tense narration is clean and controlled, but she
doesn't quite gives us the atmosphere or suspense that would pull us into the tragic
history she has found so compelling. RS
MCDERMOTT, GERALD, ad. 
Coyote: A Trickster Tale from the American South-
west; ad. and illus. by Gerald McDermott. 
Harcourt, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-220724-4 
$14.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
Let's just say that if Coyote used the brain behind his long blue nose, he would get
94 
* THE BULLETIN
in a lot less trouble. It would also help if he looked before he leaped-as he discov-
ers in this adaptation of a Zuni tale wherein Coyote eagerly begs the crows to let
him join their singing and dancing ... and flying. The crows put up with his
clumsy dancing and offkey singing, and each generously (Coyote thinks) donates a
feather or two so Coyote can join their majestic sweep above the canyon: "Coyote
fell so fast, his tail caught on fire." That's why the tip of his tail has been black ever
since, but more important, that's why Coyote remains such a hero for the primary
set: he never learns. McDermott sets the slapstick mayhem of Coyote (himself all
blue angles and eagerness) against desert reds and oranges, and against the crows,
who are a tough, neat little battalion of formal shapes, purple feathers, and natty
green headbands. Bold shapes and expansive double spreads (as well as an eco-
nomically pared text) recommend the book for story hours large or small; pair it
with McDermott's more mystical Raven (BCCB 6/93) for some vibrant cross-
cultural contrast. RS
McGUGAN, 
JIM Josepha: 
A Prairie Boy's Story; illus. by Murray
Kimber. 
Chronicle, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8118-0802-5 
$11.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Josepha is saying his goodbyes on his final day of school to his friend, the narrator,
and to his teacher. He has been unable to learn English, and according to the
rules, has been forced to sit with the primary children although he is fourteen. His
teacher is frustrated by his departure, feeling that his mind is about to open "like a
flower to the sun," and she isn't cheered by his gift of a beautifully carved toy
violin. His young friend, who appreciates the older boy's protection from the
bullies, his other acts of kindness, and his laughter, is racking his brain to come up
with an appropriate parting gift. As Josepha tosses his precious carving knife down
from the wagon, the boy comes up with the perfect present in exchange. Kimber's
oil paintings convey both the sweep of the prairie and the faces of the people with
great richness. Evocative of WPA art, the illustrations glow with turquoise skies,
rolling clouds, and the golds and browns of the land. This is a picture book for an
age group which generally considers itself too old for picture books-too difficult
even with background explanations, the language is poetically elliptical, and
McGugan has clearly chosen not to cater in any way to a younger audience's knowl-
edge or understanding. Although the story has little action, it is quietly powerful
in its depiction of a sympathetic character making an important transition from
failure in the classroom to the challenges of the adult world. SDL
McKISSACK, PATRICIA 
African-American Inventors; written by Patricia and Fredrick
McKissack. 
Millbrook, 1994 
96p 
(A Proud Heritage)
ISBN 
1-56294-468-1 
$17.90 
Ad 
Gr 4-7
The McKissacks have done a creditable job of presenting the somewhat sparse
information available on African-American inventors. In the introduction, they
quote a Maryland politician who said that "not one black person [has] ever yet
reached the dignity of an inventor" and contrast this with the fact that in 1900 a
four-volume series had been published listing hundreds of patents granted to black
inventors. This book is clearly their own attempt to set the record straight and to
highlight a few of the particular inventors. They give an excellent background on
patents, explaining the five different types available, and continues with a basically
chronological survey. The section on inventions by slaves is of necessity the skimpi-
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 95
est, since the Dred Scott Decision said that black people were not citizens and
therefore could not apply for patents; their work was often presented as that of
their white owners. After the Civil War, a flood of patents was issued to African
Americans, and the authors rush through some of these inventions very quickly,
with those of black women taking only one paragraph. Other inventors are given
more space: Norbert Rillieux, Jan Matzeliger, Lewis Latimer, Elijah McCoy (whose
work may have inspired the phrase "The Real McCoy"), and Granville T. Woods
are thoroughly discussed. A more in-depth treatment of modern inventors would
have been interesting to young readers, especially those looking for inspiration,
but the clear writing, clean book design, and ample black-and-white photographs
and drawings make this a good choice for filling an important gap in American
history collections. A bibliography and an index are included. SDL
MAESTRO, 
BETSY 
Why Do Leaves Change Color?; illus. by Loretta
Krupinski. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
32p 
(Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022874-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022873-3 
$15.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-445126-7 
$4.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Why do leaves change color? is certainly a question many children ask, and Mae-
stro generally presents the answers clearly. She begins by telling children, "Look at
the leaves! It's autumn," and points out the different types of leaves and trees. The
inside of a leaf, with its chlorophyll that makes it green, is shown, and Maestro
explains how the leaves feed the tree. Once cool weather begins, the leaves stop
doing their work and begin to die, and the various pigments either come out or are
made. She mentions that evergreens keep their leaves, but does not explain why,
and she concludes by talking about jumping in leaves and other fall activities,
saying, "The trees are ready-are you?" There are two step-by-step craft ideas, and
a list of places around the United States to see fall color, with the toll-free tele-
phone number of the "Fall Color Hotline." It's likely some children will be con-
fused at Maestro's telling them several times that it's fall now, when they may very
well be reading the book in other times of the year. Additionally, we hear twice
that bright days and cool nights make colorful leaves, and it sometimes feels as if
Maestro is struggling to fill the space without overlapping too much with informa-
tion found in other books in this series. Krupinski's illustrations, which follow a
blond girl, Asian-American boy, and a dog throughout, fill the pages with softly
muted fall colors in gouache and color pencil. Her birds and squirrels are true-to-
life, and the dog has a more cartoonish air children will enjoy. SDL
MANDEL, PETER 
Red Cat, White Cat; illus. by Clare Mackie. 
Martin/Holt,
1994 
26p
ISBN 0-8050-2929-X 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. K-2
No plot here-just paired-up pictures with sets of rhymed, double word captions
representing antonyms ("Up Cat, Down Cat") and contrasts ("Town Cat, Farm
Cat"). While the concept is nothing earthshaking, the execution is deft and ap-
pealing, with a controlled vocabulary that is accessible to the earliest beginning
readers, large, clear type and spacious layouts that are easy on the eye, and witty
illustrations that even pre-readers can enjoy lingering over. Dozing on the back of
a cow, Farm Cat angles in her sleep with a fishing bob tied to her tail; Shy Cat
timidly woos his sweetheart with a fishbone tagged with hearts and his signature
pawprint; Fall Cat waits in ambush on a tree limb to dump a load of dry leaves
96 
* THE BULLETIN
onto the smug pooch below. The pen-and-watercolor paintings, dominated by
muted browns, grays, and golds and bordered in black, present an elegant sleek-
ness not usually found in books for tyro readers. The variety of stylized felines-
wide-eyed, expressive, and outrageously whiskered-will set youngsters pointing
and bragging, "My cat's just like this one." EB
MARKLE, SANDRA 
Outside andInside Birds. Bradbury, 1994 
40p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-02-762312-2 
$15.95 
R* 
Gr 2-4
Markle begins her study of birds by posing the question, "Do you ever wonder
why most birds can fly and you can't?" and throughout the text guides readers in
comparing their own bodies with those of birds. For instance, one photo clearly
shows that the wings of an ibis bend in three places-shoulder, elbow and wrist-
just as human arms do, while at the same time a bird's feet and legs are very differ-
ent. Information is seamlessly organized, including the way feathers are constructed
for flight, the ways birds maintain them, and aerodynamically efficient avian bone
structure. Topics ranging from birds' organs (shown in a picture not for the squea-
mish) to care and feeding of the young are covered. 
Markle writes in a lively,
engaging style, and the details she provides are memorable: "Hummingbirds eat
twice their weight in nectar. Imagine how much you would have to eat if you ate
like a bird." Attractively designed, the book uses its spectacular photographs as far
more than decoration-the photos, captions and text all work as a unit. She con-
cludes with two pages of suggested activities, such as sending away for owl pellets,
or observing and imitating pigeons in the park, and with a pronunciation guide
and glossary. SDL
MILSTEIN, LINDA 
Miami-Nanny Stories; illus by Oki S. Han. 
Tambourine,
1994 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11152-1 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11151-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
During a trio of family visits, two youngsters become better acquainted with their
out-of-town grandmother and learn a little of their family history. In the first
chapter, more a snapshot than a tale, Nanny arrives from the Sunshine State with
hugs, kisses, home-baked mandelbread, and an assortment of family heirlooms.
Chapter two finds grandson Joey in Miami, getting bored with the beach; Nanny
regales him with a story of how Papa Joe used to swim way out where the dolphins
leap, and how his skill as a swimmer had allowed him to escape from a concentra-
tion camp in World War II. Finally, granddaughter Sophie visits with Itza-Neni,
who tells her the history of the gigantic feather bed sewn back in the old country
by a young woman who seemed doomed to a life of household chores and
babysitting, but who later earned her way out through an education-Itza-Neni's
older sister, Miami-Nanny. The third tale works best, with its clever build-up to
the revelation of Nanny's identity and its subtle reference to the feather doll Sophie'
received from her grandmother, who had remarked in the first chapter, "It be-
longed to my little sister. She gave it to me to remember her by, when I left
home." But the chapter on Papa Joe tiptoes cautiously around his imprisonment
("Everyone that got caught was sent to a special prison in the middle of the woods"),
while turning his escape into a generic adventure story. Milstein's dialogue, with
innocent and even comic intent, brushes close to cliche ("A good box, a nice shop-
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 
97
ping bag, it might come in handy"; "Do you want to eat a little something?").
While the tales never quite leap from the personal to universal appeal which family
stories need to engross readers' interest, Han's warm family scenes are imbued
with an cozy Gemiitlichkeit. EB
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 
Scholastic, 1994 
(Voyages of Discovery) 
4 6 p
ISBN 0-590-47638-6 
$19.95 
NR 
Gr. 4-6
Despite the hustle on the back cover of this glossy (and expensive) series entry
("Musical Instruments is interactive-designed to be read, handled, fully experi-
enced!"), the book is basically a disheveled encyclopedia entry, supplying facts on
the history of music around the world, kinds of instruments and their manufac-
ture, and a smattering of tidbits about composers, little of which is laid out in any
sensible way. The first double spread, "Early Music," is followed by another on
"Music and Myth," which is followed by "Blowing," a spread on woodwinds and
brass instruments. Within each spread, some of which have flap-lifting or trans-
parencies that work to no informative effect, subheads that would seem to outline
the facts are more often perplexing, as in the three sections of "Music as Compan-
ion": Military Music, Clown Music, and The Soul of the Saxophone. (This spread
also sports an Old Black Joe painting of slaves and repeats the canard that music
can charm snakes.) The flashy design sometimes gets ahead of the information, as
in the attractive reproduction of a page from an orchestral score-in Italian, so
you'll have to define fagotti for yourself. The fact that the book contains an enve-
lope of reusable stickers (fun but pointless) indicates that this is more a bookstore
than a library item, but maybe you can head 'em off at the pass and point your
patrons to better books on more specific topics (such as Hausherr's What Instru-
ment Is This?, BCCB 10/92) or at least direct them to the "M" volume of any
respectable encyclopedia. RS
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
The Glory Field. Scholastic, 1994 
[288p]
ISBN 0-590-44893-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-9
The Lewis family of Curry Island, South Carolina is now a sprawling, flourishing
clan, but it owes its growth-indeed its very survival-to the fortitude of several
remarkable teenagers, whose sacrifices and decisions throughout the family's 250-
year history are highlighted in six self-contained but seamlessly interrelated tales.
Muhammad Bilal arrives in slave shackles in 1753 and founds the dynasty. Lizzy,
implicated in a slaves' escape attempt, must flee the Curry plantation to become a
camp follower to a Negro regiment in the Civil War. Her freeborn son Elijah
dangerously defies white authority when he comes of age, and like his mother,
leaves his home to settle in the North. There his daughter Luvenia sees her dream
for a college education crumble, but forges ahead to become the family's first en-
trepreneur. In 1964 a Lewis teen is torn between the possibility of integrating a
Southern university on a "token" basketball scholarship or participating in a civil-
rights demonstration. Finally, middle-class Malcolm from the Harlem branch of
the Lewises grapples with his crack-addicted cousin on their trip to the family
reunion in Curry. As he helps in the final harvest of sweet potatoes from the field
where Muhammad (now only a misspelled name in the family Bible) once toiled,
Malcolm earns the stewardship of the family's heirloom, a set of shackles which he
will pass to the next generation. Plentiful dialogue, spiced with truly witty repar-
tee, will make Myers' contemporary-fiction fans feel right at home in this sweep-
98 
* THE BULLETIN
ing family saga; cliffhangers that end each chapter will rivet readers who normally
shun lengthy historical fiction. EB
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Boys Against Girls. Delacorte, 1994 
14 7p
ISBN 0-385-32081-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Will these kids ever make up? The Hatford boys and the Malloy girls are at it
again (see also BCCB 4/93 and 11/93), plotting and executing tricks and traps and
counter-traps, and while there's a hint of reconciliation at the end of this install-
ment, it's basically business as usual. Most of the scheming here centers on the
local legend of the abaguchie monster, with each side "reporting" sightings to the
other, such as when Wally tells Caroline about the mysterious bones in the base-
ment of the local bookstore, Caroline sneaks in to find them, and the boys stand
on top of the trap door so she can't get out. As with the second book, the pattern
becomes predictable and the plot lacks development, but each of the ruses is in
itself entertaining and the writing is ever-lively. RS
NELSON, THERESA 
Earthshine. Jackson/Orchard, 1994 
182p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08717-4 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06867-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Slim-real name Margery-is twelve, living with her actor father and her father's
lover, Larry; her father is dying of AIDS, and Slim participates in a church youth
group for kids close to people with the disease. She begins to become friends with
Isaiah, whose pregnant mother has AIDS and who clings determinedly to any
theory that offers him hope of his mother's survival. As her father deteriorates, she
struggles to face her loss and define its point, and she's aided in this by the youth
group's pilgrimage that is all the more revelatory for being a comedy of errors. The
novel is overtly symbolic in the second half, and the PWAs and their compatriots
are sometimes too saintly, but Nelson has a smooth and imaginative style, Slim's
narration is frequently touching, and her family is sweetly drawn. A tender, re-
spectful story of the strength of love in the face of death, this will allow young
readers to put faces to a tragedy. DS
NEWMAN, LESLA 
Fat Chance. Putnam, 1994 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-399-22760-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Eighth-grader Judi Liebowitz is worried-worried that she'll never find something
to be in life and worried that she is and always will be fat, fat, fat. Her obsession
with her weight and with food leads her to dieting, fasting, and, after her classmate
and idol tips her to the "trick," bulimia. Eventually Judi's heroine of slenderness
ends up being treated for her disease in the hospital, and Judi finally confesses all
to a teacher and gets some help. Many of the characters are credible, such as Judi's
loyal best friend, her hardworking mother, and her cute but traitorous crush, and
the intense and occasionally inane junior-high dialogue rings true in a way Judy
Blume fants will relish. The book's didactic purpose is evident throughout, how-
ever, and some of the plot and narrative machinations (the book is cast, sometimes
unconvincingly, in the form of Judy's diary) are a bit contrived. Newman none-
theless creates an absorbing story; Judi's narration is agonized and agonizing in its
self-loathing, fear, and blindness (Judi says after reading The Diary ofAnne Frank,
"At least if I were in a concentration camp, I wouldn't have to worry about being
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 
99
fat"). By its very nature, in fact, Judi's well-depicted obsession resonates more
than her understanding and healing, and one hopes that readers will recognize the
latter as well as the former. DS
OAKLEY, GRAHAM 
The Foxbury Force; written and illus. by Graham
Oakley. 
Atheneum, 1994 
[26p]
ISBN 068-31898-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
The town of Foxbury, whose citizenry is entirely made up of foxes, has found a
way to keep its police force in good practice. Once a month, the "Town Burglars"
commit a burglary, and by teatime, the Foxbury Force has caught them. Inevita-
bly, one Thursday the Foreman Burglar decides to really escape with the loot,
despite the protests of his companions. The chase ends in an old castle, with the
burglars feasting in the banquet hall on fast food labeled with suspiciously familiar
golden arches, while the police climb the castle walls on a rope made of their
clothes (leaving them in their creatively varied underwear). Oakley's pace never
slackens, his characters are entirely likable, and the happy ending for both burglars
and police satisfies. With the possible exception of "torch" for flashlight, the few
Briticisms are readily understood, and the English village and countryside look
idyllic in this quietly jovial story. Oakley's pen, ink, and pastel drawings have soft
but detailed backgrounds and sharp and bright action in front, which means that
many amusing touches are worked in without ever seeming busy. SDL
O'NEILL, LAURIE A. 
Little Rock: The Desegregation of Central High. Millbrook,
1994 
6 4p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-56294-354-5 
$15.40 
R Gr. 5-8
Novels such as Dorothy Sterling's Mary Jane and Mildred Pitts Walter's The Girl
on the Outside (BCCB 11/82) have a solid nonfiction companion in this brief
account of events surrounding the court-ordered integration of Little Rock's Cen-
tral High School in 1957. The mob hysteria (and cynical politics) surrounding
the entrance of nine black sophomores into the school was immense; "'Oh my
God, they're in!' a woman screamed, bursting into tears" as the students entered
the school for the first time. (An accompanying photograph of two white women,
one screaming, one with murderous gaze, watching a black girl walk past, speaks
paragraphs.) O'Neill writes with a journalist's pace, and background information
about such landmarks of civil rights as Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka is
smoothly worked in. It's a history lesson (with a thorough list of sources, as well as
a chronology and index), but dramatic enough to garner readers who just want a
vivid story of headline dimensions. RS
PETERSEN, P. J. 
IHate Company; illus. by Betsy James. 
Dutton, 1994 
[96p]
ISBN 0-525-45329-6 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
"Mom doesn't like to have me use the word hate," Dan says grimly, "but for some
things, no other word will do." Such as the indefinite visit of his mom's friend Kay
and her three-year-old son, Jimmy-Kay smokes up a storm and calls her young
host "Danny," Jimmy idolizes Dan, waking him up in the morning by sticking a
crayon in poor Dan's nose and wrecking his stuff with joyous abandon. Petersen's
always good with this kind of boyish worldview, and Dan's blend of outrage and
100 
* 
THE BULLETIN
grudging affection for Jimmy is conveyed with sympathy and wit. Although a bit
unlikely, the resolution-Dan's naive attempts to find Kay a job, which she needs
in order to get her and Jimmy their own place, succeed in securing her a higher
salary at her desired position-will please readers as much as it does Dan. The easy
flow of the words, the unpatronizing characterization, and Dan's struggle to be
gracious in the face of invasion will gratify youngsters mastering their own social
challenges. Cheerfully cartoonish line drawings punctuate the text. DS
PICO, FERNANDO 
The Red Comb; tr. and ad. by Argentina Palacios; illus. by Maria
Antonia Ord6fiez. 
BridgeWater, 1994 
[48p]
ISBN 0-8167-3539-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
In this picture book first published in Puerto Rico, historical events are wedded to
a trickster theme to tell the story about how old siia Rosa foils the local slave
catchers, whom she has long scorned: "Hunting down black slaves and turning
them over to the mayor is no business for black folks." A captured runaway slave
can bring eight pesos, but when young Vitita spies a woman hiding under her
house, sina Rosa admonishes her to leave food out, not to tell her father, and then
contrives a sequence of tricks to keep the slave catchers away. The mischief-
disturbing a wasp's nest, conjuring up "ghosts"-does the job well, and soon Rosa
introduces the village to her comely niece Carmela who has come for a visit "to get
over the pain of a broken heart." Vitita knows the truth, and so will readers, who
will appreciate being in on the plot as much as they will admire Vitita's part in the
brave scheme. Illustrated with pencil and wash pictures that acknowledge both
the comedy and the history, the book gives a fresh new view of nineteenth-century
slavery that has as much story as lesson. RS
PINKNEY, ANDREA 
DAVIS 
Dear Benjamin Banneker; illus. by Brian
Pinkney. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200417-3 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Benjamin Banneker is one of the African-American heroes of the republic, a to-
bacco farmer gifted with an inventive and scientific mind that led him to assist in
the surveying of Washington, D.C. and to become the first black man to create an
almanac. The Pinkneys chronicle Banneker's work on his almanac and, most
particularly, his letter to Thomas Jefferson, then secretary of state, protesting the
country's-and Jefferson's-involvement in slavery. This is the account of a par-
ticular aspect of Banneker's life rather than a biography-we don't know when he
died or whether he had a wife and children, the main text of the book doesn't
discuss his surveying, and no source notes are included-but it's a compact evoca-
tion of the integrity and talent of a man who rose above the constraints of his era.
Brian Pinkney's scratchboard art is at its most luminous in this book, with shim-
mering landscapes (including a starry night reminiscent of Van Gogh) and por-
traits of strong and thoughtful men. This is a useful complement to picture-book
biographies of Thomas Jefferson (such as James Giblin's Thomas Jefferson, BCCB
10/94) and to more general surveys of early American life. DS
QUALEY, MARSHA 
Come in from the Cold. Houghton, 1994 
2 1 9p
ISBN 0-395-68986-4 
$14.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Jeff is the only one opposed to the Vietnam War in his small Minnesota town, and
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 
101
his opposition increases when his brother is killed in the fighting. Maud (in Min-
neapolis) is questioning her beliefs about her country and her family after her
activist sister tires of being on the run and blows herself up with her own bomb.
Qualey tells each of their stories, Jeff's in the first person and Maud's in the third,
as the teenagers try to decide what their places are in the polarized America of
1969. Eventually they meet, their stories entwine, and they plan their lives to-
gether, finally settling at Woodlands, the fictional northern Minnesota commune
of which the heroine of Qualey's first book, Everybody's Daughter (BCCB 3/91),
was a product. The book captures the intensity, passion, and struggle of the era
well, and Maud and Jeffrey's relationship makes a cerebral but sexy focus for the
story. The secondary characters are well drawn, particularly Jeffs family-his
reckless and doomed brother and his loving and straight-shooting mother-but
also vivid are the pretentious and self-important crusaders necessary to fuel both
sides of the homefront conflict. The lead couple here are the draw, with Jeffrey
questioning but strong, and Maud a typically tough-minded Qualey heroine. Kids
who haven't read Everybody's Daughter, in which the grown-up Jeffrey and Maud
appear, will still appreciate this thoughtful but highly charged Vietnam story, which
is in some ways a homefront counterpart to Myers' Fallen Angels. DS
RAY, MARY LYN 
Shaker Boy; illus. by Jeanette Winter. 
Browndeer/Harcourt,
1994 
4 8p
ISBN 0-15-276921-8 
$15.95 
R 
6-9yrs
Angels blithely hover throughout this fictional biography of a boy, Caleb, left by
his mother with a Shaker community after she became unable to care for him.
Caleb learns the ways of his new family (141 brothers and 138 sisters): the segre-
gation of the sexes, the dancing at services, the manufacturing of the now-famous
Shaker brooms. He also learns he has can hear the songs of the angels, who, when
Caleb is old, sing him up to heaven. It's an offbeat approach for a picture book,
but kids will be entranced with Winter's richly detailed, eccentric yet folksy, acrylic
paintings of rural Shaker life, the work and play, the orchard and farm animals, the
angels. And since words and melodies to Caleb's songs, all old Shaker hymns, are
printed in the text, they can sing along, happy with the tunes if not entirely cogni-
zant of their referents. RS
REYNOLDS, MARILYN 
Too Soon for Jeff Morning Glory, 1994 
222p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-930934-90-3 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-930934-91-1 
$8.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Jeff is looking forward to finishing up high school in style and then going on to
college, but his girlfriend has a devastating piece of information: she's pregnant.
Christy refuses to have an abortion and Jeff refuses to get married, so they fight,
drift apart, and eventually develop a friendly understanding after the baby is born.
The book is definitely didactic but the writing is smooth, honest, and credible.
Christy is somewhat stereotyped as the girl who tries to trap the boy into marriage
by intentionally getting pregnant, but Jeff is a convincing and complicated person
who initially denies his own responsibility but grows to take it seriously. The
multi-ethnic group of kids (Jeff is Anglo, Christy Latina, and the boy who pro-
vides Christy with her staunchest support African American), who are all grap-
pling with adult troubles in their own way, are an appealing cast, and the endlessness
of parenting-for Jeff and Christy's parents as well as for the couple themselves-
is made clearer than in most books on this subject. It's a dramatic and absorbing
102 
* THE BULLETIN
read, and one that could be curricularly paired with Kuklin's What Do I Do Now?
(BCCB 11/91) to bring the point home. DS
ROBERTS, 
BETHANY 
Waiting-for-Christmas Stories; illus. by Sarah
Stapler. 
Clarion, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-395-67324-0 
$13.95 
R 4-6 yrs
Trying to keep the impatient little bunnies calm on Christmas Eve, Papa Rabbit
spins seven stories about Christmas doings, most of which get their punch from
the personification of various seasonal trimmings: "Just as he [Papa] was tying the
ribbon into a nice, big bow, the package said, 'Ouch! That is too tight!'" But Papa
soothes the package with the promise that it has a secret inside; similarly, Mama
Rabbit has a conversation with the utensils while making Christmas cookies, and
Little Sister chats with the star while decorating the tree. The tone is droll and
comfy, the stories silly but low-key, and while younger listeners might be confused
by the storytelling frame (since the rabbits in the stories are the rabbits in the
family), they'll still appreciate each brief vignette. The writing is simple enough
for beginning readers as well, and the watercolor sketches have a tender-tidy right-
ness for the season. RS
SALISBURY, GRAHAM 
Under the Blood-Red Sun. 
Delacorte, 1994 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-32099-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
It's 1941, and eighth-grader Tomi Nakaji is a Hawaiian-born American citizen.
His parents and grandfather, however, are Japanese immigrant workers, and his
grandfather in particular clings proudly to his Japanese heritage and ways. Tomi
leads a standard kid-life going to school, playing baseball with his Hawaiian, Japa-
nese, and haole-the Hawaiian term for white-friends (and eagerly following the
World Series), and dealing with the local bullies. All this changes when Pearl
Harbor is bombed: Tomi's school closes down, his father and then later his grand-
father are taken away and interned, and Tomi becomes the enemy in many people's
eyes. There have been a variety of fictional accounts of the attack on Pearl Harbor,
but this is one of the more effective. Salisbury employs telling details (such as the
noise of the jackhammers digging graves the night after the bombing) and creates
some memorable characters against his historical backdrop: Tomi's stubborn grand-
father, blind to the danger his national pride presents until his beloved Japan dis-
honors him with its attack; Tomi's father's cheerful young fishing partner, Sanji,
who meets his first haole when Tomi's friend comes fishing one day, and who is
shot by the U.S. army when they see no U.S. flag on his boat; Tomi's gentle, self-
effacing, but surprisingly strong mother, who runs the household after the men are
taken away. Tomi's narration is boyish and convincing, and the dialogue, includ-
ing a fair amount ofunpatronizing but atmospheric dialect, is realistic. The thought-
ful treatment of the history and of questions of loyalty and heritage will appeal to
some readers; even more will relish the warmth of Tomi's friendships and the
sheer adventure of his experience. DS
SAVAGE, DEBORAH 
To Race a Dream. Houghton, 1994 
245p
ISBN 0-395-69252-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Theo-Theodora-is tired of living in the shadow of her tal-
ented older sister, Claudia, one of the few female concert violinists in 1906. Her
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 
103
family has just uprooted itself to Minnesota in order to live near Claudia as she
embarks on a career with the Minneapolis Symphony, and the only good thing
Theo can find about their new home is its proximity to the International Stock
Feed Farm, home of a multitude of harness racing horses including the legendary
Dan Patch. With the aid of her friend Carl, Theo passes herself off as a boy and
gets a job at the farm, hoping eventually to learn to drive horses. The fact-based
story of a young woman's eventually getting to drive probably the most famous
harness racer of all time is an appealing one, and Savage (whose great-grandfather
owned Dan Patch and appears in the book) depicts with understanding the rap-
ture and force of horsey obsession. Other plot strands-Claudia's bout with po-
lio, Theo's struggle to understand her family-are inclined to slip into cliche, and
the dreaminess of the prose can sometimes become turgid. Characterization of
Theo, her strong-willed family, and gentle but determined Carl is convincing, but
Dan Patch's saintly owner and a stereotypical wise foreigner detract from the im-
pact. It's not the hard-driving action book the subject might suggest, but unhur-
ried readers will appreciate Theo's struggles to achieve her dream, and they'll enjoy
the quiet romance that springs up between her and Carl. A note explaining the
facts behind the story is included. DS
SCHLOSSBERG, 
STEPHEN 
Big Red Truck; written and illus. by Stephen
Schlossberg. 
Thomasson-Grant 1994 
[48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56566-052-8 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-56566-076-5 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
It's a win-win situation when Roy wants to go for a jaunt on his tricycle-er, big
red truck-while his parents want him to do his chores. "I'll have to do my chores
another time," shrugs Roy as he sets off to explore the wide open country, but little
things like hunger get in his way, as when the trucker doesn't have any money for
his "peanut butter special" so the "waitress" ("Hold it right there, buster") has him
wash the dishes. Spreads of Roy's truck fantasy alternate with his parents' view of
things, and any reader resentment of such parental interference will be tempered
by the good-natured tone of the text and the expansive sweep of Roy's fantasy
landscape. Schlossberg's colored-pencil drawings are a little too lightly shaded but
the drawing is agreeably loopy, the perspectives swoop, and the truck is just great.
RS
SCHUR, MAXINE ROSE 
Day of Delight: A Jewish Sabbath in Ethiopia; illus. by
Brian Pinkney. 
Dial, 1994 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1414-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1413-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
As Menelik, a young Ethiopian Jew, recounts his family's activities on the day of
the Sabbath eve, this book becomes a comprehensive-if undocumented-pic-
ture of Ethiopian rural life, illustrating the jobs and chores (blacksmithing, cook-
ing, weaving, sowing) to be completed before the day ends. The details of the
Sabbath itself are more briefly related, but readers will understand the point of the
book: there are black Jews in Ethiopia. Whether that's enough for a picture book
is questionable. There is no story here at all, and the writing has an explanatory
bent ("Naked in the cool water, we pass around the green soap my mother made
from the wild soapwort berries") that begs the realism of the fictional frame while
it answers unasked questions of an informational nature. While there is some
104 
* 
THE BULLETIN
sense of the mystery of belief ("outside the night is still. It's at this time I feel my
high mountain village must lie on the very route to heaven"), it's cast in adult
terms, and in fact those of an adult looking in at, not a child speaking from, a
culture. Double-page scratchboard paintings are trademark Brian Pinkney, and
the book has some value in its portrayal of a little-known culture, but it's difficult
to see exactly, or even generally, who the audience is. RS
SCOTT, MICHAEL 
Gemini Game. 
Holiday House, 1994 
159p
ISBN 0-8234-1092-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Virtual-reality game designers BJ and Liz O'Connor (twins, fifteen) are in big
trouble when their bestselling game Night's Castle is reported to have sent twelve
players into "VR comas," irretrievably trapping their brains in the game's dark
recesses. While the cops try to chase down the twins, the twins are trying to chase
down the virus that has infected their game, and the only way to do so is to enter
the game themselves, defenseless against the unknown perils that have been intro-
duced-by whom? And why? The answers to those questions won't surprise
anybody, and although the plot is pure formula and the characterization rudimen-
tary, the twins' race against time and the machine is exciting. The book, set in the
early twenty-first century, is less complicated than much science fiction, and the
swift action and computer-game scenario recommend the title as a likely choice
for reluctant readers. RS
SHARPE, SUSAN 
Real Friends. Bradbury, 1994 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-02-782352-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Cassie is two months into high school and she still doesn't have any friends. She's
relieved and thrilled, therefore, when outspoken Helen blows into town and takes
Cassie as her sidekick. Cassie's an army brat who's spent her life moving around,
and she's so devoted to her first real friendship that she starts letting everything else
slip-family, other possible friendships, and grades-until even Cassie realizes that
this exclusivity with Helen is too much for her. Sharpe demonstrates a solid un-
derstanding of teen pressures and desires, and it's clear why Helen is both an at-
tractive friend and a dangerous one. Unfortunately the book peters out towards
the end: Cassie's culminating wild day at school, where she smarts off to teachers,
is not only inconsistent but inauthentic, and the resolution of the problem-Cassie
will see less of Helen-is anticlimactic and dramatically unsatisfying; nor does
anything come of Cassie's attraction to rough but responsible Ricardo. Kids will
still enjoy the suspense of Cassie's decline towards bad-girlness (the scene where
Helen gets the two of them picked up by a pair of young Japanese businessmen
will horrify yet fascinate readers); youngsters dealing with dominance and
powerplays in their own friendships will find that this strikes a familiar chord. DS
SHOUP, BARBARA 
Wish You Were Here. Hyperion, 1994 
[288p]
ISBN 0-7868-0028-3 
$15.95 
R* Gr. 9-12
Jackson-known as Jax-has really been looking forward to his senior year, when
he and his best friend, Brady, were going to share an apartment and finish up high
school away from parental control. After a fight with his father, however, Brady
storms out of town and out of his friend's life, leaving Jackson confused, lonely,
and angry. The departure of Brady sets the tone for a year full of changes for Jax,
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 
105
as his mother remarries, he acquires stepsisters, he falls in love, he loses his virginity
to the wrong girl, he nearly loses his father in an accident, and he finally catches up
with Brady only to realize that he's truly lost his friend. In less skillful hands this
could be melodrama or farce, but Jax's earnest, rough-edged, and tender narration
makes the experience painful and authentic ("Jesus, Mom," he says after she's been
worrying about him, "you get married and drag us to a new house. Dad nearly offs
himself. But I have to act like I always have or everybody freaks out"). The author
deftly evokes the goodness as well as the awful frailties of her characters, and her
cast are all vivid and particular individuals: notable are Jax's father's flaky but
surprisingly tough young girlfriend; Jax's own girlfriend, Stephanie, who commits
suicide in a final attempt to be important to him; his flighty, difficult, loving
father; even Jax's new stepsisters, one bubbly and adoring, the other flinty but
fond. And aside from the merit of respecting her characters, Shoup demonstrates
a rare understanding of the pivotal role friendship plays in the lives of young adults-
or anyone. DS
SILVERMAN, ERICA 
Don't Fidgeta Feather!; illus. by S. D. Schindler. 
Macmillan,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-02-782685-6 
$14.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
Youngsters who have experienced the tense, giddy pleasure of a good stare-down
contest will recognize Duck and Gander's freeze-in-place challenge. And what
pros they are! Buzzing bees, cavorting bunnies, swooping crows, gusts of wind
leave them unruffled; so steady are they, in fact, that Fox easily rolls them right
into his sack and sets them down in front of his stew pot. But Duck finally gives in
when she sees her friend headed stiff-limbed into the pot, and she nips Fox until he
flees. Duck may have lost the contest, but Gander acclaims her "the one and only,
true and forever champion of champions." Silverman maximizes the tension to
elicit some worried wiggles from her audience. Although the earth-toned pastel
drawings are no great shakes (animals in motion are almost as stiff as the contes-
tants), viewers will chuckle nervously at Duck and Gander's glazed stare as they
endure their torments. It's safe to bet that more than one adult will conclude the
reading with the suggestion, "Let's see how quiet you can be." EB
STANLEY, JERRY 
IAm an American: A True Story ofJapanese Internment. Crown,
1994 
102p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-59787-X 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-59786-1 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Stanley, author of Children ofthe Dust Bowl(BCCB 10/92), here turns to another
bleak chapter in American history, the internment of Japanese-Americans during
World War II. He has spun a cogent narrative of the shameful events, focusing
them through the experiences of Shi Nomura, a high school student sent with his
family to Manzanar in 1942. There's a bit ofsuspenseful romance in this account,
as Shi leaves behind both his girlfriend and another young woman he's only seen
from afar, singing-and who he meets again at the concentration camp, where her
beautiful voice has earned her the sobriquet "the Songbird of Manzanar." To his
credit, Stanley doesn't play up this angle more than he should, and the personal
accounts of Shi and others interviewed by the author are balanced with a sharp eye
for the larger sentiments of the time, such as a San Francisco columnist's remark,
"I hate the Japanese. And that goes for all of them!" In all, this is a first-rate,
readable introduction to this particular part of history, and it's complemented by
106 
* THE BULLETIN
a spacious page design, numerous black-and-white photos, an exemplary biblio-
graphic note, and an index. RS
STEVENSON, JAMES 
The Mud Flat Olympics; written and illus. by James
Stevenson. 
Greenwillow, 1994 
56p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12924-2 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12923-4 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 1-3
With their persistent humor, comical plot twists, surprise punch lines, and under-
stated lessons in getting along, these tales of the animals' annual sports meet have
a George and Martha tone that will please both listeners and independent readers.
Animals compete in delightfully loopy events-the deepest hole dig, snail high
hurdles, and ... well, let's just say the smart money's always on Mr. Tokay, that
old skunk, in the third event. A little trickery and sour grapes will occur, even
among these close animal friends, but good sportsmanship carries the day. Pen-
and-watercolor sketches in muddy browns and olives on plenty of clean white
space are appropriately animated and zany. Although some proper names might
stretch beginners' skills (Ardsley, Burbank, Hastings, etc.), the clipped dialogue
and occasional repetitions ("That's slippery ... You're slippery ... We're all slip-
pery... Never mind who's slippery!") are a boon to novice readers, who will be
drawn to the chapter book format. EB
SULLIVAN, GEORGE 
Mathew Brady: His Life and Photographs. Cobblehill,
1994 
136p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-65186-1 
$15.99 
R Gr. 6-10
Mathew Brady is a significant figure in history even for many who don't know his
name, because his photographs of the Civil War helped to form people's picture of
that bloody conflict. Sullivan, in a clear, smooth account, is upfront about how
many aspects of Brady's life are disputable and how many of "Brady's" pictures
were in fact not taken by Brady. The result is a look into photographic history and
into the importance of images in history: Sullivan deals with changes in technol-
ogy, professional competition and innovation, and fashions of and in photogra-
phy. He likens Brady to the cinematographer of a film, who arranges and plans
the images without actually operating the camera; he's also honest about the price
Brady occasionally paid for refusing to share credit with talented photographers,
who would sometimes then leave his studio and become competitors. The text is
illustrated by the reproductions of photographs from Brady's studio and elsewhere,
many with a remarkable clarity that allows the past to connect easily with the
present: pictures of Lincoln, Grant, McKinley, and Robert E. Lee, as well as the
famous war scenes, bring history into the hands of the reader. This book provides
insight not only into the times Brady chronicled but also into the way history is
passed on and would make an intriguing conversation starter in a history unit. DS
SUTTON, ROGER 
Hearing Us Out: Voices from the Gay and Lesbian Community;
illus. with photographs by Lisa Ebright. 
Little, 1994 
[127p]
ISBN 0-316-82326-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Gr. 7-12
[Books written by Bulletin staff are given a descriptive annotation rather than a
review and code rating.] In fifteen interviews (and a foreword by M. E. Kerr) gays
and lesbians, both teens and adults, talk about their lives and such issues as coming
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 
107
out, lesbian parenting, military policy, equal rights work, and homosexuality and
religion. RS
THESMAN, JEAN 
Nothing Grows Here. HarperCollins, 1994 
182p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024458-5 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024457-7 
$14.00 
R Gr. 4-7
Maryanne hopes that she is only temporarily marooned in the shabby Aristocrat
Arms apartments, where Mom gets a break in the rent in exchange for cleaning
vacant units; with luck they will soon pull themselves out of the economic morass
in which Dad's death left them. Meanwhile Maryanne tries hard to make the best
of things, finding friends, adjusting to her new junior high, plugging away at odd
jobs for the neighbors. But nothing can appease her longing for a house of their
own with a yard she can garden, as she once did with Dad. Just when things are
looking up-Mom finds full-time work and the savings account is on the mend-
Mom decides to invest their savings in a business and finds romance with shy Mr.
Barker, owner of a local bookshop. Through her growing affection for Barker's
little boy Cody, who may have been abused by his mother, Maryanne finally comes
to accept a future different from the one she dreamed for herself and Mom. Tom,
the teasing but tender-hearted boy downstairs, provides an engaging love interest
for Maryanne, and details of latchkey life, junior-high dances where boys don't
dance, and bratty neighbor kids are right on the mark. The mutually supportive
and cooperative relationship between mother and daughter glows with
unsentimentalized warmth. EB
VAN LEEUWEN, JEAN 
Boundfor Oregon; illus. by James Watling. 
Dial,
1994 
168p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1527-7 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1526-9 
$14.99 
R Gr. 4-6
When Mary Ellen Todd's family joins the wagon train at Independence, Missouri
in 1852, about a hundred wagons in that band alone are bound for the West, but
disagreements, disillusionment, and disease so thin the ranks that, by the time they
reach the Cascades, only one other family is still with them. Based on Todd's own
account as recorded by her daughter in On to Oregon, Van Leeuwen's tale retains
the major events of the journey, from river crossings to cholera, while inventing or
"imagin[ing] with the help of historical research" other undocumented details.
Some of the episodes Mary Ellen relates seem underdeveloped-good stories that
never quite get up a full head of steam-but the many rich details unique to this
account (Mother sews shoes for the dog when his feet give out; rival wagon trains
race for the corduroy road) should interest middle-graders. Van Leeuwen does a
creditable job imparting the pain of separation repeated many times as families
who had become close turn back East, or even die, and Mary Ellen's gradual un-
derstanding of her emotionally reserved stepmother is well realized. A map of the
journey, several black and white illustrations, and notes on Todd's life and times
are included. EB
VOIGT, CYNTHIA 
When She Hollers. Scholastic, 1994 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-590-46714-X 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Opening with a challenge ("She put the survival knife down on the table") and
closing with the promise of confrontation, this short shocker chronicles the reck-
108 
* 
THE BULLETIN
less, turbulent day when Tish determines to end years of sexual abuse at the hands
of her adoptive father, Tonnie. Spurred on by a classmate's suicide, and convinced
that no one will help her (and her mother's complicity is evidence of that), Tish
believes her only hope lies in stabbing, maybe killing, Tonnie if he assaults her
again. In both event and tone, this is the most violent and enraged of the recent
novels we've seen about incest, with Tish's desperation written at an almost oper-
atic high. Voigt's prose is jagged, fragmented, sometimes elliptical as it traces
Tish's search for a way out of her misery. A kindly lawyer appears as a somewhat
convenient champion, but Tish is on her own in the end. Never the tidy victim so
often found in stories about abuse, Tish is messy and complicated, and while read-
ers may not like her, they will follow each step of the way as Tish, the knife tucked
into her Doc Martens, finds her way home. RS
WALLACE, BILL 
True Friends. Holiday House, 1994 
169p
ISBN 0-8234-1141-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Sixth-grader Courtney is getting in with the in-crowd, courtesy of the fancy clothes
and regular visits to the beauty salon that her new stepmother, Emily, insists upon.
Emily is a pretty mean stepmother, but it's a stereotype that fits comfortably into
this formulaic but likable story about a girl's discovery of-as the title says-true
friendship, personified in plucky, disabled Judy Baird, who responds to schoolyard
whispering about whether to call her handicapped or crippled or physically chal-
lenged with a firm retort: "The best word is Judy ... But if Judy is too hard for
you to remember, crippled or handicapped is fine. It doesn't matter." In the eyes
of the other girls, the problem ofJudy's cerebral palsy pales beside the fact that she
lives in "No Hope Village," a low-rent housing project, with her mother, rumored
to be a witch, who won't even help Judy when she falls down. Mrs. Baird, it turns
out, is just a hardworking woman determined to see that her daughter learns to
stand on her own, and that's just one of the truths Courtney comes to understand.
The plot is overloaded-Emily takes off, the bank forecloses on Dad's business,
Courtney's brother is wrongly arrested for selling drugs, Courtney herself is sus-
pected of stealing money-but it all basically works out in a way that is tidy but
not unrealistic. Wallace writes about girls with the same vigor and raffish senti-
mentality with which he writes about boys; his fans as well as those of Barthe
deClements will enjoy the ride. RS
WATERS, KATE 
The Mysterious Horseman: An Adventure in Prairietown 1836; il-
lus. with photographs by Marjory Dressier. 
Scholastic, 1994 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-590-45503-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Andrew McClure eavesdrops at the door of the inn taproom and hears a traveler
tell of a night rider "dressed in black ... chasing a poor schoolmaster." Although
the innkeeper attributes the rumor to "too many ardent spirits," Andrew and his
friend Thomas Curtis actually witness a horseman thundering toward Prairietown,
and they scurry off to tell Mr. Curtis of the apparition. When Thomas' father
reads them a passage from Irving's The Legend of Sleepy Hollow, Andrew is forced
to conclude, "The traveler was talking about a new book [16 years old by then],
not about a real rider!" This somewhat contrived plot serves as the pretext for
photographs of Prairietown, a recreated nineteenth century village at Conner Prai-
rie in Fishers, Indiana. Interpreters from this living history museum, acting as
McClure and his neighbors, are shown at a variety of everyday chores, but these
homey activities have little to do with the Headless Horseman theme and are stiffly
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 
109
posed to boot. Seven pages of copious addenda-ranging from biographical in-
formation on the interpreter who plays Andrew to a recipe for gingerbread-round
out this volume, which will best be appreciated by visitors to Conner Prairie and
by children who enjoy touring historic reconstructions. EB
WESTALL, ROBERT 
A Place to Hide. Scholastic, 1994 
199p
ISBN 0-590-47748-X 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Eighteen-year-old Lucy Smith's world changes when her father informs her that
he's blowing the whistle on major government corruption, hands her a suitcase full
of money, and tells her to go into hiding. Lucy alters her identity and becomes an
antiques dealer in England's industrial north, growing comfortable with the local
scene and characters; when the government tries to eliminate both Smiths, Lucy's
new friends come to the rescue and save the day. This isn't Westall at his best, but
it's a capable if implausible thriller-Lucy's remaking of herself and sudden switch
from schoolgirl to worldly shopowner offers readers wish-fulfilling satisfaction, as
does her eventual triumph over the forces that threaten her. This will appeal not
only to diehard Westall fans but also to aficionados of lighter young-woman-in-
trouble gothics, who will relish the dangerous drama. DS
WISNIEWSKI, DAVID 
The Wave of the Sea-Wolf; written and illus. by David
Wisniewski. 
Clarion, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-395-66478-0 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
While you're scouting the Pacific Northwest forests for the remains of Red Ranger's
Star-Hopper (see Breathed, above), keep an eye open for a Tlingit "war canoe,
trapped in the trunk of a lofty cedar." In this tale, loosely based on Tlingit lore,
Princess Kchokeen has been gifted with a rare vision of Gonakadet, the powerful
sea-wolf that creates great waves in the bay. Her newfound ability to predict
Gonakadet's movements by clues of earth tremors, sea sounds, and bear-howling
quickly bring her wealth and honor among the village fisherman, who can now
safely navigate the local waters. The arrival of a vessel of white fur-traders is wel-
comed at first by the villagers, but when the strangers' greed threatens the homes
and livelihood of her people, Kchokeen calls on Sea-Wolf for help. Double-page
cut-paper collage spreads, which frequently cross the line between intricate and
fussy, are bound to elicit oohs and aahs, particularly where the medium has been
mounted five or more layers thick or raised to cast realistic shadows upon the
background. Text insets bordered with more cutwork Tlingit designs, while ap-
pealing in themselves, tend to visually overload the already dense compositions. A
lengthy but undocumented essay (intimidating with its close printed, double col-
umned text) offers a crash course in Tlingit history and lore related to the tale, and
discusses recorded geologic phenomena that shed light on possible origins of Tlingit
belief in the monster thought to be responsible for turbulence in the bay. Exciting
elements of killer waves and threatening aliens make this an enticing choice for
independent readers, as well as a natural tie-in for school geography and earth
science units. EB
WOLF, SYLVIA 
Focus: Five Women Photographers. Whitman, 1994 
64 p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-8075-2531-6 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Five photographers, two of them historically significant figures (Julia Margaret
110 
* THE BULLETIN
Cameron and Margaret Bourke-White) and three of them contemporary talents
(Flor Gardufio, Sandy Skoglund, and Lorna Simpson) are the focus of Focus. Wolf
describes each photographer's life and work, discussing each woman's cultural back-
ground (English, European American, African American, Mexican) and photo-
graphic vision, helped by a liberal representation of the subject's own work. The
text is not always as fluid as the pictures, but the language stays simple and the
explanations of photographic science are clear and understandable enough for neo-
phytes. Appropriately enough, the photographs, ranging from Cameron's haunt-
ing monochrome portraits to Skoglund's fluorescent-toned and surreal domestic
scenes, are the best evocation of each artist, whetting appetites for more whether in
monograph or museum. Kids who may not have given the art of photography a
second thought will be drawn by the green "Radioactive Cats" of the cover, and
there's variety and imagination enough within to keep them interested. Source
notes on the photographs and a sophisticated bibliography are included. DS
ZINDEL, PAUL 
Loch. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024543-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024542-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Young Luke Perkins is nicknamed "Loch" after he sees the famed monster in Scot-
land; ten years later, fifteen-year-old Loch is saddened by the recent death of his
mother and the subsequent decline of his scientist father. Dr. Sam seems to be
completely cowed by his employer, Mr. Cavenger, a tabloid publisher who sends
Loch's father on quests for proof about mythological beings such as Sasquatch and
Nessie, and who has decided to investigate a small Vermont lake for eerie under-
water inhabitants. It turns out to have them in droves-primeval yet evolved
marine creatures (the book labels them plesiosaurs) who fight back savagely and
gorily against the heartless humans who seek to destroy and exploit them. Loch
and his sister, Zaidee, discover a softer side to the creatures, however, when they
befriend a stranded young one whom they call "Wee Beastie"; with the help of
Cavenger's daughter, Sarah, they protect Wee Beastie from the money-grubbing
publisher and his henchmen until the not-so-wee beasties slay their foes and make
it back to their original, bigger habitat. This is sort of a cross between ET and
Jaws-the kids desperately attempt to protect the misunderstood against the arro-
gant, but the bad guys bite the dust with great drama ("Erdon's last conscious
thought was the realization that he was being chewed in half"), leaving grisly bits
of people floating about the lake. The characters are pretty stock, the sentimental
undertones rather unsubtle ("We're a family again, aren't we?" asks Zaidee as she
gazes up at her re-empowered father after the great boss-killing denouement), and
nobody seems much worried about what will happen to the residents of the bigger
lake to which the creatures flee. Still, it's a good, rip-roaring, kids-know-best
adventure that would make a terrific beach paperback and has "reluctant reader"
written all over it. DS
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 
111
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Annual '94. Picture Book Studio, 1994. 177p. illus. and with photographs. Pa-
per ed. ISBN 1-55858-265-7. $39.95.
Glossy pages showcase samples of the art displayed at this year's Annual Illustrator's
Exhibition at the Bologna International Children's Book Fair. Each double spread
offers biographical information on a single artist and two or three reproductions of
his or her work; illustrators appearing in the book include names unfamiliar to
American audiences as well as more familiar artists such as Kathryn Hewitt and
Alan Marks. The variety of backgrounds, styles, and media demonstrated here
offers an interesting look at the breadth and promising future of international
illustration. DS
Edwards, Margaret A. The Fair Garden and the Swarm ofBeasts: The Library and
the YoungAdult. Reprint ed. ALA, 1994. 156p. illus. with photographs. ISBN
0-8389-0635-4. Paper ed. $18.00.
Veteran YA critic and librarian Patty Campbell provides an illuminating foreword
to Margaret Edwards' professional memoir cum manual, originally published in
1969 and still required reading for any librarian working with teens. Edwards
focuses intently on books and reading (although Campbell notes the irony of the
Margaret Edwards award for young adult literature, named to honor a woman
who had little patience for the genre) and her advice on bringing books and teens
together remains sensible and inspiring, if unaware of a contemporary culture which
has little patience for books. Campbell's preface traces Edwards' career, examines
the changing picture of youth librarianship and literature written for teens, and
sparks her analysis with reminiscences from Edwards' colleagues and students. (And
for Campbell's perceptive critique of the areas in which she considers Edwards to
have been "dead wrong," see "Reconsidering Margaret Edwards," Wilson Library
Bulletin, June, 1994.) RS
Smith, Henrietta M., ed. The Coretta Scott King Awards Book: From Vision to
Reality. ALA, 1994. 115p. illus. ISBN 0-8389-3441-2. Paper ed. $25.00
Commemorating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the establishment of the Coretta
Scott King Awards, Smith has compiled a comprehensive survey of the award win-
ning titles. Listed in reverse chronology, each winner and honor book is given a
lengthy annotation, and a full-color gallery of selected award-winning illustrations
provides visual interest. Interviews (reprinted from LanguageArts) by Rudine Sims
Bishop with award-winners Patricia McKissack and Pat Cummings are lively and
informative; photographs and brief biographies of many of the awardees complete
the book. Useful as a retrospective selection tool, the book is also a browsable
overview of the best of the last twenty-five years ofAfrican-American literature for
children. RS
112 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Doherty; Scott; Zindel
Africa-folklore: Aardema
African Americans-fiction: Myers
African Americans-stories: Cooke;
Fox; Pic6
African Americans: McKissack;
O'Neill; Pinkney
AIDS-fiction: Nelson
Art and artists-fiction: James
Babies-stories: Auch; Fox
Bears-stories: Isaacs
BEDTIME STORIES: Cisneros;
Frank; Janovitz
Bicycling: Buettner
BIOGRAPHIES: Sullivan
Birds: Markle
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Lynch; Scott; Zindel
Brothers and sisters-stories: Brown
Brothers-stories: Auch
Cats-stories: Mandel
Child abuse-fiction: Voigt
Christmas-fiction: Breathed
Christmas-stories: Roberts
Civil Rights: O'Neill
Civil War-fiction: Lyon
Civil War: Sullivan
College-fiction: Choi
CONCEPT BOOKS: Mandel
Coyotes-stories: McDermott
Dance: Garfunkel
Death-fiction: Choi; Hickman;
Nelson
Death-stories: Fox; Lester
Depression, the-fiction: Horvath
Disabilities-fiction: Wallace
Divorce-fiction: Shoup
Dogs-stories: Day
Dolls-stories: Frank
Eating disorders-fiction: Newman
Ecology: Wisniewski
Emotional problems-fiction:
Lynch; Newman
England-fiction: Doherty; Westall
Ethiopia-stories: Schur
Family life-fiction: Lynch;
Petersen
Family life-stories: Cisneros
FANTASY: Carter
Farm life-stories: Ray
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Voigt; Westall
Fear-stories: Auch; Brown
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Aardema;
Isaacs; Lester; McDermott
Friends-fiction: McGugan;
Sharpe; Shoup; Wallace
Friends-stories: Brenner
Fruit-stories: Kilborne
FUNNY STORIES: Connell;
Naylor
Geography: Wisniewski
GHOST STORIES: Lyon
Government: O'Neill
Grandmothers-fiction: Hickman
Grandmothers-stories: Milstein
Guidance: Sutton
Hawaii-fiction: Salisbury
HISTORICAL FICTION: Blos;
Choi; Cutler; Doherty; Dorris;
Horvath; McGugan; Myers;
NOVEMBER 1994 
* 
113
Qualey; Salisbury; Savage; Van
Leeuwen; Waters
History, European: Adler;
Bachrach
History, U.S.: Kroll; O'Neill;
Pinkney; Ray; Sullivan; Van
Leeuwen; Waters
Holidays: Drucker
Holocaust, the-stories: Milstein
Holocaust, the: Adler; Bachrach
Homelessness-fiction: Doherty
Homosexuality-fiction: Nelson
Homosexuality: Sutton
Horses-fiction: Savage
Immigrants-fiction: Blos;
McGugan
Insects-fiction: Carter
Inventors: McKissack
Japanese Americans-fiction:
Salisbury
Japanese Americans: Stanley
Jews-fiction: Blos
Jews-stories: Milstein; Schur
Jews: Adler; Bachrach; Drucker
Koreans-fiction: Choi
Latinos-fiction: Reynolds
Latinos-stories: Cisneros; Pic6
LOVE STORIES: Qualey; Savage;
Thesman
Mathematics: Connell
Military schools-fiction: James
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Thesman
Music: Musical; Ray
MYSTERY STORIES: Byars;
Connell; Westall
Native Americans-fiction: Dorris
Native Americans-folklore:
McDermott
Native Americans-stories:
Wisniewski
Nature study: Markle
Photography: Sullivan; Wolf
Pioneer life-fiction: Van Leeuwen
POETRY: Bunting; Florian;
Janovitz
Pregnancy, teenage-fiction:
Reynolds
Rabbits-stories: Elzbieta; Roberts
Reading aloud: Aardema; Florian
Reading, beginning: Mandel;
Stevenson
Reading, easy: Brown; Florian;
Petersen
Reading, family: Auch; Breathed;
Drucker; Florian; Fox; Milstein;
Roberts
Reading, reluctant: Buettner;
Byars; Connell; Naylor;
Newman; Scott; Westall; Zindel
Religious education: Drucker;
Ray; Schur
Rural life-fiction: Waters
Russia: Buettner
Safety education: Gibbons
School-fiction: Sharpe
SCIENCE FICTION: Scott
Shakers-stories: Ray
Sisters-fiction: Choi
Slavery-stories: Pic6
Social studies: Sutton
Stepmothers-fiction: Wallace
Story hour: Aardema; Brenner;
Bunting; Frank; Isaacs; Mandel;
McDermott; Pic6; Roberts;
Schlossberg; Silverman;
Stevenson
TALL TALES: Isaacs
Time travel-fiction: Lyon
Vietnam War-fiction: Qualey
Voyages and travels-fiction: Van
Leeuwen
Voyages and travels: Buettner;
Kroll
War-stories: Elzbieta
West, the-fiction: Van Leeuwen
Women's studies: Wolf
Work-fiction: Westall
World War II-fiction: Cutler;
Salisbury
World War II: Adler; Bachrach;
Stanley
Zambia-folklore: Lester
with
4 
2·
(
ii
"An artist known especially for her exquisite draughtsmanship
visualizes five familiar nursery pieces.... A feast of bright yet
subtle color and bold design, just right for introducing the
youngest to some familiar animals while tickling their ears with
contagious rhymes and their minds with a few simple concepts."
-Kirkus Reviews
"Armed with a paintbox and a handful of rhymes and fingerplays,
Ormerod once again proves how closely attuned she is to a baby's
world.... A visual delight."-*Publishers Weekly (starred review)
Ages Infant up. 40 pp. TR $15.00/0-688-12558-1; LE $14.93/0-688-12559-X
Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
m~a~i 
li~bs~re;.~_ 
~ 
~
rr 
rr 
~sr 
rrrpa 
rrs 
r77Rr
One FaI. Day
by MOLLY BANG
"The ever-inventive Bang (two Caldecott Honors) uses some of her
favorite images in a deceptively simple bedtime story with several
layers of visual and conceptual meaning." 
-*Kirkus 
Reviews
"The illustrations are impressive for their clarity, their detail, and
their ability to convey the energy of a child's day. ... Emphasizing
comfort, security and friendship, the words work as a lullaby,
moving and intimate." 
-Publishers Weekly
Ages 3 up. 24 pp. TR $15.00/0-688-07015-9; LE $14.93/0-688-07016-7
SGreenwillow Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc. 
1
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
__
When 
somehow 
something
was not right...
Elizabeth
Imagined
an Iceberg
y Chris Raschka,
or of Yo! Yes?,
lecott Honor Book
stranger scoops Elizabeth into her
te little girl calls upon a strength
herself and pulls away to safety.
.... Portrays a serious and bewilder-
i hi hi 
r 
\ t 
\' 
rt 
hild 
i 
d-nTrr 
-vr\^
mm 
muumm 
n 
w 
c 
e 
c 
... 
s 
empow 
,
to extricate herself."
-
School Library Journal
'he] characters are distilled to a
sence; by touching on children's
s, 
the dreamlike representation may
n them to discussion."
-
Kirkus Reviews
e book] operates on many levels
has a powerful emotional
punch.... [Raschka] shows himself
again to be a master of spare,
rhythmic language and lively,
intriguing illustration."
-
New York Times Book Review
m1
Ages 4 - 7
TR $14.95 0-531-06817-X 
Orchard Books
RLB $14.99 0-531-08667-4 
A Grolier Company
_0
Z 
I
__ 
C
* "This 
expressive pig's appeal remains timeless."
-School Library Journal (starred review)
Geirldimue's
Baby Brother
'DO
H1OLLY KELLERII
Author of Geraldine's Blanket and Geraldine's Big Snowe
*"With its drolly understated humor, this book offers a fresh,
appealing variation on the theme of an older sibling adjusting to a
new baby.... [It] will bring smiles to Geraldine's young fans--and
win her some new ones, too."-Publishers Weekly (starred review)
"The whimsical line drawings add to the overall charm. A wise,
funny, accepting little book7--Kirkus Reviews
Ages 4 up. 32 pp. TR $15.OO/O-688-12005-9; LE $14.93/O-688-12006-7
Greenuillrv 
1iks A division of Wlliam Morrow & Co., Inc.
Greewilow 
ooksj~)WIJ1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
*"nggig. 
.. A 
stlie 
an 
clss 
offering.
4:
i 
A, 
told 
Mae
fluat 
kyKYC1f
An ~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
A 
enaigtx 
n 
ccmlse 
anigsstti.eso
NORTH-SOUTH BOOKS
welcomes
Lisbeth Zwerger
Kveta Pacovska
John A. Rowe
Alan Marks
Ivan Gantschev
Eve Tharlet
Michio Hoshino
-Gisela Durr
All published
under our
new imprint
MICHAEL NEUGEBAUER BOOKS
For a free copy of our new catalog call 800-282-8257 Art by Kveta Pacovskd
Publishers Weekly star '
Im 
%i~AVi 
1 
ii(V
SON
out loud at Robinson's
ristmas Pageant Ever
the return of the six
s."-Publishers Weekly
sixth-grade classmate
.. explains in hilarious
mans are behind
astrophe that occurs
h concludes that if
Sgo to jail, she could
. Robinson's readers
)k forward to finding
vhich it will be."
-Kirkus Reviews
ges 8 up. $14.00TR
0-06-023039-8)
$13.89LB
(0-06-023043-6)
Also available,
Barbara Robinson's
THE BEST CHRISTMAS
PAGEANT EVER
Pictures by Judith Gwyn Brown
Ages 8 up.
$14.00TR (0-06-025043-7)
$13.89LB (0-06-025044-5)
$3.95 Trophy (0-06-440275-4)
$3.95 Keypoint (0-06-447044-X)
nsChildren 'sBooks
I 
10 tast 53rd Street, New York 10022
+Kirkus Reviews pointer
' 
The Horn Book stars
Vfor Vanishing
An Alphabet of Endangered Animals
Patricia Mullins
"From 'armadillo' to 'zebra,' each letter of the alphabet begins
the name of an endangered species.... The [full-color] torn-
paper collage illustrations are handsome and dramatic. As in
Dinosaur Encore, Mullins has created a large, colorful work,
well suited to sharing with a group.... Careful scholarship,
intelligent presentation, and gorgeous artwork combine to
make this a fascinating book for a wide audience."
-The Horn Book
Ages 3-7. $15.00TR (0-06-023556-X); $14.89LB (0-06-023557-8)
Also by Patricia Mullins
' HarperCollins Children'-
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
]I
eaca leter ott ms alphaencal journey, a theatcal scene shows
a boy on stage, under the spotlights, in front of a famous city
landmark....The alliteration plays with the sound of words and
their meaning; the verbs suggest volumes. Lobel's watercolor
and gouache art is lavish, comic, and joyful."-ALA Bookst
"Fans will appreciate this as a companion to Lobel's Alison's
Zinnia but newcomers, too, will fully enjoy the trip."
-
lish 3W$eekly
Ages 3 up. 32 pp. TR $16.0/0-688-10354-5; LE $15.93/0688-10355-3
L 
* 
* 
: "SU
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
Fables,
Foibles,
and Fooble
CARL SANDBURG
Edited and with on Introduction by aeorge enoricK
Illustrated by Robert C. Harvey
"These stories are fun to read. They are fun for children with active Imagi-
nations. They are fun for adults after a busy day." -
Warren R. Weber,
chief, I & RM, Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site.
Illus. Paper, $10.95
Order toll free 800/545-4703
I 
Univers 
ity of IllinoisP 
s 
1 
S 
OH
0 
1
4 
0
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
"
i,
;
0:A&4610
r'
