T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
May 2015
Vol. 68   No. 9
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Amanda Cockrell, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Claudia Nelson, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
May 2015
Vol. 68 No. 9
435  the BIg PICture
 
 Gone Crazy in Alabama  by Rita Williams-Garcia
436  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
436 • Simon vs. the Homo Sapiens Agenda  by Becky Albertalli
442 • Rhymoceros  written and illus. by Janik Coat
444 •  Boys Don’t Knit  by T. S. Easton
455 • Hippos Are Huge!  by Jonathan London; illus. by Matthew Trueman
456 •  Breaking Sky by Cori McCarthy
463 •  Meet the Dullards  by Sara Pennypacker; illus. by Daniel Salmieri
472  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $103.00 or electronic $115.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2015 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Gone Crazy in Alabama by Frank Morrison copyright ©2015 and used by permis-
sion of Amistad/HarperCollins.
May 2015 • 435
the BIg PICture
Gone Crazy in Alabama
by Rita Williams-Garcia
We’re accustomed to fantasy series that advance a clear trajectory across several 
volumes, but such multivolume development is not as common in realistic fiction. 
And that’s a shame, because when such a narrative cycle is well executed, it brings 
readers something well beyond what a single book can, creating an experiential 
rhythm and a deeper understanding. In her trio of books about the Gaither sisters, 
One Crazy Summer (BCCB 2/10), P.S. Be Eleven (BCCB 9/13), and now Gone Crazy 
in Alabama, Rita Williams-Garcia masterfully shows us how it’s done.
In this title, the Gaither girls are off for another summer away: this time 
they’re going to Alabama to stay with their beloved grandmother, Big Ma, and 
their extended family. Since narrator Delphine and her little sisters Vonetta and 
Fern are Brooklyn girls, with a seasoning of Oakland Black Panther from their stay 
with their mother, they are naïve about the ways of the late 1960s deep South. 
Delphine, now twelve, also has a lot to learn about family history, especially the 
estrangement between the girls’ great-grandmother and her half-sister across the 
creek, who have an age-old rivalry; at the same time, Delphine’s frustration with her 
own sister, Vonetta, creates a breach between the girls that leads to possible tragedy. 
The book’s natural storytelling cadence effortlessly combines all these 
strands. The girls’ dialogue, is, as always, superbly written and absolutely natural, 
and the growing mutual antipathy between Delphine and Vonetta rings with clarion, 
irritating truth: Vonetta really can be kind of a pill, and Delphine really is “mean 
and bossy,” as Fern says, when it comes to her sister. This relationship is one of 
several with parallels within the book, as the girls’ great-grandmother, Ma Charles, 
and her half-sister, Miss Trotter, haven’t spoken face to face for years, each refusing 
to take the initial steps of rapprochement, and both paying a price of separation 
for their stubbornness. 
And those family stories are key here, as the book culminates the tale of the 
Gaithers’ heritage. The previous titles have taken the sisters through their mother’s 
life and then their father’s; now this perfect and logical capstone to the saga (an au-
thor’s note suggests this is the last book featuring the girls) brings new consciousness 
of the past and also unites all three strands, Oakland, Brooklyn, and Alabama, in the 
present. “My sisters and I,” Delphine realizes as she hears stories, sometimes startling, 
of family history, “we weren’t just Trotters, Charleses, Gaithers, and Johnsons. We 
were pieces of other families we’d never know or see.” Williams-Garcia never loses 
track of the comedic side of family drama, though, with Ma Charles cheerfully 
contradicting her daughter at every turn, and the Gaithers’ bickering as humorous 
as it is on target. As Miss Trotter slyly says, viewing yet another theatrical family 
436 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
perturbation, “I tell you, I don’t miss the picture shows or television at all. Not at 
all.” The different family takes of the girls’ great-grandmother and her half sister 
also provide a clever way to explore the historical complexity of racial identity and 
power hierarchies: Miss Trotter is part Native American, with a history that includes 
her Native American ancestor selling his African-American in-laws into slavery; the 
KKK-member sheriff is a distant cousin, descended from another branch of the 
family (a family tree is helpfully and fascinatingly appended). Yet however much 
the family is steeped in the past, they’re by no means tied to it: events eventually 
bring Miss Trotter and Ma Charles back together, and the family looks eagerly 
forward into the future as they breathlessly watch the Apollo 11 moon landing. 
This iteration of the girls’ adventures requires knowledge of the previous 
volumes to fully appreciate, but those in the know will rejoice in the return of the 
girls and the revealing of new and absorbing family stories, with Williams-Garcia 
at her best in capturing how relatives young and old can needle, torment, and love 
one another in their own special ways. There are similarities here with Woodson’s 
Brown Girl Dreaming (BCCB 9/14), which would make an excellent next step and 
consolation for readers wistful for the apparent end of the series. But if readers do 
have to say goodbye to the Gaither sisters and their crew, this is a warm and spirited 
valedictory. (See p. 471 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
AlbertAlli, becky Simon vs. the Homo Sapiens Agenda. Balzer + Bray/Harper-
Collins, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-234867-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-234869-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
Simon Spier is falling in love with a boy he’s never met. A provocative post on their 
school’s gossip Tumblr caught his eye, and he began an email correspondence, us-
ing the name Jacques, with a boy who calls himself Blue. Blue and Jacques take 
advantage of their anonymity to share their hearts, but when Simon carelessly leaves 
his browser open in the school library, a guy named Martin threatens to expose 
Simon’s secret unless Simon helps him get in good with Simon’s friend Abby. Though 
angry, Simon reluctantly plays along to give him and Blue more time to explore 
what is happening between them. What is happening between them, and within 
Simon, is an irresistibly tender story of two smart, witty, introspective teens who 
May 2015 • 437
have a lot of reason to question the cultural defaults, including both orientation 
and race, that make their love story something they want to keep to themselves. 
Mild strain among Simon’s diverse group of friends in his suburban Georgia high 
school emerges when crushes go requited and unrequited, but the group remains 
cohesive and supportive when Simon is eventually outed; so does his delightfully 
quirky family, even when Simon gets drunk and calls his dad out on “that awkward 
moment when you realize you’ve been making gay jokes in front of your gay kid 
for the last seventeen years.” Though there are realistic moments of tension, the 
dominant sentiment here is the delicious excitement of finding your best self in the 
eyes of someone else; not since Levithan’s Boy Meets Boy (BCCB 9/03) have readers 
been treated to such a happy sigh of a book about two boys falling in love.  KC 
AllowAy, kit Dreamfire. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2015 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-06366-3 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-6967-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Josh doesn’t want an apprentice—she’s most comfortable while blaming herself for 
her boyfriend’s death and resolving other peoples’ nightmares alone. She’s really good 
at both, and she’s so impressive at the latter, known as dream walking, that she’s 
caught the attention of the political powers that be and of the evil Feodor, who is 
threatening the balance of the dream and waking worlds. It’s a good thing she gets 
the apprentice anyway, because Will is just as brash, brave, and well-intentioned 
as she is, and they have each other as they fling themselves headlong into danger. 
The villain is impeccably developed: he is complex with layers of psychosis, PTSD, 
and pure evil, and he is easily the most memorable thing about this novel. It is clear 
that no matter how much the politicians for the dream walkers make pronounce-
ments, how much the brave teenagers fight, or how much the prison he is in bills 
itself as escape-proof, this man is going to wreak some serious havoc. The book 
occasionally overdoes the world-building, with complex charts and pages-long 
descriptions, but the result is a lush and fully realized setting. Patient readers will 
be richly rewarded with effective mystery, a charged romance (of course Will and 
Josh wind up together), and a cool alternative world detailed onto our current one 
in ways that make expected places and scenes unfamiliar and magical.  AS 
Angel, Ann, ed. Things I’ll Never Say: Stories about Our Secret Selves. Candle-
wick, 2015 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7307-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 10-12
Secrets revealed and secrets buried: either way, secrets have a way of changing your 
life, especially when you are a teen. In these fifteen original short stories by a diverse 
set of YA authors, characters guard secrets—often very adult-level secrets—about 
their parents, their friends, their teachers, and themselves that reveal them to be 
better and worse than they appear. Some stories fall into the category of domestic 
realism, such as Ellen Wittlinger’s exploration of a girl overcoming the shame of 
living with a mother who is a hoarder; Erica L. Kaufman’s tale of a girl trying to 
hold it together while keeping her mother’s alcoholism a secret; and Kekla Magoon’s 
account of a girl who escaped her past of disordered eating by going to boarding 
school but who fears of facing the holidays at home. Other stories center on more 
438 • The BulleTin
salacious secrets: a boy prostituted for his father’s debts, a girl trying to seduce her 
teacher to confirm her own self-worth, a boy unwilling to accept his guilt in giving 
his girlfriend herpes, and a girl who maintains a string of boyfriends to compensate 
for the loss of her father’s love. There are even two fantasies, one by Cynthia Leitich 
Smith about a guardian angel who has fallen in love with a human boy, and another 
by Katy Moran that owes much to the story of Bluebeard. Because these are short 
stories, the world-building is quick, depending on readers to quickly immerse 
themselves in the settings and draw conclusions based on minimal backstories. 
The secrets’ often mature content raises the moral question of whether a thing is 
secret because it’s shameful or shameful because it’s secret, making this a thought-
provoking collection.  KC 
Arnold, dAvid Mosquitoland. Viking, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-451-47077-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
When Mim discovers that her mother is sick, she escapes her father, her stepmother, 
and her new school in Mississippi to board a bus north to Cleveland to be with her 
mother. As might be expected in a YA road-trip novel, Mim meets various characters 
who help or hinder her journey, which is really a bumpy path to self-discovery; 
the most important include an older woman on her way to see her gay nephew; a 
sexual predator; a developmentally delayed boy named Walt; and a cute college guy, 
Beck, with whom she falls in love. Along the way, Mim writes letters that reveal 
her backstory: a father who worries that she may be bipolar like her mother and 
her aunt and has insisted she take medication, and her coping mechanism of using 
her mother’s abandoned lipstick to draw “war paint” on her face as an expression of 
her inner pain and the strength she wishes she had. This gesture aside, Mim’s story 
is emotionally affecting in multiple ways; when she keeps quiet about her sexual 
assault, for instance, and the predator then assaults another, younger girl, Mim feels 
guilt about her silence. On the other hand, her kindness is rewarded, as she rescues 
Walt from a dangerous situation and detours from her own goal to support Beck 
in settling his demons. While Walt’s character is somewhat a device as the disabled 
person who brings out the protagonist’s better angels, a strong emphasis on personal 
alienation and the saving grace of community permeates this voice-driven novel, 
and the whip-smart narration is seductive and powerful.  KC 
Arnold, elAnA k. Infandous. Carolrhoda Lab, 2015 189p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-3849-1 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-6180-2 $9.99  
R Gr. 10-12
Sephora Golding is starting to feel like she’s living in one of the old-style fairy tales, 
the pre-Disney kind that contain some shocking elements. She and her beautiful 
single mother have always been two against the world in their grubby Venice Beach 
apartment, but lately Sephora is thinking more and more about what makes her 
different from the mother she idolizes. As she processes losing her virginity to a 
handsome older stranger she met on the beach, her mother begins dating the surfer 
guy who lives downstairs who is closer to Sephora’s age than her mom’s. Retellings 
of traditional tales, including those of Sleeping Beauty, Demeter and Persephone, 
and the rapes of Philomela and Lucretia, contextualize and foreshadow Sephora’s 
contemporary story, creating a novel that is as artful as it is emotionally discon-
May 2015 • 439
certing. Sephora’s adoration of her mother is nearly erotic in its presentation, as 
she focuses obsessively on the beauty of her mother’s body and how she misses the 
physical closeness they shared when she was younger. More intense, though, is her 
realization that the stranger she willingly slept with turned her life story into the 
worst kind of incestuous fairy tale; oddly, it is this very realization that frees her 
from her obsession with her mother into her own sense of self. Though Arnold’s 
prose lacks the same ethereal glaze, fans of Francesca Lia Block will find themselves 
very much at home here in terms of setting, theme, and ethos.  KC 
Avi Catch You Later, Traitor. Algonquin, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-61620-359-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Pete Collison’s seventh-grade teacher has turned the entire class against Pete by 
accusing Pete’s dad of being a communist. Pete begins to believe there may be 
something to the accusation when he’s tailed by an FBI agent who tries to bully 
the boy into spilling information about his family. At first Pete attempts to solve 
the mystery by himself, à la the fictional gumshoes he idolizes, but the pressure 
forces him to confront his father, who confides a far more complex personal history 
than Pete ever suspected and keeps a couple of family secrets locked away to the 
very end. As the mystery unspools, it proves to be less about Dad’s past communist 
affiliation, which he admits, and more about the source of the information leaks 
to the FBI. When friends peel off and Pete becomes increasingly isolated, he also 
becomes more willing to take risks to resolve the family crisis, even though suspects 
are uncomfortably close to home. Avi introduces themes that haven’t yet found 
their way into many children’s novels about the McCarthyite 1950s—the plight of 
one-time idealists who had long since abandoned their hopes for communism, and 
of those who had sought work abroad, even in the Soviet Union, during the Great 
Depression. This may well evoke speculation over which youthful enthusiasms of 
today could become the adult burdens of tomorrow.  EB
bAir, SheilA The Bullies of Wall Street: This Is How Greedy Adults Messed Up Our 
Economy. Simon, 2015 [272p]
Trade d. ISBN 978-1-4814-0085-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0087-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Among the collateral damage wrought by the Great Recession are those tweens 
and teens whose households suffered loss of income and housing, and whose own 
prospects for secure employment and a prosperous adulthood are not looking too 
rosy. For adolescents in search of answers, Bair offers a simplified and redesigned 
reprise of her best-selling adult work, Bull by the Horns. Part One features fictional 
vignettes of families impacted by the financial meltdown, from home loss through 
shaky mortgages or risky speculation, to academic problems caused by school 
funding cuts and the burden of student loan debt. In Part Two, Bair describes her 
own experiences during the crisis as chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation. Part Three discusses the current state of national financial affairs, 
which Bair considers far from reformed, and how to conduct one’s personal fi-
nances prudently. Bair is top-notch at explaining how the system is built and why 
it breaks down, carefully connecting topics such as ballooning mortgages, securi-
440 • The BulleTin
tization, loan servicing, regulatory bodies, bailouts, and director compensations 
into a coherent whole. The writing is kept lively by Bair’s insider perspective and 
her take-no-prisoners critique of those she deems most culpable for the crisis and 
its handling. The problem here, and it’s an unfortunate but considerable one, is a 
tonal mismatch between the six fictional pieces, simplistically choreographed to 
move from maudlin set-up to optimistic conclusion, and the deft explanations of 
challenging concepts, which speak to an older audience. Teachers and librarians 
recommending this title might suggest culling the main point of each scenario and 
moving briskly along, or better yet, reconsidering each tale in light of the experi-
ences of family, friends, and neighbors.  EB
bAlAk The Stranger; tr. from the French by Alexis Siegel; written and illus. 
by Balak, Michaël Sanlaville, and Bastien Vivès. First Second/Roaring Brook, 
2015 208p (Last Man)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-046-6 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-9
Adrian has been preparing for the annual Games for years, and he’s crushed when 
his assigned partner manages to get sick right before the event. Richard Aldana 
arrives late at the Games, and he’s likely hungover and clearly from another world 
(our own, given his cigarettes, leather jacket, and contemporary slang) rather than 
from the magical medieval realm of the graphic novel’s setting. Adrian doesn’t 
care a whit that Aldana doesn’t belong, because Aldana is also seeking a partner in 
order to compete, and thus magically trained boy Adrian and brutish man Aldana 
team up and eventually become friends. Sharp black, white, and gray illustrations 
work smoothly with the text, often featuring key wordless events that evoke the 
coziness of Adrian’s relationship with his mother or the mostly silent physicality 
of a fight. There are a lot of mysteries here: what is Adrian’s gorgeous mother hid-
ing, who is Aldana and why is he here in this world where magical summons win 
fights instead of his impressive punches, and why does this annual contest even 
exist? Answers are apparently being withheld for the next two volumes, originally 
published in France, because this first novel is all about action. That’s appropriate, 
because neither Adrian nor Aldana are questioners and they are the focus: the rest 
of us just have to wait for more pieces to emerge while they are busy winning.  AS
cApettA, Amy roSe Unmade. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 373p
ISBN 978-0-544-08737-8 $17.99  
R Gr. 9-12
Cadence emerged from her last confrontation with the Unmakers (in Entangled, 
BCCB 1/14) permanently separated from her particle-entangled twin, Xan, and 
happy to hide for a while. When the Unmakers unleash a series of attacks that leave 
the human race on the brink of extinction, though, Cade decides the time has come 
to stop running and lead the quest for their survival. With the help of her ragtag 
crew of friends, she gathers remaining survivors from disparate corners of the uni-
verse and searches for a new planet where humanity can thrive. But the Unmakers 
are closing in, a fledgling romance with ship captain Rennik is complicating the 
mission, and an unexpected psychic connection to the lost Xan has Cade slipping 
in and out of consciousness. Readers who followed Cade and company on their 
first adventure will be happy to continue the cross-galaxy trip in this strong sequel. 
The primary draw of the first title—the engaging, imaginatively drawn spaceship 
crew—develops here into the series’ core strength. It’s still Cade’s story, but her 
emotional connection to the taciturn Rennik, the lively Ayumi, the battle-hardened 
May 2015 • 441
Lee, and their living spaceship Renna draws readers fully into the narrative and 
makes them feel like part of the team. The space-adventure storyline continues to 
surprise, and the tension never lets up, making the novel a real page-turner. Sci-
ence fiction elements take on a pseudo-magical quality, especially as Cade’s musical 
talents develop the power to bring life back to entire planets; the dimension is well 
executed and it adds flair. The novel’s end finds most of the crew safely ensconced 
in a new planet home but leaves room for likely sequels.  AM 
cArey, JAnet lee In the Time of Dragon Moon. Dawson/Penguin, 2015 [480p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3810-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Carey revisits the blended world of dragon fantasy and medieval fiction she cre-
ated in Dragonswood (BCCB 2/12) and Dragon’s Keep (BCCB 5/07), this time 
focusing on the troubles of teenaged Uma, a half-English, half-Euit girl who finds 
herself fighting a mad queen to save the tribe that ostracized her. Kidnapped by 
English soldiers, Uma is forced into servitude along with her healer father to treat 
the ruling Pendragon queen’s infertility and bouts of hallucinations. Failure means 
death for Uma and the remaining Euits, and the murder of the queen’s only son 
adds urgency to the matter. Now Uma is caught up treating the queen, solving the 
mystery of the prince’s untimely death, and negotiating a romance with Jackrun, 
the nephew of the queen and the heir apparent. Though the reading experience 
is enhanced by knowledge of the previous books, Uma’s story stands alone, and 
Carey’s careful world-building is both elegant and immersive. The plot, unfortu-
nately, lacks the same finesse, suffering from an overabundance of conflicts (the 
queen, the murder, not to mention Jackrun’s dragon problems) and a debilitating 
lack of action. Still, the mix of fantasy and historical fiction may satisfy fans of the 
previous books, and the budding relationship between Uma and Jackrun will snag 
a few romance readers as well. A fascinating author’s note on tribal and medieval 
medicine is included.  KQG
cAStellucci, cecil Stone in the Sky. Roaring Brook, 2015 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-776-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-626-72151-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
For years, residents of space station Yertina Feray, including young Tula Bane (in-
troduced in Tin Star, BCCB 3/14), have eked out a meager existence away from 
the interference of Intergalactic Imperium forces. Now a precious resource has 
been discovered on the desolate planet nearby, and the dream of wealth has drawn 
a rush of aliens to their formerly quiet part of the galaxy. With them come two 
surprises for Tula: Reza, the former lover she betrayed, and Brother Blue, a deadly 
enemy now backed by the power of the Imperium. No longer safe, Tula flees her 
home and the new alien love she’s found there to ship-hop in search of shelter and 
possible allies. When she saves a ship full of humans bound for death on an isolated 
planet, though, she unexpectedly becomes a leader, and her path takes an unlikely 
turn back to Yertina Feray. An exciting and compelling read, this sequel builds on 
Tin Star’s solid foundation, with its blend of space adventure and coming-of-age 
narrative. Expanding the story beyond the space station walls allows the spunky Tula 
to continue her growth from self-sufficient loner to reluctant friend to community 
leader, and her romantic foibles give the novel a more grownup edge. A previous 
442 • The BulleTin
subplot takes center stage, and there’s a stronger emphasis on plot-driven danger 
and intrigue, but it’s never at the expense of the novel’s emotional core. Readers 
who enjoyed the imaginatively crafted aliens of the previous novel will be pleased 
to see favorites return and new faces join the cast, while those new to the series will 
find enough backstory and context clues to follow along.  AM 
clArk, JAy Finding Mr. Brightside. Ottaviano/Holt, 2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9257-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Abram and Juliette live just down the street from each other. A year ago, a car 
accident rocked their lives, as it killed Abram’s father and Juliette’s mother—and 
revealed their affair. Since then, Abram has been watching over Juliette, spurred 
by his remarkably generous and well-adjusted mother to make sure she is doing 
okay. She’s not: she has begun to abuse the Adderall her high-powered mother had 
her try. It’s tough when your mom introduces you to her drug of choice, but even 
tougher to deal with that along with betrayal and grief. Against all of her willpower, 
anger, and better judgment, Juliette is drawn toward Abram, whose quiet persis-
tence turns out to be just what she needs to find a path forward. This is romance 
done right, with a slow bloom that fights its way through legitimate resistance with 
patience and forgiveness toward resilience. Readers get a balanced look at what’s 
happening through chapters that alternate viewpoint between the protagonists, so 
that they understand that both Abram and Juliette bring not only their need but 
also a different kind of help into the relationship. Juliette is committed to getting 
Abram off Paxil and back to the tennis courts he left behind when his father died, 
and Abram provides a consistent, often silent presence that allows Juliette to learn 
to trust herself at her own pace. Their respect for each other’s pain and their per-
sonality differences—her constant self-doubting critique and his old-style loyalty, 
good humor, and gentleness—make them safe complements. Readers who want 
some old-fashioned sweetness in the midst of a smart, contemporary romance will 
find it here.  KC
coAt, JAnik Rhymoceros; written and illus. by Janik Coat. Abrams Appleseed, 
2015 36p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1514-3 $15.95  
R 2-5 yrs
Who better to introduce young children to the rudiments of poetry than a blue, 
bulky, two-horned, three-toed ungulate? Not that Coat’s rhino actually does much 
introducing; he mainly poses at the epicenter of activity and lets rhyming happen 
around him, occasionally lifting an arm (well, he is a cartoon figure, after all) to 
hold an object, registering an emotion, or performing a subtle action that doesn’t 
seem to require much effort on his part. He indicates “grumpy” with a squiggle on 
his black line mouth and an irritated tilt to the brows over his dot eyes; he dem-
onstrates “bumpy” by sporting a white hide with textured blue dots. “Furry” has 
a strokable swath of fabric inserted behind his die-cut silhouette, while his form 
loses its crisp definition on the facing page, “blurry.” Several pairs go beyond simple 
rhyme to clever juxtaposition: “tired” rhino is tucked into bed, without shifting 
from his unvarying profile position; “wired” rhino is wide-eyed from too much of 
the candy littered around him—certainly a term that listeners have heard applied 
to themselves when they reach the end of the parental rope. Preschoolers who were 
tickled by Hippo’s similarly understated performance in Hippopposites (BCCB 6/12) 
May 2015 • 443
will be equally delighted with Coat’s latest offering, and they might prepare their 
own rhymed tributes for September 22, World Rhino Day.  EB
coloSSAl, eric Rutabaga: The Adventure Chef; written and illus. by Eric Colos-
sal. Amulet/Abrams, 2015 127p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-1380-4 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-1597-6 $9.95  
R Gr. 3-5
Rutabaga is a chef on a mission – he’s tired of ordinary fare and has embarked on 
a quest to find the most adventurous ingredients he can. Rutabaga joins company 
with various groups in this graphic novel, flitting from heroic wannabe dragon 
slayers to a cranky cook who needs to shake up his kitchen, all in the pursuit of 
honing his craft. Our culinary-minded protagonist is kind and generous if a bit 
prone to melodrama, and he is surrounded by a mix of clever, obstreperous, and 
often memorable characters who all nudge Rutabaga toward seeing things beyond 
his own portable kitchen. The graphic-novel format works well here, pairing vivid 
retro-toned illustrations with a mostly cheerful, bouncy narration. Rutabaga’s 
huge eyes capture his range of emotions, and his animated cooking pot somehow 
manages to be rather expressive, despite a complete lack of facial features. While 
the medieval setting isn’t used to much effect, it adds a framework of setting for 
the Vikings, taverns, and kingly legends that pop up in the book. Since the recipes 
sprinkled throughout the book all look delicious but use at least one fictional 
ingredient, future chefs will be well pleased that there are a few real recipes at the 
end of the book.  AS
eAglAnd, JAne The World Within: A Novel of Emily Brontë. Levine/Scholastic, 
2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-49295-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-49317-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Not much is known about Emily Brontë, which gives Eagland relatively free rein 
in imagining the inner world of the reclusive writer in this fictional treatment. 
The Emily readers meet here is a nearly dysfunctional introvert who is fiercely 
devoted to her family and happy to lose herself in the world she and her brother 
and sisters create in their ongoing stories. Even here, though, she is stung by older 
siblings Charlotte’s and Branwell’s dismissal of her ideas and plot lines, and she 
begins to keep them to herself. She worries about her father’s health, chafes under 
her aunt’s insistence that she develop more womanly virtues and occupations, and 
feels betrayed when Charlotte willingly goes away to school; even knowing about 
their family’s money problems and the need for Charlotte to make a living, Emily 
can’t understand why anyone would want to leave their isolated home. While her 
circumstances and problems may seem tame to some contemporary readers, her 
emotional distress will resonate with teens who also live inside their heads, analyz-
ing every event for its potential to threaten their precariously built sense of self. 
Eagland’s leisurely, measured prose ably captures the pace of the Brontës’ rural life 
while highlighting the tempests of Emily’s inner world, and the scenes of Emily’s 
thrilled response to rough weather on the moors offer the perfect foreshadowing to 
the writer she will become. Readers attracted to the in-depth portrayals of female 
characters in family dramas such as Jane Austen’s novels and Downton Abbey will 
enjoy this. KC 
444 • The BulleTin
eASton, t. S. Boys Don’t Knit. Feiwel, 2015 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-250-05331-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
Ben Fletcher needs better friends, or so he thinks when his ne’er-do-well crew 
persuades him to take part in an elaborate plan to steal liquor from the local su-
permarket. He is the only one caught, and the conditions of his probation require 
that he take a class, keep a journal, and give back to the community. Thinking he is 
signing up for a knitting class taught by his sexy English teacher, he is only mildly 
dismayed to discover it’s taught by the equally sexy mother of a girl he likes, but 
he is completely surprised by the fact that he likes knitting and is quite good at it. 
So good, in fact, that he enters a regional knitting competition, wins, and finds 
himself representing his county at the All-UK Knitting Championship. Which is 
great, except that he has been hiding his not-very-manly hobby from his father, 
his friends, and the school bullies. It turns out, though, that his goofy friends are 
exactly the ones he needs when the bullies try to derail the knitting competition, 
and pandemonium ensues. Hilarious in both plotting and style, this proves that girls 
don’t have the lock on the funny British diary genre. Ben’s writing is laced with the 
kind of jokes boys tell about real or imagined male and female anatomy; even while 
he feigns disgust, no sausage or plumbing problem is safe from a double entendre, 
and included excerpts from his friend’s parody, entitled Fifty Shades of Graham, are 
as funny as they are risqué. Still, it’s all talk, and Ben isn’t just a jokey guy but an 
appealing worrywart who can’t seem to avoid coming out on top despite his best 
efforts to dig himself into ever deepening holes. Readers up for a silly, light-hearted 
romp will find themselves in stitches over this one.  KC 
engle, mArgAritA Drum Dream Girl: How One Girl’s Courage Changed Music; 
illus. by Rafael López. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 42p
ISBN 978-0-544-10229-3 $16.99  
R 4-8 yrs
“On an island of music/ in a city of drumbeats/ the drum dream girl/ dreamed.” 
The unnamed island is Cuba, and the unnamed girl, as explained in an historical 
note, is real-life musician Millo Castro Zaldarriaga. The dream is her desire to play 
the conga drums, bongo drums, and “moon bright timbales,” a privilege reserved 
for boys and men in 1920s Cuba. Her older sisters form an all-girl dance band 
and invite her to play, but her father forbids it. He does, however, agree to put the 
final decision in the hands of a percussion teacher, who recognizes the girl’s talent 
and guides her to public performance. Engle’s free-verse poem leaves Millo playing 
bongos for moonlit dancers, with the somewhat didactic commentary that “girls 
should always/ be allowed to play/ drums/ and both girls and boys/ should feel 
free/ to dream.” (A closing note adds that Millo eventually performed for President 
Theodore Roosevelt in 1932.) López’s acrylic paintings, with textured, knife-edged 
shapes layered onto dappled backdrops reminiscent of murals, are vivid and lush, 
offering symbolic imagery that is challenging yet accessible to children who are just 
beginning to figure out visual language. Even without the specifics offered in the 
closing note, young viewers will be able to reflect on the meaning of the winged 
drum in a bird cage, the father lassoing his girl down from the clouds with slender 
ribbons, the identity of the straw-hatted man who sits with his sketchpad on a cloud, 
observing Millo play her bongos. With its emphasis on artistry and visual metaphor, 
this title bears a strong kinship with Yuyi Morales’ Viva Frida (BCCB 12/14), but 
it also brings an accessibility that young viewers (and teachers) will appreciate.  EB
May 2015 • 445
FiSher, cAtherine The Door in the Moon. Dial, 2015 [352p] (Obsidian 
Mirror)
ISBN 978-0-8037-3971-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-12
Having just escaped bombing raids of 1940s London and the clutches of the fairy 
queen Summer (in The Slanted Worlds, BCCB 4/14), teens Jake and Sarah find 
themselves in danger once again, as an old friend drags them through the obsidian 
mirror into the heart of the French Revolution’s Reign of Terror. Now changeling 
Gideon must find a way to shake Oberon Venn from a fey-induced stupor to save 
them, while Piers rescues the trapped Wharton from the labyrinthine Summerland. 
Meanwhile, the deeply scarred Maskelyne and his devoted assistant Rebecca struggle 
to defend Wintercombe Abbey from the encroaching faerie woods and the growing 
power of Janus, who lurks behind the mirror’s dark surface. The group soon find 
their disparate adventures overlapping, as common enemies and unexpected allies 
draw everyone into the opulent courts of Paris and the shadow of Madame Guil-
lotine, where they must put aside dislike and distrust if they hope to find a way 
home. All the inventiveness and well-plotted action of the previous two novels are 
on display in this exciting sequel. The rollercoaster adventure at the heart of this 
genre-blending fantasy hits perilous new heights, and Fisher continues to shake 
up the narrative by giving the characters new partnerships to forge and bringing 
everyone together to face down a danger as a team. Interwoven backstories, long-
held secrets, and personal quests return to divide them, though, setting up conflicts 
for expected sequels. References to previous adventures, including the reappearance 
of a few secondary characters, make knowledge of earlier books a must, but readers 
familiar with the series’ dark and twisted worlds will find themselves right at home 
and eager to follow the cast into further adventures.  AM
gAlAnte, ceciliA Be Not Afraid. Random House, 2015 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37275-6 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37274-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37277-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Since her mother’s suicide, Marin has been able to see pain as colorful masses lurk-
ing beneath the skin of the people around her, but whether that ability is a gift or a 
curse is unclear to her. What is clear is that she doesn’t want to get involved when 
Cassie, a girl with whom she has a troubled history, has a seizure during Mass at 
her Catholic school. Cassie has implicated Marin, however, by calling for her in 
the midst of her increasingly violent episodes, and Cassie’s brother, Dominic, is 
begging Marin to help him figure out what is wrong with his sister. Marin’s crush 
on Dominic makes it hard for her to refuse, and the two of them finally admit 
what the adults can’t come to terms with—that Cassie has a demon inside her that 
requires an exorcism. While the theology is a bit muddled, the process of casting 
out the demon, as well as the steps leading up to it, are full of the kinds of details 
that make these stories so popular. Crushing fear, grotesque distortions of the body, 
exposure of secrets, physical and verbal violence, occult belief, and faith in some-
thing more powerful than evil weave in and out of Marin’s story, with the ultimate 
result that Marin forgives herself for not being able to save her mother from her 
less sinister, more metaphorical demons. In learning her limits, Marin also learns 
446 • The BulleTin
what she is capable of and responsible for, which, when added to some weighty 
subplots, moves this story beyond its focus on demon possession.  KC 
gemeinhArt, dAn The Honest Truth. Scholastic, 2015 229p
ISBN 978-0-545-66573-5 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Mark’s twelve, and he’s running away from home. He’s being clever about it, cover-
ing his tracks to disguise his Seattle destination, and hiding his beloved dog, Beau, 
in his duffle bag. However, a twelve-year-old on his own is still vulnerable, and 
Mark’s more vulnerable than most: he’s a longtime cancer patient whose disease has 
returned, and his real goal is to climb Mount Rainier for his late grandfather—and 
possibly die trying. Mark’s accessible narration is spare and determined, and pure 
momentum drives the story. Unfortunately, there’s considerable contrivance in 
his adventures and, sometimes, the characters, which occasionally tips into the 
ludicrous; additionally, interposed chapters in third-person narration, focalized 
through Mark’s best friend, Jess, are labored and mawkish, detracting from the 
drive of Mark’s journey. That being said, this is the sort of effective cheesiness that 
live-action Disney thrived on for years, and many elementary-schoolers not yet 
ready for Hatchet (BCCB 12/87) will be on the edge of their seats for a readaloud 
or flipping the pages swiftly to find out what happens to Mark—and, more im-
portantly, his dog.  DS
george, kAllie Clover’s Luck; illus. by Alexandra Boiger. Disney Hyperion, 
2015 [144p] (Magical Animal Adoption Agency)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8382-2 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-0120-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Young Clover has had a series of pet misfortunes that convince her she is, despite 
her name, patently unlucky. When she enters the mysterious Woods to recover her 
missing bird, she instead discovers the Magical Animal Adoption Agency and ends 
up a volunteer, assisting the gnome-like Mr. Jams with such critters as a toad with 
color-changing warts, fairy horses, unicorns, and a dragon. When an emergency 
calls Mr. Jams away and Clover finds herself in charge, she is tricked by a witch, 
who then captures Clover, as she needs the blood of an unlucky child for a spell. 
The spell backfires, however, because Clover is not unlucky after all, and the girl 
manages to get back to the agency just in time to clean it all up for Mr. Jams’ return. 
This is the first title in a series, and the setup and plot are unfortunately contrived 
and unconvincing; besides the “unlucky” gimmick, Clover herself is a fairly generic 
character, as are her parents and Mr. Jams. What will interest kids, though, are the 
animals at the agency (the tiny fairy horses are utterly delightful) and the familiar but 
still engaging premise of a magical world existing alongside the real one. There’s also 
some genuine amusement in the idea of spoiled princesses coveting and then casting 
off unicorns, and savvy kids will draw their own parallels with real animals in real 
shelters. Frequent and slightly fanciful monochromatic art helps bring the text to 
life and adds to the magical atmosphere. Pearce and Stiefvater’s Pip Bartlett’s Guide 
to Magical Creatures (reviewed below) is a better book about caring for fantastical 
animals, but those who enjoy that title may want to give Clover a try as well.  JH
May 2015 • 447
goldStone, bruce I See a Pattern Here; written and illus. with photographs by 
Bruce Goldstone. Holt, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9209-7 $17.99  
R 4-8 yrs
This attractively photoillustrated title introduces primary-graders to the way design 
elements are manipulated to create various kinds of patterns and to the correct 
mathematical terminology for these transformations. Goldstone quickly draws 
his audience into the subject with a double-page spread of eight strands of beads, 
with a dangling thread and a selection of possible beads clustered on the end, and 
the invitation to determine “which bead keeps the pattern going.” Subsequent 
spreads demonstrate transformations and concepts: translation, rotation, 180-de-
gree turn, reflection, symmetry, scaling, and tessellation, as well as the effects of 
stretching and squashing elements, and fiddling with color. Goldstone wraps it up 
with another pair of activities—identifying transformations in an intricate mosaic 
and using Lego-style blocks, stamps, and paper-cutting to create original patterns. 
With crisply reproduced pictures of animals, household objects, architecture, and 
global arts and crafts (many captioned) that are as beautiful as they are effective, 
this successful math lesson doubles as an aesthetic pleasure.  EB 
grAvel, eliSe Head Lice; written and illus. by Elise Gravel. Tundra, 
2015 32p (Disgusting Critters)
ISBN 978-1-77049-661-3 $10.99  
R Gr. 2-3
  The Spider; written and illus. by Elise Gravel. Tundra, 2015 32p (Dis-
gusting Critters)
ISBN 978-1-77049-664-4 $10.99  
R Gr. 2-3
Gravel continues her Disgusting Critters series (see The Worm and The Fly, BCCB 
5/14,) with these two entries, one focused on the spider and the other on every 
parent’s worst nightmare, head lice. The entertaining formula established in previ-
ous titles—presenting absorbing facts in the main text while the animal in question 
delivers sassy and amusing asides in the art—continues here. The red and black 
fanged head louse is jocosely cheery for a parasite, and the factual info (“The head 
louse’s body is slightly transparent, so we can see inside his tummy”) is effectively 
punctuated by the accompanying illustrations (“Oh, so THAT’s where I put the car 
keys,” he exclaims, the silhouette of said keys faintly visible in his abdomen). The 
black, oblong, spindly-legged spider is equally charming, although her identification 
as female is somewhat disconcertingly highlighted by stereotypical interests such 
as “princess shoes” (for her multiple feet), “eye shadow” (for her multiple eyes), 
and “purses” (as in the silk case in which she carries her eggs). Thankfully, other 
depictions amusingly present her in a more balanced light, such as her portrayal as 
a cowgirl (lassoing her prey) or a superhero (rescuing humans from mosquitoes). 
Supplemental information may be desirable for some points, but the books are still 
solidly entertaining and funny, and the limited palettes (red, black, and turquoise 
for the head lice, and hot pink, chartreuse, and black for the spider) and wide-eyed, 
comical critters are attractive and inviting (well, as inviting as a head louse can be). 
Few nonfiction easy readers impart their information with such gleeful enthusiasm 
and kid appeal, and for that Gravel is to be commended.  JH
448 • The BulleTin
gregorio, i. w. None of the Above. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2015 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233531-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233533-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Kristin is content being a cross-country running star, the beloved girlfriend of a 
nice boy, and her dad’s support after her mother died of cancer. When she tries to 
have sex for the first time, however, the disastrous attempt leads to a life-changing 
diagnosis: Kristin has androgen insensitivity syndrome. Before she can even truly 
process what being intersex means, her father is panicking because there is a slight 
risk of cancer, her boyfriend has rejected her in a very ugly, public way (and many 
of her peers have rejected her anonymously online), and she has scheduled surgery 
to have a gonadectomy, wanting her male sex organs out of her body immediately 
in spite of her doctor’s recommendation that she wait and do more research first. It 
is effective to have the instructional portions filtered through Kristin’s first-person 
narration, as she is as clueless at first as some readers might be (for example, her first 
thought is that she is now a gay man). The lengthy discussions of intersex politics 
and community and the detailed descriptions of vaginal dilating or hormonal shifts 
may be best suited for those with some sort of personal connection to the topic, but 
they’ll certainly inform readers looking to know more, and Kristin’s struggle with 
her identity is wrenching and authentically conveyed. An author’s note explains 
that this novel is based on a real intersex patient the author met while a surgical 
resident and offers a well-chosen list of additional resources.  AS
grove, tim First Flight Around the World: The Adventures of the American Fliers 
Who Won the Race. Abrams, 2015 88p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-4197-1482-5 $21.95  
R* Gr. 4-8
The United States claimed bragging rights (fairly or unfairly) for the Wright Broth-
ers’ 1903 “first flight” and then promptly lost ground, so to speak, to other nations 
in developing strategic applications for air transportation and travel. In 1924 the 
United States Army Air Service entered into competition with Great Britain, France, 
Italy, Portugal, and Argentina to make the first air circumnavigation of Earth. A 
fleet of four biplanes, each with a pilot and mechanic, took off from Seattle on 
what was hoped to be a four-month adventure, and nearly six months later landed 
victorious in Seattle, missing two of the original planes but, happily, none of the 
crew. Grove recounts the flight, drawing heavily from a journal kept by flier Leslie 
Arnold and from hundreds of photos taken en route. The result is a nonstop true 
action/adventure tale replete with crashes into mountains, mechanical failures over 
oceans, strandings and rescues, heartening incidents of international support and 
cooperation, and nerve-wracking moments of uncertainty fed by political conflict. 
The mission, designed to be a technological feat, quickly became a diplomatic 
success as well, with the weary fliers continually stalled by foreign dignitaries and 
enthusiasts eager to laud the travelers’ undertaking, when they simply wanted to fix 
their planes, beat the competition, and go home. The book design deserves some 
acclaim as well, telling a edge-of-the-seat story in a research-friendly format, with 
well-placed maps (an opening world map sports chapter references), bold-colored 
recaps of such salient information as planes and fliers with photos, and the dates 
and fates of international competitors. A bibliography lists key primary sources, 
May 2015 • 449
endnotes cite quotations from text and sidebars, a glossary covers important avia-
tion terms, and an official itinerary with dates, landings, miles flown, and pontoon/
wheel changes allows readers to track progress against a map. Readers who followed 
Bly and Bisland’s 1890 round-the-world race in Matthew Goodman’s adult book 
Eighty Days will want to see what circumnavigation looked like three decades and 
one world war later.  EB
hAnd, cynthiA The Last Time We Say Goodbye. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2015 386p
ISBN 978-0-06-231847-3 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Since her younger brother killed himself, Alexis has struggled to hold it together; 
she’s starting to think she can see and hear Ty around the house, and she’s not sure 
she cares about going to MIT next year after all. As she uses her therapist-provided 
journal to explore the tragedy, her feelings about it, and subsequent events, she sees 
the ripple effects from Ty’s suicide, but does coming to grips with it mean turning 
her back on Ty? The author writes with polish, and Alexis’ icily focusing her anger 
on her father, who divorced her mother, is a plausible response to unbearable grief. 
However, the story is slow and programmatic, with some elements (Alexis’ romance, 
her delivering her brother’s letter to the girl he loved) more narratively neat than 
poignant, and ultimately the prose’s smoothness ends up distancing the emotion. 
Arcos’ There Will Come a Time (BCCB 6/14) is a more heartfelt and resonant tale 
of sibling loss, but readers may still find Alexis’ journey a moving one.  DS
heAdley, mAriA dAhvAnA Magonia. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232052-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232054-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12 
Aza has grown up knowing that she should have died long ago from her respiratory 
problems and her bizarre anatomy that no one can understand or treat. She’s got 
an amazing family and a best friend who have been unstintingly supportive, but 
it all still sort of sucks, especially when her time seems to have run out. Except it 
hasn’t, because Aza doesn’t die and was never even human; instead, she was the 
savior of the bird people, stuffed into an ill-equipped human skin (and there’s quite 
a dire fate for the human who is then yanked out of that body to make room) to 
keep her safe from political enemies. Aza tries to adjust to her new life, but it’s 
a lot to take in, and some would rather she die before she figures it all out. The 
book switches gears from Aza’s maybe romance with her best bud and razor-sharp 
commentary on outliving her life expectancy to the bird savior story, but it’s an 
intriguing shift: Aza has clearly shaped a great deal of her identity around dying, 
and when she suddenly isn’t, there’s a loss rather than a gain. The sky people’s world 
is a little underdeveloped, but it remains a shadowy, sort of cool setting to which 
Aza reacts. The sweeping, lyrical language in both parts of the book is captivating, 
with haunting scenes woven from carefully chosen, sharply evocative descriptions. 
Give this to fantasy fans, who will appreciate the real-world parts and readily adjust 
when the multicolored bird people appear.  AS
450 • The BulleTin
heAly, nick, ed. Love & Profanity: A Collection of True, Tortured, Wild, Hilarious, 
Concise, and Intense Tales of Teenage Life; ed. by Nick Healy, with Kristen Mohn, 
Nate LeBoutillier and Lindsy O’Brien. Switch, 2015 [232p]
ISBN 978-1-63079-012-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Forty-three authors of children’s and YA fiction, including such heavy hitters as Pete 
Hautman, Adam Rex, Jon Scieszka, and Will Weaver as well as promising newcom-
ers such as Kwame Alexander and Carrie Mesrobian, share brief autobiographical 
accounts of their own adolescence here. Moments of exhilaration and humiliation, 
narrow escapes, and epiphanies that opened their eyes and ended their childhoods 
are all given the significance of hindsight. While some entries achieve a full nar-
rative arc, complete with thematic closure, others read more like small moments 
that got stuck in the writer’s memory relatively unprocessed. While one describes 
in frank detail a first sexual encounter and a few f-bombs are dropped into Haut-
man’s piece, this is somewhat milder than readers might expect from the title; the 
authors, perhaps because they are working with true stories from their own pasts, 
show admirable restraint and reveal not how edgy but how nerdy and ordinary 
many YA authors were as teens. Sure to give hope to aspiring writers, then, this 
collection offers models for how ordinary moments turn into stories, and ordinary 
kids turn into storytellers.  KC 
hoFFmAn, Alice Nightbird. Lamb/Random House, 2015 197p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38959-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38958-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38960-0 $10.99  
R Gr. 5-7 
Twelve-year old Twig has learned not to draw too much attention to herself, not 
to make friends, and to mostly stay home with her mother and older brother, 
James, in order to guard the family secret: because of a witch’s curse, James has 
wings. At the same time, town residents believe they have a resident monster, one 
that snatches items from people’s homes and paints grotesque signs protesting the 
razing of the local woods; while James has nothing to do with this, his family fears 
the rising furor may spark a monster hunt and reveal James’s existence. When 
descendants of the witch who cursed the family move in next door, Twig begins a 
clandestine friendship with the younger sister, while her brother falls in love with 
the older, pushing the foursome to find a way to undo the curse. Spare, evocative 
prose makes Twig’s loneliness palpable, and the savvy revelation of details will have 
readers gasping. Hoffman’s characterizations are particularly well done, from the 
waitress at the local diner to the town librarian, and Twig herself is keenly sympa-
thetic, with an honest but understated narrative voice that belies much pain and 
confusion. The tone is wonderfully haunting, with mystery, magic, heartache, and 
hope bound together so charmingly that the convenience of the plot points and 
pat statements are quickly forgiven. Even the joyous ending maintains the subtly 
eerie mood, leaving it easy to imagine an adult novel about an adult Twig not too 
far in the future. An excellent entry into Hoffman’s world of magical realism, this 
is one for kids who need hope, magic, or a little of both.  AA
May 2015 • 451
JAneczko, pAul, b., comp. The Death of the Hat: A Brief History of Poetry in 50 
Objects; illus. by Chris Raschka. Candlewick, 2015 77p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6963-8 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 5-9
The poetic pairing of Janeczko and Raschka follow up on their previous titles (A 
Foot in the Mouth, BCCB 2/09, etc.) with this new compilation. As the title sug-
gests, it’s a trip through poetic history, divided into nine eras stretching from 400 
C.e. to now, through verses focused on objects rather than on abstract concepts. 
There’s a generous diversity of nationalities prior to 1600, though entries are almost 
entirely Anglophone verse after that; it’s also an interesting mixture of old-fashioned 
tastes (there’s a definite tilt toward poetically elaborate language) and contemporary 
sensibility. Some of the poems stretch the meaning of “object” (the letter “E,” the 
evening), but others (Colman mac Lenini’s “In Praise of a Sword Given Him by 
His Prince,” Sylvia Plath’s “Mushrooms”) demonstrate how beautiful a concrete 
subject can be. Ultimately, the book isn’t entirely successful as a history or as a cur-
ricular tool, since there’s no contextual information even indicating what country 
or what year each poem was written let alone helping with additional context; that’s 
particularly a deficit in the entries written in archaic language, which could benefit 
from some framing encouragement and information to get many readers interested. 
Though the art skews the look younger than the poems, Raschka’s freewheeling 
watercolors are uplifting partners to the verse, offering moody vignettes and lively 
interpretations and keeping the spreads bright and airy; sharp-eyed readers will note 
that the “Solitary Wildgoose” of the third poem soars his way through the rest of 
the book. A detailed introduction explains the selection choices, the poetic changes 
over time, and the named eras (which are also noted on the upper left corner of 
each spread). Despite the book’s flaws, classrooms may find this a boon when it 
comes to introducing older poetry, and audiences introduced curricularly could 
be enticed to flip through and continue reading on their own. A table of contents 
is included, but no index or additional information on the poets or poems.  DS
Juby, SuSAn The Truth Commission; illus. by Trevor Cooper. Viking, 
2015 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-451-46877-2 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
In her Special Spring Project for junior year at her artsy high school, Normandy Pale 
writes the highly digressive, much-footnoted account of the Truth Commission, the 
initiative she and her two best friends, Dusk and Neil, embarked on to ask people 
about difficult and perhaps hidden truths. Normandy soon suspects their work is 
really disguised nosiness, though, and she’s starting to think about the truths she 
and her friends are hiding; she’s particularly concerned with her gifted older sister, 
Keira, who has abruptly left art college and hidden herself in her room but won’t 
tell anyone why. Juby (author of Another Kind of Cowboy, BCCB 12/07) writes with 
her usual robust breeziness, and she adds a layer of overthinking and self-analysis, 
which plays out especially in the dialogue between the footnotes and the main text, 
that’s perfect for the oversmart teen narrator. Underneath that breeziness, though, 
is Normandy’s well-trained familial tendency toward enabling and tiptoeing around 
her quixotic older sister the prodigy (“If you rock the boat in a fragile family, 
the concern is that everyone will drown”). While some of the truths Normandy 
uncovers when she turns the lens on herself and her friends aren’t hugely startling 
452 • The BulleTin
(she like likes Neil, who returns the emotion), there’s a shocking development in 
Keira’s story, and the result is genuine transformation for Normandy of her view 
of her family and herself. There’s a lot of hard-won wisdom under the energetic 
humor here, and it’s a pleasure to see Normandy finally come into herself and trust 
her own truth. Normandy’s vigorous sketches add liveliness to the margins.  DS
kephArt, beth One Thing Stolen. Chronicle, 2015 [280p]
ISBN 978-1-4521-2831-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
“My job is to help my father think in Florence. Nobody has to tell me that I’m 
failing.” So says seventeen-year-old Nadia, who’s seeking desperately to anchor 
herself in the beautiful Italian town by stealing things and then weaving them into 
secret and exquisite nests. She can’t marshal her words to tell her parents—or her 
beloved best friend, Maggie, left behind in Philadelphia—about her distress, but 
she does catch the eye of Benedetto, a handsome young Florentine who has his 
own case of sticky fingers and who has noticed Nadia’s hobby. But nobody else 
has seen Benedetto, so is he just something Nadia’s increasingly disordered mind 
has created? Kephart writes with exquisite loveliness and delicacy, creating Flor-
ence as a luscious fairyland with a mournful past (the flood of 1966 provides both 
subtheme and running image); the book is as much a love letter to a city as it is a 
story. Nadia’s narration makes it clear she’s distressed but avoids pinpointing her 
problem, so it’s surprising but believable when it turns out there’s an uncommon 
neurological disorder behind both her anguish and her artistry. The book takes 
the usual situation of knowing more about the narrator than the other characters 
do and makes it into a key irony, since Nadia’s growing aphasia means she’s unable 
to convey her problem—or even that she has one—while readers see the richness 
of her memories and the vividness of her current experience. While it’s not clear 
what the outcome will be for Nadia, readers will be heartened by the determined 
swinging into action of the ever-loyal Maggie to find Nadia’s mysterious boy and 
support her friend in every possible way.  DS
knowleS, Jo Read Between the Lines. Candlewick, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6387-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7421-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Ten people, living in the same town, each experience a situation involving the use 
of the middle finger on the same day. The stories are told separately, though many 
of them are connected; bullied, unathletic Nate, for instance, has his middle finger 
broken in gym class, and later uses it to intentionally/unintentionally flip off all of 
the kids in class who make fun of Ms. Lindsay, the new teacher whose story closes 
the collection. Pretty, popular Claire, who has decided that the conversations she 
has with her pretty, popular friends are utterly vapid, skips school in order to have 
some time to herself and ends up getting flipped off by a homeless woman who 
gives Claire her hungry dog. Lacy, a chubby girl who gives up her gay best friend 
after the cheerleaders notice her, experiences unwanted touching by the basketball 
star’s lecherous finger, but she’s also troubled by finding out that both new friends 
and old, straight and gay, are just using her to get to her good-looking brother. The 
stories are all skillfully written, though some are more interesting than others, but 
May 2015 • 453
as a group they fail to live up to more than the sum of their parts; the final story, 
which focuses entirely on the new teacher’s memories of lost youth, her disappoint-
ment with her students, and a boot-strapping resolve to try to make things better, 
ends the collection with a fizzle. However, the different motivations behind giving 
people and life circumstances the finger, and the various emotional recovery efforts 
of people on the receiving end of the gesture, may cause readers to think twice 
about the sentiment behind that sign.  KC 
knudSen, michelle Marilyn’s Monster; illus. by Matt Phelan. Candlewick, 
2015 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6011-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs 
“Some of the kids in Marilyn’s class had monsters. It was the latest thing.” But 
monsters, in young Marilyn’s world, can’t be bought or sought out—kids must wait 
until their monster finds them, and Marilyn’s is a long time coming. She therefore 
spiritedly decides to go looking for it, and after much searching she does in fact 
find her monster (it got lost and its wings got it stuck in a tree), to the relief and 
delight of both the monster and Marilyn. This is an intriguing and offbeat story, 
and Knudsen’s matter-of-fact narration effectively draws readers into the situation, 
while subtly engaging kids at their emotional core—who hasn’t felt left out of a 
group, or lonely at night? Who doesn’t want to be chosen and acknowledged by 
someone special? Marilyn’s determination and proactive response to her monsterless 
state also provide children with a useful, non-preachy model. Phelan’s soft-edged 
watercolor and pencil art and his rendering of the monsters as mostly nonthreaten-
ing, friendly beasts keep their actions comforting rather than creepy. Dark-haired 
Marilyn is a physically expressive figure in her longing, frustration, and, finally, 
joyfulness, and her gentle-faced, shaggy green monster with golden wings and horns 
is clearly a perfect match for her in both size and temperament. This would make 
a thoughtful complement to Santat’s The Adventures of Beekle (BCCB 6/14) or an 
imaginative prompt for a creative writing or art project; it could also inspire some 
interesting group discussion.  JH
krumwiede, lAnA Just Itzy; illus. by Greg Pizzoli. Candlewick, 2015 34p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5811-3 $15.99  
R 5-7 yrs
Young spider Itzy Bitzy is looking forward to his first day of “spindergarten,” but 
he’s unsuccessful at spinning class, scaring a girl on a tuffet and getting temporarily 
consumed by an old lady. He ditches his third spinning attempt in order to climb 
up a waterspout in response to cries for help, finding his big brother, Gutzy, is afraid 
to climb back down the tall spout. Itzy shows him the way down the web-ladders 
he has spun, and the pair safely descends, where Itzy discovers another reason to 
be proud: his third web attempt has actually netted him two flies. Krumwiede 
spins a solid and entertaining backstory for the itsy bitsy protagonist, and the 
book cleverly and humorously incorporates various spider-themed nursery songs/
rhymes (“Crikey crickets! The old lady swallowed the fly! Itzy didn’t know why 
she swallowed the fly”). Kids will be tickled by the rhyme/song connections and 
by some of the specifics of Itzy’s world. Greens, golds, and robin’s egg tones feature 
prominently in Pizzoli’s sunny illustrations (rendered with pencil, India ink, Plaka 
paint, and Photoshop), and slightly fuzzy edges give a casual, childlike look to the 
454 • The BulleTin
art. The endearing, bespectacled Itzy sports a red ball cap and wears black sneakers 
on two of his eight legs (the other six are used as arms), and he and the rest of the 
spider characters are more adorable than alarming. Pair this with Cronin’s Diary of 
a Spider (BCCB 10/05), share it as a light-hearted addition to a bug-themed unit, 
or use it as a springboard to a nursery rhyme–themed creative writing project.  JH
lAng, heAther The Original Cowgirl: The Wild Adventures of Lucille Mulhall; 
illus. by Suzanne Beaky. Whitman, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-2931-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
“Whoosh . . . whoosh . . . snap!” With a flick of her wrist, Lucille Mulhall could 
throw a lasso that would enable her to break a bronco, brand a steer, or capture a 
wolf. A fearless young woman of the 1890s who “didn’t a give a lick about what 
people thought,” Lucille made up for her ninety-pound frame with an indomitable 
spirit, participating in—and winning—professional steer-roping competitions and 
performing on the exhibition circuit, even catching the attention of future president 
Teddy Roosevelt. Lang tells of Lucille’s real-life journey to cowgirl fame in folksy 
prose while Beaky’s accompanying illustrations, as big and bold as Lucille herself 
in their full-page spreads and primary colors, add just the right amount of visual 
humor to this accessible, enjoyable biography. Though the illustrations are flat at 
times, their directness keeps with the spirit of the language and provides plenty of 
big sky for that open prairie feel. The ending is a little rushed, but fortunately an 
informed and informative epilogue (complete with timeline) provides more details 
on this spirited female athlete and how she paved the way for other twentieth-
century women.  AA
loFtin, nikki Wish Girl. Razorbill, 2015 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-686-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 Ad Gr. 4-7 
As his name implies, twelve-year old Peter Stone prefers to remain still and silent, 
responses he developed to cope with bullying at school and chaos at home. When his 
family moves to the Texas countryside, he finds a wildlife area with the tranquility 
he so desires—that is, until Annie appears. A twelve-year-old with cancer (leukemia 
that’s returned after a seeming remission), Annie brings art, verbal dexterity, and 
a sense of much-needed hope into Peter’s life, and their friendship grows as they 
meet in a nearby valley that’s touched with enchantment. Like the author’s Night-
ingale’s Nest (BCCB 4/14), this employs rich, lovely prose that conveys the magic 
and beauty of nature and friendship as a balm to stressful home lives. However, 
it also repurposes that book’s plotline and makes even more overt its problematic 
nature, with once again a young African-American girl, preternaturally gifted and 
deeply fragile, bringing hope and wonder to a sad white boy and then departing 
the worse for wear. Peter’s tormenting is also over the top at times, with the local 
bullies largely clichés. However, his emotional turmoil will strike a chord with many 
sensitive youngsters, and readers will be glad that he finally gains the strength to 
confront his family. Patron’s Higher Power of Lucky (BCCB 9/07) or even Bridge 
to Terabithia are better books about the value of making human connections, but 
readers may find the engaging style and emotional resonance satisfying.  AA
May 2015 • 455
london, JonAthAn Hippos Are Huge!; illus. by Matthew Trueman. Candlewick, 
2015 26p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6592-0 $16.99  
R* 4-8 yrs
This new entry in Candlewick’s venerable picture-book biology series brings a fresh 
and playful vigor to its subject. London’s cheerful large-print text outlines some 
basic hippopotamus facts with exclamatory relish (“Watch out! Hippo’s ‘yawn’ is 
a threat! It means Stay Away!”) while smaller-print paragraphs dig a little deeper. 
The prose here has particular verve, making the most of the hippo’s kid-appealing 
characteristics, such as poo-flinging and crocodile-savaging, and drawing audiences 
who doze off during gentler iterations of nature study. The mixed-media art ramps 
up the impact: Trueman simultaneously gives his hippos a touch of picture-book 
cuteness in their bulbous and slightly smiling faces and a touch of dinosaur ferocity, 
with lots of open jaws and powerful, crushing tusks. A delicate blend of watercolor 
translucence and grainy textures in gray and pink makes the hippo’s hide a thing 
of beauty, and effective compositions for both violent and peaceful moments build 
the drama. This will make a satisfyingly uncivilized animal story for audiences 
looking to get beyond “Hungry Hungry Hippos.” An index and a small additional 
paragraph about hippos are included.  DS
mAtthewS, owen How to Win at High School. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2015 [528p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233686-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233688-0 $10.99
Reviewed by galleys  
R Gr. 10-12
High school is not going well for Adam. His hockey-god older brother, Sam, got 
body-checked into a wheelchair, his father lost his job, they have to move to a 
crappy little apartment, and Adam has to switch schools. When his stoner best 
friend encourages him in raw teenage boy slang to, um, summon his courage and 
take a risk, Adam develops a profitable homework-for-hire business that gets him 
noticed by the high school royalty. It’s not enough, though; Adam wants to be 
like his hero, Tony Montana from Scarface, so he steps up his game, hiring kids to 
take on more homework, and procuring booze, then fake IDs, sex for himself and 
others, and finally, pills. Each step takes him closer to his goal of ultimate popular-
ity and away from the things that matter; a girl who genuinely likes him and his 
relationship with his brother are collateral damage in his can’t-stop-now tornadic 
spiral into moral nihilism. While Adam’s story simultaneously glorifies and critiques 
the vacuous aspirations of the teenage male, craft is king here: Matthews adopts 
a hipster third-person directorial voice that feels both intimate and detached at 
the same time, as if Adam is watching and commenting on a film of his own life. 
Short, intense chapters, some of which read like poetry, capture snapshots that lend 
a visceral immediacy to the action. Though the book falls a little flat when it comes 
to an emotionally satisfying conclusion, it’s credible that Sam’s comeuppance and 
transformation often are entirely internal, and it’s cynically plausible that the world 
around him remains as immoral as ever.  KC 
456 • The BulleTin
mccArthy, cori Breaking Sky. Sourcebooks Fire, 2015 406p
ISBN 978-1-4926-0141-8 $16.99  
R* Gr.9-12
As the most talented teen pilot in the United Star Academy, Chase “Nyx” Harcourt 
feels right at home screeching across the sky at Mach 3 in her Streaker fighter jet. 
On the ground, though, she’s completely lost, a rebel loner who masks a painful 
past with an irreverent attitude and a series of meaningless hook-ups. Now war with 
a powerful foreign tyrant is looming, a hot new pilot is on the scene, and Chase’s 
rule-breaking, heartbreaking ways are starting to have dangerous, unexpected con-
sequences. With international tensions rising and romantic tension with Tristan 
“Arrow” Router heating up, Chase must change her ways fast if she’s going to protect 
her heart and save the world from World War III. This riveting near-future science 
fiction military adventure reads like a cross between Top Gun and Ender’s Game, 
blended with just the right amount of adolescent angst. The writing is emotion-
ally charged throughout, moving seamlessly from scenes of mid-air acrobatics to 
edge-of-your-seat dogfights to interpersonal drama. With her faux-hawk and her 
self-protective sass, Chase emerges as a fascinating heroine, equal parts warrior 
and troubled teenager, whose entire life is a battlefield. An assortment of mentors, 
frenemies, flirtations, and friends, each with their own complex drives, secrets, and 
troubles, round out the memorable cast. Replete with fighter pilot jargon, plausible 
science fiction elements, and nerd-friendly literary allusions, this taut, well-crafted 
novel should have broad appeal, for fans of everything from Roth’s Divergent (BCCB 
5/11) to Wein’s Code Name Verity (BCCB 6/12).  AM
mccoy, chriS The Prom Goer’s Interstellar Excursion. Knopf, 2015 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95599-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85599-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89711-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
So, you finally get the amazing neighbor girl to actually be your prom date minutes 
before she is abducted by aliens. Obviously, a rescue attempt is necessary, and if a 
tour spaceship (like a rock band’s tour bus, with all the accompanying debauchery 
and epic in-fighting) is the only thing around, you hop on. Bennett, a songwriter 
himself (though he never seems to be able to actually finish any songs), is intrigued 
by this incredible alien band, but mostly he just wants to do whatever it takes to 
find Sophie and get her back in time to actually be seen with her in public. Along 
the way, the washed-up band takes a terrible gig inside an actual belly of a beast, a 
disgruntled former member kidnaps them all to try to force his way back into the 
group, and a triumphant return gig kicks the band back into glory, with Bennett 
and Sophie reaping astonishing financial reward for their assistance. Bennett’s wry, 
self-deprecating narration is endearing from the start, growing even more so when it 
becomes apparent that he really doesn’t have much but his well-honed snark and a 
years-long crush to aid him in an intergalactic rescue mission. The various aliens are 
all impeccably developed, offering glimpses into all sorts of worlds where creatures 
often make fun of Earthlings, even while emulating the parts of human behavior 
that their bodies/planets can accommodate. The happy ending isn’t quite what 
romantics might hope for, but it makes total sense, and in the end, even romance 
maficionados will have to admit that crazy space adventures and the accompanying 
wisdom they can offer can be just as good as true love.  AS
May 2015 • 457
mcintoSh, FionA The Whisperer. Knopf, 2015 [400p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49833-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49827-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49834-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Griff just wants to be near his older brothers (which is why he joined a traveling 
circus with them) and away from the voices he constantly hears in his head, the 
thoughts of others that come unbidden when he gets too close to people. Lute, the 
crown prince of Destonia, is training to be king when his brutal, power-hungry 
uncle makes a move on the kingdom, destroying everything Lute has ever known. 
The lives of the two thirteen-year-olds intertwine abruptly when Griff suddenly 
hears Lute’s cries for help, the first time this has happened with a person so far 
away. When Griff finally flees from the cruel circus master and Lute’s on the run 
for his life, their parallel journeys are gripping. As the stories converge, the narra-
tion switches between the boys more often, creating a tension that is only relieved 
when they are both in one place, shocked by the fact that they are clearly identical 
twins, while facing the evil men that threaten each of their lives. Side characters, 
including a pirate and dwarf couple who are living under a curse of their own 
making and a host of magical creatures who can communicate telepathically, are 
so nuanced and layered that they almost steal the show. The separated-at-birth 
trick is a bit well worn, but McIntosh uses it well: in her carefully detailed world, 
where magic is woven into everything, it is only a minor detail in a satisfying mix 
of fantasy, twin-switching, battles, and heroism.  AS
meAdowS, Jodi The Orphan Queen. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2015 391p
ISBN 978-0-06-231738-4 $17.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Ten years ago, Princess Wilhelmina of Aecor watched the invading force of the 
Indigo Kingdom brutally slaughter her parents, a fate that she and several of the 
other orphaned noble children barely escaped. Together, the orphans forged a 
life on the streets and spent the last decade plotting Wil’s revenge and eventual 
retaking of her kingdom; now, Wil and her best friend, Melanie, have installed 
themselves as spies in the royal court to finally set their plan in motion. Compli-
cations inevitably arise: Melanie and Patrick, the de facto leader of the orphaned 
nobles, begin behaving suspiciously; Wil embarks on a complicated relationship 
with the Black Knife, a vigilante assassin whose loyalties remain questionable; and 
perhaps most significantly, Wil learns that even once she regains her throne, she 
will have to reckon with the Wraith, a twisted type of magic that moves across the 
land, laying waste to anything in its path. Meadows deftly juggles a multitude of 
plot points here, managing to link each element to Wil’s growth as a character, 
transitioning her from a single-minded, revenge-driven girl to a competent and 
thoughtful leader who must weigh her own desires against the safety of the people 
she claims to love. Readers might guess the identity of Black Knife relatively early 
but the couple’s romance remains compelling nonetheless, especially as they struggle 
to reconcile their differing perspective on what’s best for kingdom. A cliffhanger 
ending puts a beloved character’s life in peril, ensuring both a sequel and readers’ 
clamoring for it.  KQG 
458 • The BulleTin
meSSner, kAte All the Answers. Bloomsbury, 2015 246p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-374-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-375-9 $11.99  
R Gr. 4-6
Ava Anderson worries: about math tests, which always trip her up; about her 
grandma, who has been napping a lot lately; and about her parents, who have very 
different ideas about politics. She is also anxious about jazz band tryouts and the 
upcoming class field trip to an adventure course and her grandfather who is in a 
nursing home. In short, she worries about almost everything. When she learns that 
an innocuous-looking pencil she finds in the kitchen junk drawer will answer any 
factual questions she poses, having all the answers seems pretty appealing; that is, 
until it tells her more than she should—or even truly wants to—know. Messner gets 
the mind of a mildly anxious kid right: Ava has obviously had guidance in handling 
her worrywart tendencies, demonstrating coping techniques that ultimately allow 
her reason to trump her fears. She also has remarkable but believable insight into 
the merits and traps of what the pencil offers, and her reflection process and ulti-
mate course of action ring true, as does her relationship with her BFF, Sophie, as 
they tackle the road bumps the pencil inserts in their friendship. Messner’s subtle 
indications of Ava’s biracial heritage paint a broader picture of her life without 
defining her, her family, or the book; family dynamics walk a line between sweet 
and saccharine (her younger sister’s precociousness lands firmly in the twee), but 
readers will enjoy knowing that anxious Ava is clearly safe and loved. The lesson 
here—not only about the values of not knowing, but about managing oneself in 
the face of uncertainty—will resonate and, hopefully, inspire.  AA
metcAlFe, Stephen The Tragic Age. St. Martin’s, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-05441-8 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-5735-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 10-12
Disaffection is the name of the game for seventeen-year-old Billy, who slides through 
life at moneyed “High School High” without engaging with anyone or anything. 
That changes for two reasons: first, tough and implacable Twom Twomey arrives and 
gradually becomes a friend; second, Gretchen Quinn, the childhood friend of Billy’s 
dead twin sister, returns to town, and she and Billy embark on a steamy romance. 
With Gretchen, Billy feels, “the world suddenly seems like it has the potential to 
be an okay place. And this bothers me because I know deep inside the world isn’t 
and never will be.” With Twom, Twom’s girlfriend, and a devoted follower, Billy 
sees the darker side, as they hack into security systems of nearby empty houses and 
go marauding through them, in what starts as audacious fun and grows into savage 
revenge. Metcalfe writes Billy’s narration with a laconic, conversational tone that 
deftly combines age-appropriate nihilism with hints at the emotions behind it all. 
The book crafts an intense and vivid backstory for Billy’s family that’s a keenly 
compelling tale in its own right as well as an effective explanation of what shaped 
him; however, it’s the tautly written contemporary events, with tension mounting 
along with the risk and the violence, that will keep readers on the edge of their 
seats. With the fatalism of Hassan’s Crash and Burn (BCCB 3/13), the chilling 
relentlessness of FX’s series Fargo, and a touch of the wry worldview of Kurt Von-
negut, this will be an easy booktalk that will absorb many young adult readers.  DS
May 2015 • 459
meyer, cArolyn Diary of a Waitress: The Not-So-Glamorous Life of a Harvey 
Girl. Calkins Creek, 2015 348p
ISBN 978-1-62091-652-0 $17.95  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Kitty Evans can’t understand the casualness with which her family delivers the 
shattering news: a downturn in her father’s business means she won’t be attending 
college, and she should plan to begin work at the local shoe store right away. It’s 
1926, and Kitty has bigger plans for a journalism career, and if college can’t be her 
route to independence, then surely signing on as a Harvey Girl waitress will be her 
ticket to new adventures and a broader worldview. Landing the job isn’t difficult, 
and her parents swallow pride and skepticism to reluctantly support her decision. 
The reality of the job itself, though, is quite another matter. First there’s a month 
of unpaid training at one of the smaller Harvey depot restaurants, at which the 
new hires stay in a tightly supervised hotel wing and put in long hours learning 
the meticulous detail of “the Harvey Way” of hospitality, serving train passengers 
on strict schedules, as well as railroad workers and townsfolk. With hard work and 
luck, the probationary period concludes with a brief visit home and then reas-
signment further along the Santa Fe Railway line. The Harvey waitress schedule 
doesn’t leave much time for launching a journalism career, but with some advice 
from an editor patron, Kitty hones her observational skills and sells her first stories 
based on local events in her depot assignments. Kitty and several of her waitress 
friends could easily have propelled any number of subplots, but Meyer keeps the 
blossoming romances tepid, the women’s rights theme underexplored, and hints 
of racial discrimination and social censure of the “loose” Harvey Girls left largely 
unexamined. Nonetheless, the Harvey Girl experience, which offered many young 
women a career path other than teaching, nursing, or motherhood, will certainly 
be of interest to historical fiction fans.  EB
millS, wendy Positively Beautiful. Bloomsbury, 2015 351p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-341-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-342-1 $12.99  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Erin is devastated to learn that her mother has breast cancer and horrified to dis-
cover she may have inherited her mother’s mutated BRCA gene, which makes her 
own breast cancer extremely likely (“I’m sixteen and thinking about whether I’m 
going to have to cut off my breasts”). Things only get worse from there—she ends 
up bullied by a classmate and estranged from her best friend, and a test proves she 
does indeed carry the gene herself—so she panics and leaves town to meet up with 
an online friend she’d made in the BRCA support group, only to find he isn’t a 
girl but a guy. However, Jason is a really good guy, and he helps her go back and 
face her life, however difficult it may be. Erin narrates with an energetic voice and 
a likable awkwardness, and her fascination with flying (her late father was a pilot) 
gives her an interesting dimension. The book also deals sensitively with the theme 
of genetic legacy, acknowledging the validity of various reactions and the absence 
of any one right answer. The story loses focus, however, with Erin’s AWOL experi-
ence and the development of Jason (who’s a blander character than the rest of the 
cast) into a romantic interest; Erin’s mother’s illness and death are deeply sad, but 
they overshadow Erin’s dilemma and leave pragmatic questions (like Erin’s financial 
support) dangling. The topic of our genetically influenced future is a meaningful 
one, however, and readers looking for a non-sci-fi take may appreciate exploring 
it here.  DS
460 • The BulleTin
moore, meredith I Am Her Revenge. Razorbill, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-782-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Raised in near isolation by a merciless, calculating mother for the sole purpose of 
wreaking revenge, seventeen-year-old Vivian Foster has become an avatar, a blank 
who can slip into any role she needs to manipulate people. Now she’s enrolled 
in a posh boarding school on the Yorkshire moors, where she must carry out her 
mother’s prime command: to enthrall and destroy the son of the man who broke her 
mother’s heart. Her quest quickly gets complicated, though, as she forms unexpected 
attachments to her classmates and, worse yet, her intended victim. Meanwhile, 
her only childhood friend and first love suddenly appears with designs to stop 
her plans, and her mother’s demands become increasingly violent and dangerous. 
Soon Vivian realizes her mother’s motives are darker than a broken heart, so in a 
desperate bid to save herself, she starts to uncover her mother’s secrets, beginning 
with her own identity. The book unfortunately starts slow, with Vivian initially 
dull, too focused on narrating her every move, wardrobe choice, and facial expres-
sion; the romantic elements are also unsatisfying, as Vivian shares more chemistry 
with her mark than her supposed soulmate. The story becomes more compelling, 
though, as Vivian begins to show her weakness and flashbacks reveal her mother’s 
savage preparation; descriptions of Vivian’s abuse inflicted are visceral, gradually 
drawing the reader into the mother’s terrifying shadow and making Vivian’s blind 
obedience believable. The second half picks up steam and builds to a gripping, if 
brief, standoff, where secrets are laid bare and solutions are neatly arranged. Readers 
looking for a fast read designed to get the heartbeat racing may wish to give this 
page-turner a try.  AM
o’donnell, liAm Tank & Fizz: The Case of the Slime Stampede; illus. by Mike 
Deas. Orca, 2015 [152p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0810-2 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0812-6 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Fourth-graders Tank (a troll) and Fizz (a goblin) know that something is wrong 
when the beloved school caretaker is framed for letting slime loose to wreak havoc 
in Gravelmuck Elementary and the nearby town. The best friends decide to use 
their detecting skills to figure out who is behind this dastardly set-up. Fizz, the nar-
rator, adopts a bit of world-weary, hard-boiled detective slang on occasion, trying 
to mask his unease with only moderate success. Readers will spot his discomfort 
and occasional fear, particularly when Tank seems to be convinced that the new 
janitor (an obviously villainous figure) and his machines are better than the former 
caretaker’s low-tech methods, and they’ll likely empathize with his efforts to dis-
guise his worries under a surface of jaded cool. The escapades are all a little gross 
and rather funny, and the nonhuman cast is creative and effectively detailed—it’s 
clear by the end of this short novel, first of an anticipated series, why gremlins are 
rotten and goblins rock. The frequent illustrations carry forward the story either 
with pictures alone or with speech bubbles, and their rich details are worth the 
extra attention. Offer this to recent fans of Scroggs’ Snoop Troop mysteries or to 
readers who have outgrown Rylant’s High-Rise Private Eyes detective series. Final 
color illustrations not seen.  AS 
May 2015 • 461
ormerod, JAn The Baby Swap; illus. by Andrew Joyner. Little Simon, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-4814-1914-7 $16.99  
R 4-6 yrs
Young Caroline Crocodile is jealous of her baby brother, so when her mother leaves 
the drooling baby reptile in Caroline’s care, Caroline heads to the Baby Shop in 
hopes of trading him in for a more satisfactory model. She first trades him for a 
baby panda, but when they go to a café for a snack, the panda eats his bamboo 
chair (and Caroline’s). Next she tries a baby elephant but a visit to a fountain ends 
in water everywhere and a broken fountain. Twin baby tigers seem cute but wreak 
havoc in the toy store. Finally she settles on swapping them back for her own baby 
brother, who has gained a tooth in her absence (“That is why he was dribbling!” she 
realizes). The premise in this Australian import of offloading an affection-usurping 
baby will have undeniable appeal among green-eyed older siblings. The sturdy 
structure of the storyline helps balance some of the situational ridiculousness, and 
there’s catharsis in the idea of temporarily giving away one’s sibling but reuniting 
in the end. Joyner’s art is a delight, with a retro sensibility (reminiscent of the work 
of H. A. Rey or Margaret Bloy Graham) in both the dynamic figures smudgily 
outlined in black and the muted tones of the coloration. Modern touches (such 
as a llama checking his smart phone while crossing the street) make it clear that 
this is the present day, however, and kids will enjoy poring over the details of the 
scenery. Use this to add a bit of bite to a babies-themed storytime, or pull it out 
to sympathetically share with an older sib once the shine has worn off that infant 
who’s taken over the household.  JH
oSemAn, Alice Solitaire. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2015 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233568-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233570-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 8-12
“I came out of the womb spouting cynicism and wishing for rain,” says sixteen-year-
old Tori Spring, so it’s a little surprising that she’s the one who follows the trail of 
clues at her British school to discover teasing announcements of something called 
Solitaire. Solitaire then arranges various school pranks, which mostly just annoy 
Tori; her thoughts turn more to two guys, one of whom, Logan, is an old child-
hood friend returned to Tori’s school, and another, Michael, is a sarcastic banterer 
who clearly likes Tori. Really, though, the boy she’s concerned about is her younger 
brother, Oliver, who’s recovering from recent hospitalization for an eating disorder 
and self-harming, and when it looks like Oliver’s starting to backslide and that 
Solitaire’s actions are signaling some knowledge of Oliver—and Tori—she becomes 
suspicious of her friends and classmates. It’s Tori’s voice that makes this story into 
a poignant yet blackly funny and even lively emotional journey; her narration 
initially sets her up as the detached Daria-type character, too smart and jaded for 
teenagerhood, but gradually it becomes clear that she’s spiraled into isolation and 
depression following Oliver’s illness (“You don’t have any friends. Nobody feels bad 
for you. . . . Don’t be sad anymore. Don’t be sad anymore”). Oseman deftly manages 
to convey Tori’s disaffection while still keeping her a plausibly compelling character; 
it’s clear that her negative self-assessment is what’s askew here, not the interest of 
her friends and would-be boyfriends. The puzzle components of Solitaire’s identity 
become more interesting to the reader just as they gain significance for Tori, but 
462 • The BulleTin
ultimately it’s not the secret but the human story behind Tori’s fog of sadness that 
makes this a deeply absorbing read.  DS
pAllAce, chriS Joey and Johnny, the Ninjas: Get Mooned; written and illus. by 
Chris Pallace and Kevin Serwacki. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229933-8 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229934-5 $9.49
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
There are two kinds of ninja schools in this book: KFA, which requires dedication, 
a lifetime of training, and a willingness to stare into the eyes of death unblinking, 
and then there’s KFA’s archrival the Red Moon Clan, which requires entrants only 
to write a check and draw a picture of Flippy the Ninja. While the ease of the lat-
ter school may appeal to readers at first, it is obvious that KFA students Joey and 
Johnny, our slightly dorky but brave heroic duo, are deeply dedicated to learning 
things the hard way. When the two get chosen to track a likely spy—and possible 
transfer from Red Moon Clan—the subsequent events may put the whole academy 
and their headmaster at risk if Joey and Johnny don’t succeed in an impromptu 
tournament against the other school. Sharp, snappy humor may go over the heads 
of younger readers on occasion, but it also may elevate their comedic abilities if they 
catch how effective sarcasm can be in the right moment. Plentiful small illustrations 
and comic strips add to the fun, particularly the full-page advertisements for Red 
Moon Clan. The overall exuberance is enjoyable and ultimately reassuring, sug-
gesting that none of the near-peril encountered by the characters needs to be taken 
seriously. Overall, the book is an appealing mix of ninjas, heart-pounding danger, 
and hilarity, and there’s even a nod to hard work being best; while this novel won’t 
need much promotion, reluctant readers may particularly appreciate it once they’re 
convinced that every page of the sturdy length is well used.  AS
peArce, JAckSon Pip Bartlett’s Guide to Magical Creatures; by Jackson Pearce and 
Maggie Stiefvater; illus. by Maggie Stiefvater. Scholastic, 2015 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-70926-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-70931-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Whether other people believe it or not, animals communicate with Pip; in fact, 
they talk to her all the time. This innate ability becomes useful when she is sent to 
spend the summer working at her aunt’s vet office for magical creatures. It becomes 
absolutely crucial when Fuzzles (similar to tribbles) take over everything from un-
derwear drawers to an entire small island. Worse still, when Fuzzles are nervous, 
scared, or very happy they burst into flames, so the situation is pretty dire. In spite 
of the burning tiny beasties, there’s never so much danger in this title that readers 
will fear for Pip, so they’ll be free to revel in her wry observations about all the 
things one doesn’t know about animals until you actually speak with them: unicorns 
are insufferable, ducks make fun of people all day, and even terrifying grims can 
sometimes just be lonesome and a bit anxious. Since Pearce and Stiefvater are best 
known for their YA novels, this is an unexpected, though very welcome, shift, and 
readers will coo at the big-eyed, snuggle-riffic illustrations of critters that accent 
the text. Promised sequels will cheer fans who are bummed by how quickly they 
zip through this warm, creative first outing.  AS
May 2015 • 463
pennypAcker, SArA Meet the Dullards; illus. by Daniel Salmieri. Balzer + Bray/
HarperCollins, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-219856-3 $17.99  
R* 5-8 yrs
James Marshall introduced the world to the Stupids, and now we meet the Dull-
ards, a determinedly tedious family of five. Or, at least, Mr. and Mrs. Dullard are 
determinedly tedious, but their three children are showing disturbing signs of inter-
est—they’ve been caught with books, and they’re asking to go to school and play 
outside. The family therefore moves to a more humdrum locale, but even redoing 
a room in lifeless taupe and watching paint dry isn’t enough to keep Blanda, Borely, 
and Little Dud from the excitements of their new home, so the Dullards pack up and 
return to the familiar boredom of their old neighborhood. It’s a solid joke, and the 
dry observations of the parents are humorous (“Please don’t use exclamation marks 
in front of our children,” Mr. Dullard reproves a new neighbor). Really, though, it’s 
the interaction with the art—sometimes illustrative, sometimes ironic—that ramps 
the comedy up here. Salmieri’s colored pencil, watercolor, and gouache scenes are 
funny in their own right, with the Dullards tubular-limbed, somewhat alien figures 
in gray who move between splendid impassivity and melodramatic emotion, and 
with witty details enriching the scenes. More importantly, the illustrations reveal 
the kids’ mutinous response to their parents’ strictures and follow a book-length 
trajectory as the kids move from reading about circus acts to practicing their skills 
in the hardware store to finally running off to the Big Top. Kids will immediately 
pick up the concept and make it into their own joke, and they’ll agree that this is 
the most enjoyable tedium they’ve ever experienced.  DS
phillipS, gin A Little Bit of Spectacular. Dial, 2015 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3837-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
“We are Plantagenet. We are chosen,” says the bold writing on the bathroom wall 
of Olivia’s favorite coffee shop, and eleven-year-old Olivia is instantly intrigued. 
Soon she sees the message elsewhere in town, and she’s determined to find out its 
meaning. This pursuit provides a welcome distraction for Olivia, who’s ill at ease 
in her new school and her new home (she and her mother have moved in with her 
grandmother) and who’s worried about her mother’s recovery from recent illness 
and surgery. Phillips (author of The Hidden Summer, BCCB 7/13) writes with clar-
ity and understanding of Olivia’s struggle to reboot herself in a new situation; it’s 
refreshing that Olivia is neither star nor outcast, just somebody who can’t remember 
the skills that got her friends before, so once she does get some age-mate contact 
she makes friends fairly readily. The Plantagenet explanation doesn’t live up to its 
initial mystery, but then that’s the almost inevitable fate of any such tantalizing 
hint; the underlying story of Olivia’s anxiety about her mother and difficulty in 
letting go of her caretaking role spools out subtly underneath the main plot and 
deftly intersects with it. Offering both accessibility and originality, this will enrich 
the middle-elementary shelves—and bump up the interest in restroom graffiti.  DS
464 • The BulleTin
prAtchett, terry Dragons at Crumbling Castle and Other Tales; illus. by Mark 
Beech. Clarion, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-544-46659-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
These fourteen stories for children that Pratchett wrote in his teens, as a junior 
reporter for a local newspaper, have been anthologized here with “the odd tweak 
here, a pinch there, and a little note at the bottom where needed.” The fourteen 
short tales vary in length and in their characters and setting (although several share 
the fictional town of Blackbury as their setting, and two stories feature “the Carpet 
people,” who later got their own novel, The Carpet People, BCCB 12/13), but all 
share Pratchett’s signature brand of humor. Although the stories, as a whole, are not 
as richly constructed as Pratchett’s later novel-length works, it’s clear that even as a 
youngster he had an excellent ear for a pithy turn of phrase (“The donkey, whose 
name was Pigsqueak, passed the time by singing comic songs in what wasn’t a bad 
singing voice for a donkey”) and a funny line of dialogue, as well as a knack for 
introducing creative plot twists. Wizards, dragons, royalty, Romans, explorers, vil-
lagers, taxi drivers, cavemen, and the odd abominable snowman make appearances 
(as do warriors unfortunately wearing “war paint and feathers”), and the narratives 
are by turns fantasy escapade (as in “The 59A Bus Goes Back in Time”), adventure 
story (“Another Tale of the Carpet People”), or meditations on the absurd (“The 
Great Egg-Dancing Championship”). Beech’s lively, casual monochromatic art has 
a Quentin Blake-esque flair, and the pop-eyed figures and their goofy posturing 
complement the droll text. The hefty page count and number of stories make it a 
bit hard to sustain momentum in one sitting, but as a book to be dipped into at 
intervals, this is highly enjoyable fare.  JH
rAnSom, JeAnie FrAnz The Crown Affair: From the Files of a Hard-Boiled Detec-
tive; illus. by Stephen Axelsen. Charlesbridge, 2015 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-552-1 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-757-6 $9.99  
R Gr. 2-4
Mother Gooseland P.I. Joe Dumpty (from What Really Happened to Dumpty?) 
is back on the job when the big Gooseland Games race is threatened due to the 
disappearance of the crown awarded to the winner. Said crown was on the head 
of Jack when he went tumbling down Well Hill, followed by Jill, who had warned 
him to save the crown for special occasions. When questioned by Dumpty at the 
scene, the dazed Jack could only repeat “Jack” over and over (“Do you know how 
many Jacks live in Mother Gooseland?” says the frustrated gumshoe). Dumpty and 
assistant Spider have a lot of interviews to conduct before landing on the right Jack, 
the one who “tested positive for magic beans” at last year’s games, and who has a 
rap sheet for stealing from the Giant. The trenchcoated and fedora’d egg returns 
with his wordplay-laden narration (“I’m one tough egg, but I’ve got a soft shell for 
damsels in distress”) and clever riffs on the string of suspects (Jack Sprat and his 
wife argue over whether to fry or broil a red herring). This will have strongest appeal 
for kids who have already mastered the nursery-rhyme allusions and who enjoy the 
Amelia Bedelia style of verbal gamesmanship. Line and watercolor pictures feature 
plenty of visual gags as well, from the egg-shaped ambulance, to Spider literally 
“combing” Well Hill for clues, to crash-helmeted Chicken Little, who can’t keep 
May 2015 • 465
his eyes off the sky. Kids who tailed Dumpty on his first case may be even happier 
with this one.  EB
roSen, michAel J. The Maine Coon’s Haiku and Other Poems for Cat Lovers; illus. 
by Lee White. Candlewick, 2015 56p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6492-3 $17.99  
R Gr. 3-6
There’s something about cats and haiku that just seems to go together, as noted 
poet Rosen demonstrates in this collection of twenty poems in haiku form, each 
treating a different breed of cat. Some of the subject breeds will be familiar (the 
Siamese with her “toppled lamp shade”) while others may be new to readers (the 
Havana Brown, awakened poolside by being dripped on); many of the entries, 
however, are fairly randomly assigned to breeds, since they’re describing pretty 
common cat experiences (the Abyssinian “curled up on your book,” for instance, 
or the Bombay’s nighttime gaze, “two lights/ pierce that darkness”). The haiku are 
still delicately engaging, though, with their concise evocations of cat behavior and 
vignettes of playful or somnolent felines. Full-bleed spreads of digital art have an 
old-school flavor, with the feline figures rustically homemade and the scratchy line-
work and grainy dappled textures suggesting paint; though slatey blues and golden 
greens predominate, each spread has its own palette, and tones and compositions 
vary effectively as the pages progress. This offers plenty of appealing curricular op-
portunities, and it will please feline fans looking to move up from Nancy Larrick’s 
classic Cats Are Cats (BCCB 1/89). Though there is no table of contents or index, 
four section headers identify the verses within; end matter provides more detailed 
description of each featured breed.  DS
ruddell, deborAh The Popcorn Astronauts and Other Biteable Rhymes; illus. by 
Joan Rankin. McElderry, 2015 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6555-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6556-5 $12.99  
R Gr. 3-5
The author and illustrator of the wonderful poetry collection A Whiff of Pine, a 
Hint of Skunk (BCCB 3/09) return here with a new gathering of twenty-one poems 
divided into seasonal sections. This time the topic is food, with subjects ranging 
from the wonders of guacamole (“Only Guacamole!”) to the possibilities of toast 
(“Your Choices at the Totally Toast Café”) to the celebration of an eternal favorite 
(“Stand and Cheer for MAC and CHEESE!”). The verses are pithy rhymed explora-
tions, with precise scansion and familiar rhythms; they range from the cheerful to 
the genuinely inventive (the titular “Arrival of the Popcorn Astronauts,” featuring 
kernels that “scramble into puffy suits/ and hurtle through the air”) or slyly witty 
(“Recipe for Raisins” is an ironic honoring of the fruit that’s like “wrinkled rubber 
rocks” with “bug-like chewiness”). Rankin’s watercolor illustrations are delicately 
humorous, with a style similar to those of Kady McDonald Denton (Becker’s A 
Library Book for Bear, BCCB 9/14, etc.), yet they’re distinctively absurd and fanciful; 
her precise linework gives a crisp corporeality to the penguins serving food and the 
bugs on holiday in the watermelon slide. The richly populated scenes sometimes 
create their own plots and subplots, as in “How a Poet Orders a Shake,” which is 
illustrated with a folktalesque pre-industrial drive-through where a poet on a horse 
holds up a weary line of adults and kids waiting for their turn to order. Individual 
poems, in single or in tandem, will also make winsome performance pieces or 
466 • The BulleTin
readalouds to younger audiences; just make sure they get a chance to pore over 
the art as well.  DS
SAeed, AiShA Written in the Stars. Paulsen/Penguin, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17170-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Naila has always known that her Pakistani parents were very conservative, and she 
has mostly respected their wishes but nonetheless managed to fall in love with a 
classmate, Saif, in her Florida school. When her parents whisk her away to Pakistan 
after she sneaks out to prom, they claim it’s a vacation, but Naila must endure strange 
questions from a parade of older women regarding her ability to cook and sew. 
By the time she realizes her parents are negotiating her marriage, the deal is nearly 
done. Attempting to escape, she is beaten; attempting to resist, she is drugged. Her 
new husband mistakes her stupor for appropriate modesty; though initially patient 
with her, he eventually, under pressure from his mother, rapes her. Remorseful, he 
finally understands that she was forced into the marriage against her will, but he 
knows that if he releases her so that she can return to Saif, her uncle will not just 
beat but kill her, which is one more thing that this American-reared girl simply 
can’t get her head around. Saeed’s portrayal of a bicultural young woman is spot 
on in terms of both Naila’s expectations of eventual autonomy and her confusion 
over what is happening to her; she can’t imagine that her life is completely out 
of her own control. She’s utterly stymied at how her parents can literally sell her 
into a traditional marriage to spare themselves the shame of having her choose a 
partner for herself, while her husband’s family cannot imagine that she would be so 
resistant to her parents’ plans for her. An author’s note explains that while her own 
“semiarranged” marriage was a success, she wrote the book to draw attention to the 
“silent epidemic” of forced marriage; through Naila’s ordeal, readers will certainly 
have their eyes opened to how someone can be forced to marry against her will.  KC 
Schertle, Alice Such a Little Mouse; illus. by Stephanie Yue. Orchard/Scho-
lastic, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-64929-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Each day in spring, summer, and fall, an adorable little mouse (“Such a little mouse. 
Off he goes into the wide world”) pops out of his hole in the ground (“one . . . 
two . . . three!”) and explores the environment around him, observing the plants, 
animals, and seasonal changes before collecting a tasty tidbit and bringing it home 
to his storeroom. Come winter, he pops up, notes the snow and cold temperature, 
and returns to his snug underground home, where he makes acorn bread and seed-
and-watercress soup with his stored bounty and then snuggles up by candlelight 
with a book and a cozy moss blanket. Precise and poetic language (“Such a little 
mouse, with his smart gray coat, with his ears as pink as petals, with his three 
twitchety whiskers on each side of his nose”) give this title great readaloud appeal, 
while the repeated phrases and seasonal structure offer solidity and support to 
young listeners. The coziness of the text is accentuated by Yue’s tidy illustrations, 
utilizing a palette of clear, natural hues that change along with the seasons. The 
sleek, adorable mouse is both realistic and slightly anthropomorphic—he may live 
in the dirt under a patch of dandelions, but his is a well-appointed home, complete 
May 2015 • 467
with thimble food containers and furniture constructed from a child’s ABC blocks 
and matchbooks. Nature-loving kids who also appreciate tiny, constructed worlds 
will find this especially satisfying; share it as a more natural counterpart to Beatrix 
Potter’s works in a mouse-themed story session, use it in conjunction with Edna 
Miller’s trusty old Mousekin books, or pair it with Naberhaus’ Boom Boom (BCCB 
2/15) to explore seasonal change from a different perspective.  JH
ShAng, wendy wAn-long The Way Home Looks Now. Scholastic, 2015 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-60956-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-60958-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Peter Lee divides his family’s history into Before and After, demarcated by the death 
of his beloved older brother, Nelson, in a recent car crash. After is certainly hard 
for Peter, who relied on Nelson to advise him on everything from baseball to girls. 
The strain wears heavily on his once outgoing mother, who now spends her days 
staring at the television and barely speaking to her husband, son, and daughter. 
It’s the way Mr. Lee deals with grief, though, that surprises Peter the most. A strict 
disciplinarian with old-school values imported from his native communities in 
China and Taiwan, Mr. Lee seems to be softening, perhaps with regret over having 
been so hard on his firstborn son. He not only accedes to Peter’s request to join 
a baseball team but even takes on the position of coach, selecting an improbable 
cadre of teammates with varying talents and back stories. While the hardy plotline 
of lovable misfits lends the story structure, the real interest here is the Lees’ mutual 
growth in understanding and respect and the way baseball helps the grieving family 
to spark back to life. The 1972 setting is used to advantage, setting up multiple 
themes of the Chinese-American community’s enthusiasm for youth baseball, fol-
lowing the Little League World series triumph of a Taiwanese team; Nelson and 
his father’s continual sparring over Vietnam War protests; and teammate “Aaron’s” 
outing as girl, Erin, and Mr. Lee’s creative strategy for keeping her on the team. 
While the baseball team’s tale takes center stage, the emotional drama of the Lee 
family is understated yet persistent, making this a thoughtful sports story with 
appeal to a broad readership.  EB
Shireen, nAdiA Yeti and the Bird; written and illus. by Nadia Shireen. Ath-
eneum, 2015 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0389-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0390-0 $12.99  
R 5-7 yrs
The forest creatures near Yeti’s home are scared of the big hairy guy, but he’s really 
a harmless, even lonely fellow. When a little lost red bird ends up in Yeti’s domain, 
the two become buddies; meanwhile, the forest animals witness a different side 
to Yeti as he plays with his new friend and sings duets with her. Yeti sadly helps 
the bird depart when winter comes, but the forest animals now befriend him, so 
he’s lonely no more. This UK import is the latest of several titles about a bigger 
animal who befriends a migratory bird, so comparisons to Dubuc’s stellar The Lion 
and the Bird (BCCB 7/14) or Ruzzier’s enjoyable A Letter for Leo (BCCB 2/15) 
are inevitable. Shireen’s take is less compelling than those stories, but the writing 
is solid and the broadening of Yeti’s circle of friends to include his fellow forest 
residents is a gratifying development. The mixed-media art effectively conveys both 
468 • The BulleTin
the isolation of the shaggily plush Yeti and the literal and figurative color that the 
perky little red bird brings to his life. Minimal backgrounds keep the attention on 
Yeti, the bird, and the forest animals, but occasional small details (such as a heart 
picture, tacked to Yeti’s wall, rendered in bird footprints) add interest and humor. 
This would pair effectively with Dubuc’s or Ruzzier’s titles as a compare-and-contrast 
exercise or make a congenial addition to a Yeti- or Bigfoot-themed storytime.  JH
ShuStermAn, neAl Edison’s Alley; by Neal Shusterman and Eric Elfman. Disney 
Hyperion, 2015 250p (Accelerati)
ISBN 978-1-4231-4806-7 $16.99  
R* Gr. 5-8
The good news is that Earth was not obliterated by the unfortunate space debris/
baseball bat incident in Book One, Tesla’s Attic (BCCB 2/13); the bad news is 
that the space debris now known as Felicity Bonk is creating a massive electrical 
generator as it circles the Earth, a boon only to the mad scientist Accelerati who 
hope to harness it to rule the world. Standing in the way of world domination, 
however, are Nick and his middle-school cohort, who are scrambling to collect the 
scattered bits of Tesla’s magnificent free-energy-emitting gizmo, which must be key 
to keeping Felicity Bonk under control. Tweens and teens who have embarked on 
the Accelerati Trilogy already know they’ve entered a sci-fi funhouse in the finest 
tradition of Eoin Colfer, with searingly witty narration and a cast of white and black 
hats who command reader involvement. There’s no second-book-slump here; in 
fact, characters develop in complexity without sacrificing the dark snark that sets 
the series tone. Petula is now a remorseless baddie; Caitlin is in love; Mitch has 
figured out that the Accelerati are responsible for his father’s incarceration and is out 
for revenge; Vince vacillates between death and reanimation; Nick is spinning out 
of control in his obsession to make Tesla’s machine work; and evil Alan Jorgenson 
is in trouble with his even more evil boss. Oh, yes, we learn who Jorgenson’s boss 
is—and embedded in that revelation is the plot for Book Three. Might as well put 
in the pre-order now.  EB
Smith, dAn Big Game. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2015 [272p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-76635-7 $6.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-76636-4 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
On the eve of his thirteenth birthday, Oskari is anxious to complete his coming-of-
age ritual. He’ll spend a night in the forest far from his Finnish village and hopefully 
bring down an animal with the ceremonial bow. Before his ATV reaches the site 
his father recommends for hunting, Oskari spins into a ravine and from there wit-
nesses a helicopter landing, a murder, and conspirators discussing an assassination 
plot. The target of that plot arrives shortly afterward, crashing into the forest in 
an escape pod from Air Force One. Oskari is President Alan William Moore’s best 
hope to evade his pursuers, and Moore has the good sense to take the proffered 
help. This relatively simple set-up is, of course, the springboard for the main event: 
a high-stakes chase over a forested mountainside, where cell phones don’t work, the 
bad guys have all the tech toys, and relief won’t be available until morning, should 
Oskari and Moore be fortunate enough to make it until then. Smith dishes out the 
cinematic peril action/adventure readers demand, with a knife, waterproof matches, 
and an oversized ice chest outperforming the enemy’s night vision instrumentation, 
May 2015 • 469
and a cat-and-mouse chase through partially submerged Air Force One as a climax. 
He even manages to work in a bit of character development, integrating Oskari’s 
spiritual understanding of his quest into the tale, and portraying a president with 
the prudence to think on his unshod feet and take competent help from even the 
unlikeliest source. The story-behind-the-story of the treacherous plot is disclosed 
with risible speed, a cabal between American dignitaries and Middle Eastern bad-
dies that’s at once needless stereotyping and a throwaway. And readers are not likely 
to care one whit.  EB
tAvAreS, mAtt Growing Up Pedro; written and illus. by Matt Tavares. Candle-
wick, 2015 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6824-2 $16.99  
R Gr. 2-5
This picture-book bio of Dominican pitcher Pedro Martínez arrives just in time 
to celebrate his Hall of Fame induction. As he did in Becoming Babe Ruth (BCCB 
2/13), Tavares focuses on his subject’s early years, here starting from Pedro’s boy-
hood adulation of older brother Ramón, who proceeded him to America and 
major league baseball, to his training at the Dodgers’ academy in the Dominican 
Republic and move onto their farm team, and ultimately to professional play for 
the Dodgers (with his brother) and his 1999 record-breaking season with the Red 
Sox. Although this is definitely Pedro’s story, Ramón is never far from sight, and 
fraternal mentoring and emulation forms a cohesive theme throughout. Liberally 
mixed with the expected action shots and photorealistic close-ups are scenes of the 
Martínezes’ homeland, particularly appropriate here considering the philanthropy 
and familial ties that bound Pedro close to the Dominican Republic throughout 
his career and into retirement. An author’s note remarks on Pedro’s role in the 2004 
Red Sox World Series win and Tavares’ role in Pedro’s fandom. A bibliography and 
stats chart are also included.  EB
trine, greg Willy Maykit in Space; illus. by James Burks. Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt, 2015 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-544-31351-4 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Fourth-grader Willy misses his father desperately after his pop is lost during a 
research trip to the Amazon, but he still really wants to be able to travel to Planet 
Ed on a school field trip. Mom reluctantly agrees to let another of her loved ones 
venture far from home, but her worst fears are realized when Willy is left behind 
on a faraway planet after bad weather cuts the trip short. Luckily, Willy’s not alone; 
he has a few strong allies including a kind, funny extraterrestrial, a schoolmate (his 
crush!), and an android who only recently discovered the addictive magic of knock-
knock jokes (astute readers may remember their own exhausting enthusiasm upon 
first learning to tell jokes). Together, they fend off giant monsters and manage to 
keep alive until they are rescued. The pace is just right, with quick scene changes 
keeping things moving toward what will obviously be a happy ending. The frequent 
illustrations break up the text effectively and also work to present the monsters as, 
ultimately, ridiculous and defeatable, rather than terrifying. Dad’s parallel story 
takes an awkwardly colonialist turn in the descriptions of the savage dark-skinned 
“foothunters” of the deep jungle, but the rest of the novel is effortlessly diverse in 
open, friendly ways, and the two stories of bold adventurers headed back toward 
470 • The BulleTin
home are exhilarating. Readers seeking a speedy space thriller and fans of Trine’s 
other series will be well pleased with this outing.  AS
turner, henry Ask the Dark. Clarion, 2015 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-544-30827-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Mom’s death, Dad’s disability and unemployment, imminent foreclosure on the 
house—the string of Zeets family tragedies have left Dad overwhelmed to the point 
of inertia. This leaves fifteen-year-old Billy to shoulder the burden of keeping the 
family together, and since he’s not been a model citizen or attended school regu-
larly of late, he might as well do odd jobs to chip away at the $48,000 needed to 
save their home, or better still, to find seed money for his Dad’s dream of opening 
a fruit stand. His reputation for theft and vandalism makes it hard to convince 
neighbors to hire him around their houses, but latching on to another marginal-
ized ne’er-do-well, Richie, he starts to accumulate more money than he’s ever held 
onto before. More importantly, he’s also begun to notice things—things that might 
have to do with boys who have gone missing from the community, some of whom 
have fallen off the map, and others who have been found dead, whole or in pieces, 
in state and out of state. There’s a huge reward offered to whomever leads to the 
killer’s apprehension, and Billy senses that this may be the first thing at which he 
will ever succeed. But identifying the perp isn’t the same as securing proof of the 
crime, and Billy’s risk-taking targets him as the next victim. Knowing from the 
first page that Billy survives his ordeal in no way detracts from the tension of his 
tale, and the gruesomeness of the murders, which Billy can never bring himself to 
describe in graphic detail, is harrowing. The ending, with its over-the-moon good 
fortune for the Zeets family, may strike some readers as blindingly cheerful after 
the shadow and gloom, but Billy’s closing remarks on the terror he’ll keep buried 
inside forever suggest that the Zeets’ turnaround has come at a high price.  EB
weAtherFord, cArole boSton Gordon Parks: How the Photographer Captured 
Black and White America; illus. by Jamey Christoph. Whitman, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-3017-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 5-8 yrs
From fashion models to charwomen, glamour to despair, the portrait and candid 
photography of Gordon Parks captured life’s extremes in mid-twentieth century 
America. Weatherford’s spare text follows Parks from a childhood that held an 
unpromising future for a black man, through a series of odd jobs and the chance 
purchase of his first camera, and on to his early career as a “government photog-
rapher” in search of a subject worth committing to film. With the encouragement 
of his boss, Parks photographed cleaning lady Ella Watson, whose iconic pose with 
mop and broom before the American flag was slyly entitled American Gothic and 
launched Parks’ mission to document racism that too often passed unremarked in 
everyday life. Parks’ earliest years zip by here in a blur, and listeners will need adult 
assistance in connecting how each career move prepared him for the next. The 
sleek compositions and neutral tones of Christoph’s paintings suggest the black 
and white photography for which Parks is best known, but inclusion of a scant 
four reproductions (small, at that, and tucked into the back matter) will certainly 
leave the audience wishing for more. Nonetheless, this is a promising vehicle for 
May 2015 • 471
introducing young children to the power of photography as an agent for social 
change, and it may make them aware of contemporary victims of injustice in need 
of an advocate with a camera.  EB
whiten, JAn Chooky-Doodle-Doo; illus. by Sinéad Hanley. Candlewick, 
2015 26p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7327-7 $12.99  
R 3-5 yrs
One little “chooky chick” (a baby chicken, in this Australian import) attempts to 
pull up a worm, but “Clucky cluck, worm’s stuck. What should chooky do?” Next, 
two chicks try pulling together, to no avail. One by one, chicks continue to lend 
a beak until there are five chicks and a rooster pulling on the worm, which finally 
emerges and reveals itself to be a shoelace in a buried shoe. The rhythmic pattern 
of the rhyming text (“Three little chooky chicks pulling at a worm. What’s wrong? 
Worm’s long. What should chookies do?”), along with the incremental counting, 
make this a spot-on readaloud selection for the preschool crowd. The quick pacing 
will keep the attention of restless youngsters, and the surprise ending will tickle 
preschool funny bones. Hanley’s handcrafted and digital collage illustrations use 
warm reds, golds, and oranges for the chicks and the rooster (with touches of olive 
and brown for contrast), set against white space while bands of yellowy-green fill in 
for grass and occasional pale blue scallops suggest sky. Subtle patterns and textures 
add depth to the collages, and the chicks’ and rooster’s oversized bug eyes give 
them a literal wide-eyed innocence while also indicating surprise at the moment 
of the “worm’s” unearthing. The bold, blocky figures of the birds against the white 
backgrounds ensure good visibility for group viewing. Perk up a chicken-themed 
storytime with this title (perhaps along with Harrington’s Busy-Busy Little Chick, 
BCCB 5/13), or pair it with Krauss’ classic The Carrot Seed for another tale of 
uprooted buried “treasure.”  JH
williAmS-gArciA, ritA Gone Crazy in Alabama. Amistad/HarperCollins, 
2015 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221588-8 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221587-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221590-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 435, for review.
472  •  The BulleTin
Adventure: Balak; Capetta; 
Castellucci; Colossal; Fisher; 
Gemeinhart; Grove; McCarthy; 
McCoy; Moore; Shusterman; 
Smith; trine
African Americans: Weatherford
African Americans–fiction: Loftin; 
Williams-Garcia
Aliens–fiction: trine
Animals: London
Animals–fiction: George; Pearce
Animals–stories: Ormerod; Schertle; 
Shireen
AnthOLOGieS: Angel; healy; 
Janeczko
Arranged marriage–fiction: Saeed
Art: Goldstone
Art and artists: Weatherford
Art and artists–fiction: Kephart
Asian Americans–fiction: Shang
Aviation: Grove
Aviation–fiction: McCarthy
Babies–stories: Ormerod
Baseball: tavares
Baseball–fiction: Shang
BiOGrAPhieS: engle; healy; 
Lang; tavares; Weatherford
Biology: London
Biracial people–fiction: Messner
Blackmail–fiction: Albertall
Brothers–fiction: Oseman
Brothers–stories: Krumwiede
Brothers and sisters–fiction: hand
Brothers and sisters–stories: Ormerod
Bullying–fiction: Gregorio; Loftin
Cats–poetry: rosen
Chickens–stories: Whiten
Communism–fiction: Avi
COnCePt BOOKS: Coat
Contests–fiction: Balak
COuntinG BOOKS: Whiten
Crime and criminals–fiction: Arnold, 
d.; Kephart; Matthews; Met-
calfe; Moore; Shusterman; Smith; 
turner
Cryptids–stories: Shireen
Cuba: engle
death–fiction: headley
demons–fiction: Galante
depression–fiction: Oseman
Design: Goldstone
deteCtive StOrieS: ransom
disabilities–fiction: Arnold, d.
dreams–fiction: Alloway
drug abuse–fiction: Clark
Ethics and values: Avi; Matthews
Families–fiction: Clark; hoffman; 
Juby; Messner; Metcalfe; Shang; 
turner; Williams-Garcia
Families–stories: Pennypacker
FAntASy: Alloway; Balak; Carey; 
Fisher; George; headley; hoff-
man; Knudsen; Mcintosh; 
Meadows; Messner; O’donnell; 
Pallace; Pearce; Pratchett
Fathers–fiction: Avi
Finance: Bair
Finland–fiction: Smith
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: 
Arnold, e.
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
May 2015  •  473
Food and eating–fiction: Colossal
Food and eating–poetry: ruddell
French revolution–fiction: Fisher
Friends–fiction: Loftin; Messner; 
Phillips
Friends–stories: Knudsen; Shireen
Genetics–fiction: Mills
Gestures–fiction: Knowles
GLBt people–fiction: Albertalli
Government: Bair
GrAPhiC nOveLS: Balak; Colossal
Grief–fiction: Clark; hand; Shang
Guilt–fiction: Galante
hippopotamuses: London
hiStOriCAL FiCtiOn: Avi; ea-
gland; Meyer; Williams-Garcia
History, U.S.: Meyer
History, world: Grove
huMOr: Coat; easton; Gravel; 
Juby; McCoy; O’donnell; Pallace; 
Pennypacker; Pratchett; ransom; 
ruddell
identity–fiction: Gregorio
illness–fiction: Gemeinhart; headley; 
Kephart; Loftin; Mills; Phillips
intersex people–fiction: Gregorio
italy–fiction: Kephart
Jealousy–stories: Ormerod
Jobs–fiction: Meyer
Journals–fiction: easton
Knitting–fiction: easton
Language arts: Janeczko; rosen
Latinos: engle; tavares
Literature, English: eagland
Magic–fiction: Balak; George; Pearce
MAGiCAL reALiSM: hoffman; 
Loftin
Marriage–fiction: Saeed
Mathematics: Goldstone
Medicine–fiction: Carey
Mice–stories: Schertle
Monsters–stories: Knudsen
Mothers–fiction: Arnold, e.; Mills; 
Moore; Phillips
Moving–fiction: Phillips
Moving–stories: Pennypacker
Music and musicians: engle
MySterieS: O’donnell; turner
Nature study: Gravel; London
ninjas–fiction: Pallace
nursery rhymes–fiction: ransom
nursery rhymes–stories: Krumwiede
Orphans–fiction: Meadows
Pakistan–fiction: Saeed
Persecution–fiction: Avi
Photography: Weatherford
Pilots–fiction: McCarthy
POetry: Janeczko; rosen; ruddell
Prejudice–fiction: Gregorio
Presidents–fiction: Smith
Reading aloud: ruddell
Reading, easy: George; Gravel
Reading, reluctant: Gravel; Pallace
relationships–fiction: Alloway; Ar-
nold, e.; Meadows; Metcalfe
revenge–fiction: Meadows; Moore
rhyMinG StOrieS: Coat; Whiten
romance–fiction: Albertall; Clark; 
Mills
royalty–fiction: Carey; Meadows
runaways–fiction: Gemeinhart; 
Mcintosh
School–fiction: Albertall; Matthews; 
Metcalfe; O’donnell; Oseman; 
Pallace
School–stories: Krumwiede
SCienCe FiCtiOn: Capetta; 
Castellucci; McCarthy; McCoy; 
Shusterman
Seasons–stories: Schertle
Secrets–fiction: Albertall; Angel; Avi; 
easton; hoffman; Oseman
Sex–fiction: Arnold, e.
ShOrt StOrieS: Angel; healy; 
Knowles; Pratchett
Sisters–fiction: Williams-Garcia
Social studies: Bair
Space travel–fiction: Capetta; Castel-
lucci; McCoy; trine
Spiders–stories: Krumwiede
SPOrtS StOrieS: Balak; Shang; 
tavares
Storytime: London; Pennypacker; 
Whiten
Suicide–fiction: hand
SuPernAturAL StOrieS: 
Galante
474  •  The BulleTin
time travel–fiction: Fisher
truth–fiction: Juby
twins–fiction: Mcintosh
voyages and travel: Grove
voyages and travel–fiction: Arnold, 
d.; Capetta; Castellucci; Gemein-
hart; trine
Women’s studies: engle; Lang; Meyer
Writers and writing: healy; Juby
Writers and writing–fiction: eagland
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 68 (2015).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $62.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$103.00 (print); $115.00 (online);  
$144.00 (print & online)
 
To order or To Join
Call 360.571.4520; visit us online at www.childlitassn.org; or 
write ChLA at P.O. Box 138, Battle Creek, MI 49016-0138.
MeMbers get it.
Claudia Nelson, Editor  
Texas a&M UniversiTy
Anne Morey, Texas a&M UniversiTy and  Sara K. Day, 
soUThern arkansas UniversiTy, Associate Editors
Children’s Literature Association Quarterly publishes 
first-rate scholarship in children’s literature studies. 
Each issue features an editorial introduction, juried 
articles about research and scholarship in children’s 
literature, and book reviews. The Quarterly is available 
to members of the Children’s Literature Association 
(ChLA) as a benefit of membership.  
Published quarterly in Spring, Summer, Fall, and Winter for 
the Children’s Literature Association (ChLA). Volume 40 (2015). 
ISSN 0885-0429; E-ISSN 1553-1201.
Children’s literature assoCiation Quarterly
Individual and institutional 
subscription is one of many benefits of 
membership to the ChLA.
