ILLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
ort1
.114
Uc frogs Worcr
CruRE BY V~Er~A M~3IR
*'z~i 
"The prolific poet is back,
with an illustrator who matches
him in freshness and simplicity....
A superb choice."
-Starred review I School Library Journal
-i "Ranging from sweetly poignant to goofy
nonsense, each of the 28 short poems about people
and animals [is illustrated withi subtly whimsical
pictures [thati add details to the rhyme and enliven the meter
with perfect piquancy and lilt. A brilliant match of talent that's
guaranteed to make a hit." 
-Starred review I Kirkus Reviews
*'t 
"The rhymes flow easily, set to a consistently bouncy
beat that makes reading them effortless . . . Mathers's watercolors
exude a puckish charm well-matched to the nimble wordplay.
-There's plenty of zip in this nifty outing.":
-Starred review I Publishers Weekly
Creenwllow 
ooks$16.95 
Tr (0-688-167 19-5);
Greenillo 
Boos 
$1.89 
Lb (0 688 16720-9)
I-n imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 100 19
www.harperchildrens.com
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
June 2002
Vol. 55 No. 10
A LOOK INSIDE
353 THE BIG PICTURE
I Stink! by Kate McMullan illus. by Jim McMullan
354 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
357 * Little Horse by Betsy Byars; illus. by David McPhail
358 * Artemis Fowl: The Arctic Incident by Eoin Colfer
360 * Giggle, Giggle, Quack by Doreen Cronin; illus. by Betsy Lewin
364 * The Life and Death ofAdolph Hitler by James Cross Giblin
372 * Angelo written and illus. by David Macaulay
377 * Big Mouth 6- Ugly Girl by Joyce Carol Oates
387 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
388 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Jeannette M. Hulick, Reviewer (JMH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Sabrina Austin
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus
Reprint Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300
North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin ofthe Centerfbr Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2002 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Jim McMullan from I Stink!©2002. Used by permission of Cotler/
HarperCollins Publishers.
JUNE 2002 * 
353
THE BIG PICTURE
I Stink!
by Kate McMullan; illustrated by Jim McMullan
Don't try any sweet euphemisms on this guy-no "department of sanitation ve-
hicle" or "refuse transport conveyance" for him. Our redolent narrator's a hard-
workin' garbage truck, plain and simple, and he's dang proud of it. Thirty-two
pages of nonstop attitude demonstrate that he's got one of the most important
jobs in town: "Go on, hold your nose, but think about it-WITHOUT ME?
You're on Mount Trash-o-rama, baby."
Kids who delightedly followed the rounds of Zimmerman's trash collec-
tor in Trashy Town (BCCB 5/99) ascend here from the garbage can to the dump-
ster league. McMullan's Garbage Truck is an exercise in voracious power ("ten
WIDE tires," "totally DUAL OP," "Rev me to the MAX"), roaming the night
streets of a big city with nothing but breakfast on his mind: "Feed me! Straight
into my HOPPER! Nice toss, guys!" He pauses long enough between courses to
expel a satisfied, kid-pleasing, double-spread full-bleed "BURRRP!" that leaves
room for another load of alphabetized urban jetsam: "... Moldy meatballs, Nasty
neckties, Orange peels, Puppy poo, Quail bones, too.... " With a full belly, he's
off to the garbage barge, then home for a hose down, a fill-up, and some well
earned Zzzz's: "See you guys tomorrow night."
Kate McMullan creates an automotive beast whose narrative style reeks
of personality, and Jim McMullan's renderings are a perfect match, coaxing steely
features into flexible, expressive shapes. Garbage Truck's windshield eyes grimace
with determination and flicker with mischief, while his front bumper stretches
from time to time into a devilish grin. Muscular sweeps of pitch-black outlining
emphasize his sinuous, brawny grace. He plows through the textured, jewel-toned
night bathed in color-explosive bursts of searing yellow/orange headlights, a purple
cloud ofodiferous fume, a golden, almost beatific halo that seems to bless his civic-
minded efforts.
While truck lovers will swarm to this like flies to a you-know-what, there
are bound to be plenty of primary teachers prowling for a fresh twist on the vener-
able community helpers unit, and for them the McMullans thoughtfully leave ajar
a couple of doors leading to deeper discussion and exploration. Having polished
off his alphabetical petit defeuner, Garbage Truck poses beside a green recycling
can. Does his dialogue bubble reading "Thank you very much" refer to his ample
meal, or perhaps to readers' courtesy in sorting waste properly and lightening his
load? Likewise, the garbage barge floats problematically at the dock; Garbage Truck's
job is done for the day, but the refuse lingers, prompting the questions, "Where
will it go? What will happen when it gets there?" Once the revving and roaring
subsides, kids can consider what they might do to put Garbage Truck on a much-
needed diet. (Imprint information appears on p. 374.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
354 
* 
THE BULLETIN
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ABBOTT, TONY 
Dracula: Trapped in Transylvania. Volvo/Hyperion,
2002 
[14 4p] 
(Cracked Classics)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7868-1324-5 
$4.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-7
In this first title in a planned series, sixth-graders Devin and Frankie (Francine)
bomb their book report on Dracula (they don't read, ever) and get sent to deten-
tion in the library. Set to repairing old books, the two pals come across a tattered
volume of Dracula, tussle over it, and fall through a magical security gate right
onto the road Jonathan Harker is traveling to get to the Count's castle. Inside
Stoker's horror novel, Devin and Frankie discover that the story proceeds as long
as they are reading it; assuming they must get to the end in order to return to sixth
grade, they force themselves to plow through, chapter by chapter. In this emi-
nently predictable plot, the two discover that even though they get involved with
the characters they cannot affect the outcome of the action; the nonreaders also
discover the joy of reading. Dracula is retold here in a slapdash, sporadic narrative
that features a syntactically challenged Van Helsing (the book omits the insect-
eating Renfield altogether), along with a Dracula who is the butt of unoriginal
fang jokes. Dental dissing aside, what will make this title even remotely attractive
to young readers will be the connection to the horror novel and the occasional
flashes of genuine humor ("To my surprise I found a whole other character down-
stairs") among the not-so-smart smart-mouthing; without those, the obvious pe-
dantic intent will curl the lips of middle-school readers and leave them doubting
the intelligence of well-meaning adults. JMD
AHLBERG, ALLAN 
The Woman Who Won Things; illus. by Katharine
McEwen. 
Candlewick, 2002 
80p
ISBN 0-7636-1721-0 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
In this easy chapter book, a followup to The Man Who Wore All His Clothes, Mrs.
Gaskitt has a run of amazingly good luck and starts winning contests and prizes
willy-nilly. In the meantime, her husband happily (almost daily) changes jobs, the
family cat amiably bickers with the neighbor cat, and the children, Gus and Gloria,
have a new substitute teacher, Mrs. Plum. The arrival of the cozy and inventive
Mrs. Plum coincides with a sudden rash of things going missing from students'
desks and backpacks; the petty thievery culminates in the disappearance of all the
money from the school fair. The title-indicated plot line quickly becomes second-
ary to the shenanigans of the grandmotherly-looking Mrs. Plum, and the addi-
tional subplots of Mr. Gaskitt's ever-changing vocation and the friendly arguments
of the two cats crowd an already event-filled tale, but there's a certain pell-mell
charm to the narrative. Readers will appreciate the unusual (but nicely foreshad-
owed) criminal in the form of the kindly substitute, and the matter-of-fact quirki-
ness of the style keeps the disparate threads tonally consistent and humorous. The
illustrations are cheerful in their color-inside-the-lines simplicity. This will suit
beginning chapter-book readers with a taste for the Pinkwateresque offbeat or for
tales the triumph of the righteous and entertaining. JMD
JUNE 2002 
* 355
ALPHIN, ELAINE MARIE 
Simon Says. 
Harcourt, 2002 
258p
ISBN 0-15-216355-7 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
High-school junior Charles Weston transfers to a ritzy Houston fine-arts academy
to meet his hero, senior Graeme Brandt, who in his freshman year published a
young-adult novel so insightful that Charles is certain Graeme must have all the
answers to wrenching questions about life, art, and living according to one's own
game plan. Graeme, though, turns out to be a conundrum himself-a master at
pleasing anyone he's with and a tortured soul whose crippling case of writer's block
has undermined his self-confidence. It's Graeme who's in need of direction from
Charles, and after viewing the paintings Charles has never allowed anyone else to
see, Graeme finds inspiration to complete his second novel. The young author is
still plagued by his self-doubt, however, and commits suicide, leaving Charles to
take the guilt of Graeme's action upon himself. Alphin's cast engages in and leads
readers through serious exploration of art's purpose and an artist's responsibility to
his/her vision, but while the novel is heavy on philosophizing, it's painfully short
on plot. Charles' ponderous internal monologue ("Do we choose who we are, or
are we born that way? If Graeme was born a mirror, can he choose to change? Or
did he choose to become a mirror somewhere along the way, and can he revise that
choice? Did he already revise it, as he stood in my studio?") finds little relief in
sporadic entries from Graeme's journal and six-page suicide note, and his ultimate
release of conscience-a very long time coming-seems easy and pat when it ar-
rives. Despite the setting, this isn't quite what boarding-school-story fans have in
mind, but amateur psychologists will have a field day riding Charles' wave of in-
trospection. EB
ARMSTRONG, JENNIFER 
The Kindling; by Jennifer Armstrong and Nancy
Butcher. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
224p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029411-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-008048-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Five years after a virus apparently wiped out all the adult population, a small band
of child survivors have formed a makeshift family, modeled on what the eldest can
remember of life before the 2002 "fire-us." One young teen takes on the role of
Mommy, another Teacher, another Hunter, raising the littler ones according to
dimly remembered standards for "civilization." They have just reached a crisis, as
Hunter realizes that he's scavenged all the available food within their Florida town,
traumatized Mommy is unable to leave the confines of their house, and a new
player arrives-a teenage boy who calls himself Anchorman, mouthing news re-
ports through a picture frame and dragging along a mannequin ("Bad Guy") which
he blames and regularly pummels for all the world's troubles. Anchorman is set on
hiking to Washington, D.C. to find the President, and persuasion, bullying, and
sheer necessity finally impel the family to join him on his road trip. Having estab-
lished each child's peculiar personality trait and/or psychosis, Armstrong and Butcher
march them through predictable rounds of panic attacks, angry rages, and subse-
quent rapprochements. There's no obvious rhyme or reason to the children's er-
ratic memories; none can remember his or her name, but reading road maps, clipping
the Yellow Pages, and finding their way around deserted hotels seems to be second
nature. Still, Anchorman and his abused sidekick make a deliciously eerie pair,
and readers may be sufficiently intrigued by their ominous presence to stick around
for volume two of the proposed trilogy. EB
356 
* THE BULLETIN
ARNOSKY, JIM Field Trips: Bug Hunting, Animal Tracking, Bird-Watching, Shore
Walking; written and illus. by Jim Arnosky. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
96p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15173-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15172-8 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Four chapters on the rudiments of bird and bug watching, animal tracking, and
shore hiking prepare novices for neighborhood naturalizing-no matter where that
neighborhood may be. Each section addresses safety concerns and discusses simple
equipment to enhance observation and collection, suggests formats for field notes,
and offers ample black-and-white, drawn-to-scale silhouettes of tracks, bugs, birds,
shells, and vegetation that one might encounter. While much of the information
is available in standard field guides (which offer the additional benefit of color
illustrations, at that), Arnosky's just-enough approach brings an often overwhelm-
ing mass of flora and fauna down to a manageable level for first-time trekkers.
"Animal Tracking" is particularly informative, offering hints for distinguishing
similar tracks and discussing how tracks can morph in conditions such as snow
melt ("Consider how much a track has melted and enlarged before concluding that
'Bigfoot' is in your town"). Avid campers will probably prefer a resource geared to
their own region, but teachers organizing an outing will appreciate tips for focused
observation, and kids who've never gotten dirt on their gym shoes can step a bit
more confidently into the wild. EB
ARUEGO, JOSE 
Weird Friends: UnlikelyAllies in the Animal Kingdom; written and
illus. by Jose Aruego and Ariane Dewey. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-15-202128-0 
$16.00 
R 
5-9 yrs
This reliable duo introduces listeners to fourteen odd partnerships formed among
birds, mammals, and sea creatures for their mutual nourishment, hygiene, and/or
protection. Concise explanations are deftly geared to a young audience: "During
the day, while the mouse sleeps, the beetles dismount and eat the bugs in the
mouse's burrows. The beetles are always well fed, and the mouse and its house are
free of itchy insects." The text's observations are consistently upbeat (partnerships
seem so sturdily forged, it's a wonder any animals ever get eaten at all), and if the
cheery line-and-watercolor pictures occasionally make the predator/prey relation-
ship appear like a bit of a lark, the symbiotic arrangements between animal allies
are clearly conveyed. A helpful concluding page that tells listeners "Where You
Can Find Weird Friends" reviews each team's geographical region. Animals lovers
will lap this right up, and primary-grade teachers will want to consider this title to
round out a nature lesson or even to stimulate discussion on what makes a lasting
friendship. EB
BRIGGS, ANITA 
Hobart; illus. by Mary Rayner. 
Simon, 2002 
57p
ISBN 0-689-84129-9 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
The title pig and his brother and sister piglets possess hidden talents: Hobart is a
tap dancer, Byron a poet, Violet an acrobat, and Wilfred a singer. Their lives are
sunny and hopeful until, thanks to a jealous gander and a self-satisfied milk cow,
the little piglets discover their ultimate end (bacon). They flee Farmer Mills' farm
in order to develop their gifts, return in glory, and avoid their culinary fates. The
plot is derivative (shades of E. B. White), and the piglet characters are a bunch of
Wilbur wannabes without the useful contrast of Charlotte's spidery charm. Still,
the writing is simple and clear, and novice chapter-book readers will happily settle
JUNE 2002 
* 357
into the easy text and large typeface. Rayner's comfortably styled line drawings
offer some of the punch the text lacks. JMD
BYARS, BETSY 
Little Horse; illus. by David McPhail. 
Holt, 2002 
45p
ISBN 0-8050-6413-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 1-3
Checking out his reflection in the stream one day, inquisitive Little Horse acciden-
tally falls in and drifts away from his beloved home in the small valley ("No human
had ever put foot there. It was not on any map"). He encounters first a waterfall,
then an enormous hawk, and finally a land where everything (trees, dogs, humans)
is much larger than he is: "For the first time in his life, Little Horse realized that he
was small." After being scooped up by a huge farmer and handed over to a child as
a toylike pet, Little Horse rests while dreaming of a day when he will be able to
return to his home and family. The conclusion is a bit open-ended, as Little Horse
is still stuck away from home, but Little Horse is a sympathetic figure and young
readers will readily relate to his panic at finding himself helpless and alone. Pri-
mary-graders will easily manage the short sentences, simple vocabulary, and brief
chapters of Byars' text; quick pacing, cliffhanger chapter endings, and the unusual
situation will also encourage even impatient or hesitant readers to hang in there to
the end. McPhail's frequent full-page and spot-art drawings helpfully assist read-
ers in making inferences about the text, and composition and perspective are put
to good use to depict the scale of the vulnerable Little Horse against his enormous
surroundings. Despite its equivocal ending, this tale will still be an engrossing and
accessible adventure for many beginning readers. JMH
CADNUM, MICHAEL 
Forbidden Forest: The Story of Little John and Robin
Hood. Orchard, 2002 
218p
ISBN 0-439-31774-6 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Cadnum's In a Dark Wood (BCCB 6/98) explored the Robin Hood story from the
viewpoint of the Sheriff of Nottingham; now he turns to Little John, Robin Hood's
loyal lieutenant. Initially a simple ferryman, John flees to the forest after a contre-
temps leaves a knight dead and his own life in danger. He first finds a place with
the patrician outlaw Red Roger but forsakes him when Roger proves dangerous
and dishonorable; he then, after the traditional quarterstaff battle at the river cross-
ing, joins the band of Robin Hood. Meanwhile, back in Nottingham, young
Margaret Lea finds her knightly husband murdered on their wedding night, and
the sheriffs man is determined to pin the crime on Margaret; with her attendant,
she too flees to the forest, finding succor from Robin's band and a strange fascina-
tion with John. While this has some of the density and stately pace of the previous
volume, it's less inward and psychological, instead offering an atmospheric narra-
tive effectively balanced between a novel and a romance. Robin Hood here is the
blemishless and magnetic hero of ballad and John stalwart yet admirably sensitive,
and there's some not unenjoyable sentimentality in the picture of the storybook
life of the outlaws and of the attraction between Margaret and John ("The tender
friendliness of such a dangerous man both thrilled her and froze every thought").
There's action aplenty as well, however, with various cudgelings, scuffles, and ex-
ecutions in addition to a neat bit of plotting to save Robin Hood and Margaret in
one fell swoop. Though tapping into some of the contemporary revisionary im-
pulses for folklore, this is more an imaginative restoration that takes the legend
back to its balladic roots in the greenwood. DS
358 
* THE BULLETIN
CASELEY, JUDITH 
On the Town: A Community Adventure; written and illus. by
Judith Caseley. 
Greenwillow, 2002 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029585-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029584-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"Visit the people and places in your community. Take your notebooks and explore,"
says Charlie's teacher, so Charlie sets off with his mother to do just that. With
Mama's encouragement and assistance, Charlie carefully records and illustrates
each location they visit (the fire station, the park, and the pizza parlor, among
others) and each community member they meet as the two walk around town and
run several errands (such as purchasing stamps at the post office, getting a haircut,
and picking up Papa at the train station). As the day finally draws to a close,
Charlie discovers "the very best part" of his community: home. This is mostly a
catalogue of events and a list of typical community figures (in fairly gender-
stereotyped roles), but Caseley manages to inject ample interest into her purposive
tale with simple but credible characters and warm, detailed illustrations. Although
many of the compositions are cluttered and overly busy, the watercolor and colored
pencil illustrations (accented with black pen) are bright and engaging; Charlie is
particularly winsome with his dark, curly flat-top and yellow sneakers. This may
not be quite as much fun as Sesame Street's "Who Are the People in Your
Neighborhood?," but this is still a pleasant and useful introduction to the concept
of community. JMH
CLEMENTS, ANDREW 
Things Not Seen. 
Philomel, 2002 
251p
ISBN 0-399-23626-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Bobby wakes up one ordinary wintry morning to a very unordinary fact: he's
become invisible. His parents are understandably upset, and they're also deter-
mined to protect him from the media frenzy that will doubtless result if his condi-
tion becomes known, so they tell the school that he's out sick. Meanwhile, Bobby
is determined to find a cure, so he begins to research the problem; along the way he
befriends Alicia, whose blindness initially keeps her from realizing that Bobby is
invisible and who becomes privy to his secret as he struggles with daily life and the
possibility that his condition may not be reversible. This is a classically intriguing
idea, and Clements as usual adds extra kid appeal by making his youthful protago-
nist more capable than the adults in many ways (it's Bobby and not his physicist
father who figures out both the cause of and the solution to his problem); there is
also a bit of thoughtful exploration of some larger implications (was Bobby just as
invisible before to some people?). Unfortunately, the book lacks imagination on
several fronts, failing to investigate some of the obvious questions and largely leav-
ing characters cliched and predictable. The result therefore is a plodding problem
novel, with a rather unusual problem but the usual angst, alienation, and finally
resolution. There's a lot of missed opportunity here, but readers may still enjoy
the premise and Bobby's exploits. DS
COLFER, EOIN 
Artemis Fowl: The Arctic Incident. Miramax/Hyperion,
2002 
[2 8 8p]
ISBN 0-7868-0885-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Fans of the original Artemis Fowl (BCCB 7/01) will be happy to have him back in
JUNE 2002 
* 
359
this plot-packed sequel. With the help of his bodyguard/butler, Butler, teenage
criminal mastermind Artemis is attempting to rescue his father from the Russian
mafia who has held him captive for so long. Before he can accomplish this feat,
however, Artemis is sidetracked by a planned overthrow of fairyland by a dis-
gruntled, discharged member of the LEPrecon (Low Elements Police Reconnais-
sance) squad, Briar Cudgeon. A slow, hardware-heavy start thankfully segues into
a convoluted adventure of international proportions, with enough races, chases,
and near escapes to keep even the most action-addicted reader happy. Artemis and
previous nemesis elf Holly Short become nearly amiable allies, there is a vital visit
from that ferociously flatulent dwarf, Mulch Diggums, and Artemis actually gets
out in the field and gets himself more than a little dirty, proving that even the most
cerebral of geniuses can rise to physical action in a perilous pinch. The adult
humor of Artemis' sessions with the school psychologist may fly over the heads of
many readers, and the nastiness of Cudgeon teeters edgily on the brink of real
darkness; still, all ends well, and even Artemis has grown by the conclusion of this
snappy action-fantasy-adventure. JMD
COOPER, ELISHA 
Ice Cream; written and illus. by Elisha Cooper. 
Greenwillow,
2002 
[4 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-001424-5 
$15.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-001423-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-10 yrs
OLDER, JULES 
Ice Cream; illus. by Lyn Severance. 
Charlesbridge, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-88106-111-5 
$16.95
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88106-112-3 
$6.95 
R 
Gr. 2-5
The summer heat is on, ice cream's on everyone's mind, and two delectable new
titles arrive to whip kids' cravings into a feeding frenzy. Cooper traces modern ice-
cream manufacturing from pasture to milking barn, to factory, to market, and,
somewhat sneakily, back to pasture ("The farmer... walks out to the field and eats
ice cream with his cows. Well, he lets them watch"). In his signature watercolor
shorthand of slashes and dabs, Cooper evokes the sensory as well as mechanical
aspects of a process: "The ice cream machine sits on the factory floor. It is a steel,
piston-pumping, cream-dripping, gadget-whirring, water-spraying, pipe-rattling,
chocolate-leaking animal." Older tackles the history of frozen confections, from
the days when "guys with big arms and sharp saws used to cut ice out of frozen
lakes," through innovations in ice-cream technology-"Now, instead of turning
and scraping a pot, all you did was spin a crank until your arm fell off'-to current
statistics on ice-cream consumption-"Canadians: You've dropped from fifth to
seventh place. If you want to be in the top five, you've got to apply yourselves."
Cartoon artwork is sprawling and splashy, outlined in thick black line to pack an
even heavier visual punch. Both approaches are sure to please; stack 'em up for a
luscious double dip. EB
CRESPO, CLAIRE 
The Secret Life of Food; illus. with photographs by Eric
Staudenmaier. 
Melcher Media/Hyperion, 2002 
[108p]
ISBN 0-7868-0846-2 
$19.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-9
Though the title might indicate otherwise, this is neither a cheesy science filmstrip
about the wonders of nutrition nor a steamy expose on the private affairs of comes-
360 
* THE BULLETIN
tibles but rather a clever collection of recipes for culinary creativity. Crespo's main
focus is the transformation of familiar foods into totally different edible entities,
such as Licorice Records, a Jell-O Aquarium (with gummy fish), and Potato Flip-
Flops. Crespo also dishes up a few cool "fake-out" foods (cherry-cola flavored
gelatin served in a soda glass complete with straw and cherry) and gross-out dishes
(Spaghetti with Eyeballs, Finger Cookies), as well as a sprinkling of old favorites
(cupcakes baked in ice cream cones), some slightly revised (Sheep in Blankets).
There's a good mix of recipes here: various courses and categories-snacks, en-
trees, sides, desserts, and beverages-are all represented, and both the concepts
and actual results will appeal to kids' tastes. Full-page color photos are vivid and
clear, featuring the finished foods in clever settings (the Potato Flip-Flops are shown
poolside, Anatomical Heart Cookies are packed in an ice chest with bottles of red
soda), and the book's layout is unobtrusive, yet slick and stylish. A short statement
in small print at the end of the book offers the only indication that adult assistance
is needed, though adult help is clearly necessary for many recipes (some compli-
cated steps are left unexplained) and a few more tips on safe handling of food and
equipment might have been in order. Still, for the savvy teen cook or young chefs
with access to adults who know their way around the kitchen, this toothsome
tome will provide plenty of opportunities for fun with food. JMH
CRONIN, DOREEN 
Giggle, Giggle, Quack; illus. by Betsy Lewin. 
Simon,
2002 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-689-84506-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-6 yrs
Having been driven to the edge by his typing cows (Click Clack Moo, BCCB 9/00),
Farmer Brown is taking a vacation, leaving his brother Bob to tend the farm. Bob
diligently follows the instructions left for him, liberally providing the barn-dwell-
ers with delivery pizza, pampering the pigs with Farmer Brown's best bubble bath
and towels, and treating the critters to the video of their choice, convinced that
these are his brother's directions. The livestock's ill-suppressed snickering and
some illustrative hints give the game away, however: they've replaced Farmer
Brown's instructions with their own requirements for luxurious care. This doesn't
have the effective plot development of the previous title-Bob's just fooled, fooled,
and fooled again-and the execution of the moment of discovery robs it of some
of its punch (we never see what Bob thinks of it all), but it is still a bucolic tale of
suave animal manipulation. While the illustrations aren't as clear as they might be
on the mechanics of note substitution, they're exuberant indeed, their generous,
freewheeling lines and splashes of color creating pigs that radiate comfort, cows
whose own butter wouldn't melt in their mouths, and a poker-faced duck (astute
viewers will note details reflecting the proceedings of the previous book, such as
the electric blankets warming the snoozing animals). Young audiences ready to
move beyond animal noises to some rollicking barnyard conspiracy will be happy
to giggle along with the livestock. DS
DENSLOW, 
SHARON 
PHILLIPS 
Georgie Lee; illus. 
by Lynne Rae
Perkins. 
Greenwillow, 2002 
[96p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17941-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17940 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
This series of chapter-length episodes about young J.D.'s experiences on his
JUNE 2002 
* 361
grandmother's farm features a cow of great bovine mettle, Georgie Lee, and events
ranging from cattle driving to corn-swiping. Though Georgie Lee meanders through
the story, this is really about the relationship between J.D. and his grandmother,
quietly revealed through the concrete details of daily life on a farm: climbing a tree
("It seems, J.D.," says Grandmother, "I remembered how to climb up a tree, but I
forgot how to get down"), saving Georgie Lee from a storm ("That's not Georgie
Lee.... 
It's the hay tarp caught on the fence"), and facing wasps ("'Move slowly,'
Grandmother called, 'and they won't bother you'"). While a few aspects may
puzzle youngsters (the joke J.D. and Grandmother tell her brother may leave read-
ers scratching their heads), they'll be hooked by Denslow's inclusion of popular
primary-grades topics ranging from snakeskins to birthdays. Perkins' line draw-
ings, often featured in attractive vignettes, are delicately textured with hatch and
crosshatch resulting in a certain rustic formality. Fans of Mills' Gus and Grandpa
books who are ready for the transition to a slightly longer text will enjoy spending
time on the farm with J.D. and company. EAB
DOYLE, BRAN 
Mary Ann Alice. 
Groundwood, 2002 
168p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88899-453-2 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Mary Ann Alice is the bell in the church at Martindale, Quebec, and it's also the
name of our narrator, the bellringer's daughter and the seventh-grade classmate of
Mickey McGuire (from Uncle Ronald, BCCB 2/97). According to her beloved
teacher, Patchy Drizzle, Mary Ann Alice has the soul of a poet; she's also got the
opportunity to observe some exciting changes in her neck of the woods, where
they're going to build a new hydroelectric dam across the Gatineau River. The
dam brings many things: work for some, the loss of farmland and house for oth-
ers, and for Patchy Drizzle, apparently, death in an explosion-though Mary Ann
Alice refuses to believe it. Doyle continues to find richness in his eccentric country
ensemble of colorful characters, like Lake Wobegon moved to Canada and back to
the 1920s; amid his blissful serendipities, however, are harder-edged historical re-
alities about the juggernaut of progress as it hits this small farming community (an
author's note explains that he's taken some minor fictional license, but the exploi-
tation of the residents whose livelihoods were drowned with little or no recom-
pense is factual). As usual, however, he provides plenty of interest of a more personal
kind, whether it be the discovery of fossilized Arthur the Arthropod, Mary Ann
Alice's inexorable intention to get kissed by Mickey McGuire, or Patchy Drizzle's
triumphant return aboard an unmoored house floating down the flooded Gatineau.
All this is related in Doyle's salt-of-the-earth, dialogue-laden style, which makes
the narrative slip down easily even as it offers a surprisingly complex literary expe-
rience. DS
EASTON, KELLY 
Trouble at Betts Pets. Candlewick, 2002 
133p
ISBN 0-7636-1580-3 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Betts Pets, independently owned and operated for two generations, is suffering
from competition with larger chains. In addition, its stock is mysteriously disap-
pearing, apparently the result of shoplifting (petlifting?). These troubles weigh
heavily on fifth-grader Aaron Betts, who has spent his afterschool hours and week-
ends tending the pets and helping out his family; Aaron is also depressed by his
poor math grades and the specter of being tutored by snotty Sharon Trout. Aaron
and Sharon tentatively develop a friendship, however, and when they accidentally
discover a cache of stolen pet-store animals in the apartment above his parents'
362 
* THE BULLETIN
store, it is Sharon who brainstorms a stakeout to catch the culprit. Easton has
created an endearing protagonist in Aaron, who identifies all his human acquain-
tances with animals, and an endearing cast of secondary characters such as Aaron's
droopy-eyed father and next-door neighbor Tony. Unfortunately, the plot is of-
ten slow, and Aaron's proclivity for sounding too wise for his years takes away
from the strength of the story. Kids may nonetheless be drawn to this quick read
and to Aaron and his enclave of unusual friends, who are scheduled to return in a
sequel. EAB
FALCONER, IAN 
Olivia Counts; ISBN 0-689-85087-5; Olivia's Opposites; ISBN
0-689-85088-3. 
Each book: written and illus. by Ian Falconer. 
Simon,
2002 
14 p 
$6.99 
R 
2-4 yrs
The sophisticated, fashion-conscious, undeniably histrionic piglet Olivia plays to
a younger audience in this set of board books. Curmudgeons may grumblingly
note that almost all the tidy vignettes displayed here (with the exception of some
porcine aunts and cousins making their debut) have been lifted from more copious
spreads in Olivia (BCCB 11/00) and Olivia Saves the Circus (11/01). However,
given the images' remarkable success second time around, it's fair to say that Fal-
coner simply exercises ecological responsibility, transforming used material into
something new and useful. With her "long" red gown or "short" red tutu, her
"plain" undies and "fancy" accessories, Olivia's sartorial obsession transfers smoothly
to concept-book format, and her "two" ear bows, "five" books, and "six" scary
paper bag mask teeth clue viewers to her wide-ranging interests. While a few
references will fly over the heads of the board-book audience, listeners too little to
comprehend Olivia's longer adventures will nonetheless recognize a strong charac-
ter when they see one, and they'll surely appreciate the introduction. EB
FAMA, ELIZABETH 
Overboard. Cricket, 2002 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-8126-2652-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
A family spat nearly costs fourteen-year-old Emily her life when she impetuously
runs away from a northern Sumatra hospital, where her parents are medical mis-
sionaries, to join her sympathetic uncle on the nearby island of Weh. Her over-
crowded ferryboat capsizes a few miles from shore, and Emily spends over seventeen
hours in the sea, buoyed by her inflated leggings and, eventually, by the compan-
ionship of a devout nine-year-old Muslim boy, Isman. Fama moves swiftly from
the family drama setup into the survival story, and what a first rate nail-biter it is.
No raging storms and tossing waves here-fear and guilt, desperate fellow survi-
vors, exhaustion, severe sunburn, dehydration, strong currents, and treacherous
whirlpools turn Emily's deceptively warm and placid stretch of Indian Ocean into
a battle arena. Each child taps a source of inner strength, Isman his submissive
faith and Emily her physical training and resourcefulness, but in the end it is their
cooperation and common will that bring their plight to a credible and oh-so-
welcome conclusion. EB
FISHER, LEONARD EVERETT 
Gods and Goddesses of the Ancient Norse; written and
illus. by Leonard Everett Fisher. 
Holiday House, 2002 
34p
ISBN 0-8234-1569-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Fisher, long a raconteur of the mythological and mystical, here presents a roster of
gods and goddesses of the ancient Norse. A short introduction to the Norse
JUNE 2002 
* 363
worldview is followed by brief biographies of the gods and goddesses: each spread
features a portrait of a specific deity and several paragraphs about his or her ori-
gins, powers, and functions within the pantheon. Fisher opens with Odin, fol-
lowed by Frigga, Thor, and Baldur, and then moves into the lesser-known gods
and goddesses, including Hermod, Niord, Bragi, and Tyr. Each entry is succinct
and specific, with just enough information to whet readers' appetites for more
details. Fisher's monumental paintings are rendered in opaque pigments that lends
them weight and authority. Front endpapers feature a world map with the "Lands
of the Ancient Norse" in icy blue; back endpapers feature a brief bibliography, a
pronunciation guide, and a "Norse Family Tree" of gods, goddesses, and giants.
While some of the images run to wooden expressions and ponderously drafted
physiognomies, the cover portrait of a horn-helmeted, one-eyed Odin will bring
readers running. JMD
FLETCHER, RALPH 
Poetry Matters: Writing a Poem from the Inside
Out. HarperCollins, 2002 
142p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623599-5 
$15.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-380-79703-8 
$4.95 
R 
Gr. 5 up
JANECZKO, PAUL, ed. 
Seeing the Blue Between: Advice and Inspiration for Young
Poets. Candlewick, 2002 
132p
ISBN 0-7636-0881-5 
$17.99 
R 
Gr. 5 up
These two titles have somewhat different approaches, but they're both nearly irre-
sistible invitations to the craft of poetry. While Fletcher includes a few interviews
(with Kristine O'Connell George, Janet S. Wong, and J. Patrick Lewis), most of
his text is direct discussion of writing, with examples of poetry (including poems
by young people) scattered throughout for illustration. Issues addressed include
soundplay, form, structure, and poetic subjects, with useful and practical guidance
on how to make things go right and how to repair the situation if they don't.
Noted compiler Janeczko has, fittingly, compiled his poetic introduction, pulling
together words of wisdom and an appetizer of a poem or two from thirty-two
poets, some whose writing for young people will doubtless be familiar to readers
(Douglas Florian, Nikki Grimes, Jack Prelutsky) and some whose writing is largely
aimed at adults (Christine Hemp, Mark Vinz). The range of approaches and styles
is impressive and broadening, and the difference only accentuates the consistency
of the advice: "READ. READ. READ," as Robert Farnsworth puts it (Andrew
Hudgins points out that poems are great bathroom reading, since they're finishable
in a sitting), and revise, revise, revise ("With a little time taken and a little critical
assessment," says Adam Ford, "ordinary poems can become quite extraordinary").
Both titles are browsable and invigorating, marrying sympathetic encouragement
to concrete assistance; young poets and poetry curricula won't want to miss either
of them. Fletcher adds an annotated bibliography of recommended poetic works;
Janeczko appends notes on contributors and an index of first lines for the included
poems. DS
FLINN, ALEX 
Breaking Point. HarperTempest, 2002 
[224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623848-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623847-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Gate-Brickell Christian is a toney private school attended by the rich and privi-
leged-and a few despised offspring of the staff, like Paul Richmond. He's a
364 
* THE BULLETIN
lonely fish out of water, resenting the smothering attentions of his newly divorced
mother and developing a default friendship with the class oddball, when he's singled
out by Charlie Good. Charlie, the magnetic class ringleader, becomes the center of
Paul's world: his approval is Paul's greatest reward, his understanding is Paul's
balm, and his disappointment is Paul's despair ("And there was the promise of
more, of being his friend and really belonging for the first time in my life. I wanted
that more than anything, enough to do almost anything"). Paul's loyalty to Charlie
takes him from vandalism (battering mailboxes) to cheating (breaking into the
school and changing Charlie's grades in the computer) to, finally, leaving a Charlie-
made bomb in a classroom ("It'll start a fire, that's all. A harmless little fire where
everyone will have fun in the sprinklers"). While this is emphatically pointed
throughout (it's no surprise that Paul gets caught and takes the rap while Charlie
gets off scot-free) and Paul's too hollow a character for his fate to be genuinely
tragic, the taut inevitability of his approaching doom makes for gripping reading.
The story's main impact lies in Paul's willful and continuous denial, which strength-
ens and expands in the face of indication after indication of Charlie's malignity:
the warnings of a student, the killing of a dog, the suicide of a classmate; there's
therefore a building tension in Paul's every spiral downward, since readers will
increasingly wonder not if he'll be caught but if he'll admit what he's actually
doing. This isn't as nuanced as Giles' Shattering Glass (BCCB 5/02), but it's a dark
drama of self-destruction that should make for grimly satisfying reading. DS
Fox, CHRISTYAN 
What Shape Is That, PiggyWiggy?; written and illus. by Christyan
and Diane Fox. 
Handprint, 2002 
20p
ISBN 1-929766-44-0 
$5.95 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
Fox, CHRISTYAN 
What's the Opposite, Piggy Wiggy?; written and illus. by Christyan
and Diane Fox. 
Handprint, 2002 
20p
ISBN 1-929766-43-2. $5.95 
R 2-5 yrs
Truly a Renaissance Man (well, Pig), our massive-snouted pink hero turns his
hand to both construction and aeronautics in this set of sturdy board books. Un-
der the watchful eye of his sidekick teddy bear in Shape, PiggyWiggy builds a
house, with a square foundation, rectangular bricks, diamond-shaped tiles, etc. A
couple of glitches spoil the effect, as the roof is described as a triangle (clearly the
roof is rectangular; it's the gable that's a triangle), and the red-brick edifice inexpli-
cably changes to white by the last spread (without, one might add, the aid of a
cylinder of paint). PiggyWiggy and Teddy fare better as pilots in Opposites, zoom-
ing their respective aircraft over and under a rainbow, in hot and cold locales, on
sunny and rainy days, until, having journeyed apart, now "they are flying together.
Hooray!" PiggyWiggy is pretty darn endearing, with his dot eyes, overgrown ears,
and bubbly enthusiasm in all undertakings, and the Foxes strike a nice balance
between detail and clarity in their neatly outlined cartoon scenes. PiggyWiggy
should prove to be an amiable newcomer in the board-book neighborhood. EB
GIBLIN, JAMES CROSS 
The Life and Death of Adolph Hitler. Clarion,
2002 
[256p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-90371-8 
$21.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Whereas novelists can be forgiven, even applauded, for manifesting delight in their
own well-drawn villains, nonfiction writers are held to a more sobering standard
JUNE 2002 
* 365
when confronting infamy. In his restrained yet nonetheless chilling text, Giblin
ably traces Hitler's rise from indifferent student and homeless artist to soldier,
political orator, statesman, and catalyst for world-altering havoc. Although no
new informational ground is broken here, Giblin has a keen eye for telling detail
and apt quotes, frequently catching in a contemporary remark the ironic foreshad-
owing of the maelstrom to come. For example, the warden of Landsberg Prison,
where Hitler was incarcerated following the failed Munich beer hall uprising, notes,
"There is no doubt that he has become a much more quiet, more mature and
thoughtful individual during his imprisonment than he was before, and does not
contemplate acting against existing authority." With the exception of a few judi-
cious clarifications (e.g., noting that Hitler's claim that Jews avoided service in
World War I is patently inaccurate), Giblin reserves his personal commentary to
the closing pages dealing with Hitler's death and the persistence of neo-Nazism
today. Such reservation cannot be construed as exoneration or even dispassion,
however; his sure-handed exposition of Hitler's polemics, policies, and actions
merely requires little editorializing. An excellent selection of photographs, maps,
and political cartoons is included, as well as source notes and a glossary; an index
will be included in the bound book. EB
GRAVES, BONNIE 
Taking Care of Trouble; illus. by Robin Preiss Glasser. 
Dutton,
2002 
70p
ISBN 0-525-46830-7 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Fifth-grader Joel isn't quite sure how he wound up taking care of Tucker (a.k.a
Trouble), the toddler next door. An astute reader, however, will realize that it has
something to do with the persuasive powers of Rachel, Joel's friend Ralphie's pretty
older sister and Trouble's usual sitter. After succumbing to Rachel's pleas (she is
desperate to go to the mall and get a t-shirt featuring her favorite rock band, Scum
and the Suds), the inexperienced Joel finds himself babysitting for a howling tod-
dler with very definite opinions and needs-such as food, entertainment, and clean
diapers. Joel copes (despite the interference of Ralphie, who is determined to
videotape the whole disastrous afternoon), with his own good sense and a little
help from Trouble. This title never quite achieves the buoyancy that would make
it light and easy; the dialogue isn't particularly snappy, and the momentum doesn't
reach the rolling pace necessary to carry the contrived plot. Still, there's enough
broad physical humor-an escaped cockatoo, Trouble's getting covered with baby
food, a smelly diaper-changing scene-to keep emergent readers reading. Full-
page line drawings throughout add some welcome comic visuals to the mix. JMD
GREEN, MICHELLE Y. 
A Strong Right Arm: The Story of Mamie "Peanut"
Johnson. Dial, 2002 
[128p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8037-2661-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
Among the few women to play Negro League baseball, Mamie Johnson was ninety-
eight pounds of pitching power-mentored by the likes of Satchel Paige, consign-
ing heavy hitters to the bench with fastballs, change-ups, and the occasional curve.
Her three years of professional success, however, required as much fortitude off
the field as ability on. The Supreme Court had not yet dealt Jim Crow his death
blow when Mamie ascended in her career, and her discouraging attempt to break
into the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League proved to be a foretaste
366 
* THE BULLETIN
of the discrimination she would face touring with the Negro League: "Not one of
the skirted women who had worked so hard for the right to take to the field ...
took a step in our direction." Mamie's tale is one of triumph and pride, though,
not bitterness, and her pure delight in sportsmanship rings through. Close col-
laboration between author and subject is evident from the content and tone of
Johnson's introductory remarks, as her foreword segues into Green's account, writ-
ten in Johnson's first-person voice, without a noticeable shift in voice. Green/
Johnson's narration smacks of the spit-and-vinegar attitude readers would expect
of such a determined athlete, and sports enthusiasts will marvel at a time when the
girls could play pro hardball with the boys. EB
HASKINS, JIM 
Champion: The Story of Muhammad Ali; illus. by Eric
Velasquez. 
Walker, 2002 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8785-1 
$18.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8784-3 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
This picture-book biography of Muhammad Ali is packed with information about
the renowned boxer, perhaps even more so than Gordon's easy chapter book
(MuhammadAli, BCCB 5/02). Like Gordon, Haskins hews close to the major
incidents in Ali's life, emphasizing his close relationship to his parents and his early
determination to succeed. While the first three of his four marriages are not men-
tioned (either in the main text or in the chronology of his life), Ali's conversion
and devotion to Islam is given appropriate weight. Most of the text is flatly ex-
planatory, but sprinkled throughout are quotes from Ali himself in the rhyming
verse that was so popular with the press and Ali's fans. Velasquez' florid oil paint-
ings are inconsistently executed, ranging from journalistic photorealism to unrec-
ognizable portraiture, and the compositions are generally staid. Despite the
uninspired text and uneven illustrations, there is an inherent power to the story of
this legendary athlete. Use this for reluctant readers or to whet appetites for Myers'
The Greatest: Muhammad Ali (BCCB 4/01). A brief bibliography is appended.
JMD
HEUSTON, KIMBERLEY 
The Shakeress. 
Front Street, 2002 
[21 6 p]
ISBN 1-886910-56-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Following the death of their parents and baby brother in a fire, Naomi and her
three siblings find life with their aunt intolerable. Naomi and elder brother Ben
agree that their best chance for completing their education and learning a useful
trade in their early nineteenth-century community can be found among the neigh-
boring Shakers, and with cautious optimism they put themselves in that order's
hands. Despite the initial hardship of being separated in gender-segregated houses
and activities, all four children flourish. Naomi develops her skills as herbalist and
healer, Ben gets to travel on trade missions, Eli learns woodworking, and Glory is
simply content. In time, however, Naomi recognizes that Shakerism requires a
commitment she cannot make, and with the community's blessing she leaves to
begin a new life as a healer in a frontier town. There she becomes engaged to an
agreeable, hard-working young man; still, doubts persist, and ultimately her ac-
ceptance of Mormonism offers her clear direction: "She wanted to live a life that
meant something, that demanded her best, so that when it was over ... she could
look back and say, I didn't skimp. I became the woman God wanted me to be."
JUNE 2002 
* 367
Heuston skillfully sets thoughtful discussion of spiritual growth and religious choice
into a tale that finds and embraces the good in disparate religious traditions, and
only diehard romantics who cannot forgive Naomi's broken engagement will rue
her choice. EB
HOFFMAN, ALICE 
Indigo. Scholastic, 2002 
84 p
ISBN 0-439-25635-6 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Hoffman's previous foray into fabulae for young adults was Aquamarine (BCCB
2/01), a tale about a stranded mermaid helped by two soon-to-be-parted friends.
The setting in this second water-fable is not a seaside resort but the landlocked
town of Oak Grove; the main characters here are also high and dry, albeit not
literally. Thirteen-year-old Martha is mourning the death of her beloved mother
and saddened by her father's consequent self-isolation. Her two best friends, adopted
brothers Trevor and Eli (a.k.a Trout and Eel) are isolated by their physical differ-
ences (webbing between their fingers and toes) and by their desire for the sea,
which they have never seen. When the three decide to leave home and head for the
coast, their departure is complicated by a violent rainstorm that threatens to drench
the town. Fortunately, the boys' natural gifts allow them to save the town from
flooding, and eventually their mysterious origins are revealed (they're the offspring
of a mermaid and a sailor). The plot is obvious, and it's device, not drama, that
brings this story to its contrived end. Hoffman does capture the essence of the
innocently knowledgeable adolescent in the characterizations of Martha, Trout,
and Eel, however, and the supernatural overtones will intrigue readers. The pro-
duction values for this little novella are very high-running headers, page num-
bers, and full-page illustrations for each chapter are done in an inky blue; endpapers
feature a light-shot sea with fish silhouettes. Fancy but facile, this is still an easy
booktalk, and it may have transient appeal for mer-people aficionados. JMD
HOLBROOK, SARA 
Wham! It's a Poetry Jam: Discovering Performance
Poetry. Wordsong/Boyds Mills, 2002 
55p
Library ed. ISBN 1-56397-998-5 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59078-011-6 $9.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Poet and frequent performer Holbrook offers an enthusiastic endorsement of po-
etic performance, including dozens of her own poems to serve as examples and
suggestions. She discusses volume ("But always remember, there is a lot of power
in talking softly, too"), rhythm ("When you recite a rhyming poem, you shouldn't
sound as if you are bouncing on a bucking bronco"), movement ("As a performer,
you need to feel comfortable moving your arms, feet, and body"), and other as-
pects of delivery and introduces various possibilities for performance (choral read-
ing, call and response) and performance opportunities (various kinds of poetry
contests). There are some exciting ideas here for both kids and professionals (who
will be able to translate many of them appropriately for kids too young or old for
reading the book itself). Unfortunately, lack of organization (there's no particular
progression or shape in the arrangement) and clarity (phraseology and terms are
too often unexplained) interferes with the book's utility, and the tone sometimes
turns from the personal to simply gushy; the poems are also rather an uneven lot.
Still, the opportunities will draw the dramatic even as the sage advice bolsters the
timid, so readers will be ready to jam. No notes or indices for the poems are
included. DS
368 * THE BULLETIN
JACKSON, DONNA M. 
The Bug Scientists. Houghton, 2002 
4 8p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Scientist in the Field)
ISBN 0-618-10868-8 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-7
It's hard not to like a book that starts off with a cricket-spitting contest ("The
young contestant leans his head back, draws in a breath, and wraps his tongue
around a slippery dead cricket") and explores the crime-solving capabilities of
maggots ("If insects are found in parts of the body that usually do not attract
bugs-like the shoulders or thighs-it often indicates that there have been injuries
to those area" [sic]). These and other tidbits are all in a day's work for the insect
professionals featured here in this overview of some of the more dramatic aspects
of entomology. Longer portraits of three entomologists alternate with smaller
"Bug Bits" treating interesting facts, projects, and careers (including a Hollywood
entomologist who trains insects for the silver screen), and pages bedecked with
color photographs and diagrams offer views of various long-legged beasties and
their minders. The different directions make for a rather scattered approach, un-
fortunately, and the narrative seems rather cobbled together as a consequence; the
subject might be better served by more in-depth exploration of fewer topics, espe-
cially the more unusual ones. 
There's still an eye-opening view of the world of
insects and entomologists, with enticingly gross bits galore for kids looking for
something to squeal at and a generous helping of surprising information for those
looking to expand their horizons. A list of insect superlatives, a glossary, a selec-
tion of print and electronic resources, and an index are included. DS
JAMES, SIMON 
The Birdwatchers; written and illus. by Simon James. 
Candlewick,
2002 26p
ISBN 0-7636-1676-1 
$15.99 
R 6-9 yrs
Jess's granddad regales her with stories of his birdwatching adventures, telling her,
"Jess, when I go birdwatching, things happen." He insists, for instance, that when
he draws pictures of birds, sometimes they draw him, too, and that when he can't
find birds' names in his field guide, they help him. When Jess finally decides to go
birdwatching with her grandfather, she's initially disappointed: "I couldn't see
anything at all." Clever Granddad takes her into the blind, however, from where
she sees dozens of different kinds of birds; on the way home, Jess tells grandfather
a birdwatching story of her own ("Granddad, I liked it best when the dancing
penguins came and shared my sandwich"), joining her grandfather in the tradi-
tions of birdwatching and tale-telling in one fell swoop. The close relationship
between Jess and her grandfather (reminiscent of Helen Griffith's similar duo in
Georgia Music, BCCB 12/86, etc.) is effectively and quietly conveyed through the
simple, understated text, and audiences will appreciate Jess' move from outsider to
participant in the family tradition. The woodland setting, with its sun-dappled
foliage, is evocatively rendered in line and watercolor; Jess and her granddad are
dot-eyed but expressive characters with a comfortably homey air. Some young-
sters may need to stretch a bit to reach the dry humor, but they'll all warm to the
shared joke and the shared outing. JMD
JANECZKO, PAUL, ed. 
Seeing the Blue Between: Advice and Inspiration for Young
Poets.
See review under Fletcher, p. 363.
JUNE 2002 
* 369
JEAPES, BEN 
The Xenocide Mission. 
Fickling, 2002 
[4 00p]
ISBN 0-385-75007-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
At mid twenty-second century, Earth has established an alliance with a technologi-
cally advanced species of furry quadrupeds (First Breed), who have been geneti-
cally engineered to require outside leadership and who, although officially regarded
as political equals, now depend on humans for guidance. An unprovoked attack
on a manned spy satellite by a warrior species (dubbed XCs, for a previous xenocidal
attack on Dead World) tests the strength of the Commonwealth alliance as cap-
tured XC prisoners and newfound survivors on Dead World slowly shed light on
the reasons for the attacks, and a host of interested parties manipulate the conflict
to promote their own political agendas. Jeapes winds surefootedly through his
labyrinth of plot points and viewpoints. A strong measure of humor, slyly directed
at the next century's British Navy, spices the action, and as plotting never quite
upstages character development, even such stock devices as interspecies sidekicks
and multi-limbed foes are surprisingly fresh. Teens scanning the galaxy for sum-
mer sci-fi fare will want to tuck this title in with their beach gear. EB
KING-SMITH, DICK 
George Speaks; illus. by Judy Brown. 
Roaring Brook,
2002 
92p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2519-0 
$21.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1544-6 $14.95 
M 
Gr. 2-4
Laura is very unimpressed with her new baby brother-that is, until she discovers
he can talk. Apparently George is an old (pompous) soul, who somehow retained
his intellectual abilities, and here he is, in the body of an infant, with the brain of
an educated adult. In the first few chapters, Laura attempts to keep George's
secret; she spends the rest of the book trying to help her inept parents cope with
the reality of their precocious bundle of joy. The premise here has distinct possi-
bilities, but the humor is adult and the action, by necessity, is minimal. George is
a tyrannical little windbag, without the charm babies need to keep their caregivers
caring; he even sneers at Laura, his confidant and ally. This is essentially a one-
joke enterprise, and after the initial surprise wears off, the remaining attempts at
humor fall flat. Brown's line drawings make George look a lot cuter than he reads.
JMD
KURTZ, JANE 
Water Hole Waiting; by Jane and Christopher Kurtz; illus. by Lee
Christiansen. 
Greenwillow, 2002 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029851-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029850-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Young Monkey wakes thirsty and wants to hasten to the water hole, but his cau-
tious mother holds him back: "Wait! Mama grabs his paw. Stay away from
Hippo's yawning jaws." Monkey watches impatiently as various animal species-
hippos, zebras, elephants, etc.-take their turn at the water hole. He is not the
only observer, though: crocodile is also watching for a chance, not to drink, but to
eat. Eventually, Monkey, his mother, and their pack go to the water hole to drink
(they manage to avoid what is apparently a very slow crocodile). There are some
distractingly odd turns of phrase in the text, and inconsistent use of internal and
end rhyme makes it uncertain as poetry and uneven as prose. The cumulative
370 
* 
THE BULLETIN
momentum is effective, however; the addition of the danger of the crocodile adds
some small suspense, and the thirstiness of the young monkey is palpably evoked.
Pastel illustrations shift between naturalistic and awkward, the sometimes majesti-
cally rendered animals undermined by overly anthropomorphized expressions and
rolling eyes. An author's note gives some background on the natural events that
inspired this look at the fauna on the African savannah. JMD
LEE, TANTH 
Wolf Queen. 
Dutton, 2002 
216p
ISBN 0-525-46895-1 
$16.99 
M 
Gr. 7-10
The third and final entry in the Claidi's Journal trilogy finds protagonist Claidi
aloft in a mechanical marvel, the Star, accompanied by the robot YinYay, who
provides for her every need. The ship malfunctions just as they locate the Hulta,
the nomadic tribe led by Claidi's fiance, Argul. As it happens, Argul has renounced
his leadership of the tribe and gone into exile because he and the Hulta believe that
Claidi deliberately deserted him on their wedding day. The action of the novel
revolves around Claidi's quest to find Argul, and, as in the previous titles in the
series (Wolf Tower, BCCB 7/00), her quest to discover the secret of her origins.
The romance between Claidi and Argul is still a bright spot. Unfortunately, Lee's
uneasy techno-fantasy has a plodding pace that simply can't carry the overbur-
dened plot. The journal device (the narrative is written as Claidi's diary) is hack-
neyed, and Claidi's contrived asides to the reader lack grace. The characters are
flatly two-dimensional, and the exposition is contrived in content and in presenta-
tion (a nice long speech wraps up the trilogy, revealing Claidi's origins and the
Machiavellian motivations of her enemies). Those seeking a strong fantasy trilogy
should look to tried and still-true authors such as McCaffrey, Pierce, and McKillip;
leave this trilogy locked in the tower where it belongs. JMD
LEVY, CONSTANCE 
Splash!: Poems of Our Watery World; illus. by David
Soman. 
Orchard, 2002 
48p
ISBN 0-439-29318-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Thirty-four short poems make up this H 20-themed poetry collection. The po-
ems' contents cover a broad range of aquatic topics, including not only water in its
varying states (liquid, solid, and gas forms all put in an appearance) but also geo-
graphic bodies of water (lakes, oceans, rivers), uses of water (doing the laundry,
making soap bubbles), creatures associated with water (fish, turtles, alligators), and
the role of water in the human body. The result is a diverse yet clearly connected
group of poems that manage to possess both middle-grade appeal and curricular
usefulness. Nearly all of Levy's poems have a fluid rhythm and cadence that scans
well and suits the watery theme ("See how the stream/ suddenly leaps/ loose and
free/ from the mountain's brink"-"Splash!"). Many of the poems incorporate
some element of rhyme, while successfully avoiding a fall into mere singsong verse:
"Wave after wave,/ each wave/ a beat/ each beat/ repeating/ each stretch/ reced-
ing"-"Ocean Rhythms"; "In the black of this cave/ where bats bunk by day/ and
spelunkers with lanterns/ push darkness away,/ water spots linger/ with juice/ from
the rock"-"Plink by Plink." Humorous wordplay trickles its way into a few
poems as well, as in "Rain, Dance!" in which bored plants pester a rain cloud:
"C'mon, let's celebrate./ Make Thunder/ clap!" The monochromatic use of blue,
in both type and illustrations, is appropriately marine; the art (in-what else?-
watercolor) is smoky and liquid, with atmospheric views of water roiling, limpid,
JUNE 2002 * 371
and frozen. Use these poems in language arts, science, or geography classes, pull
them out for a rainy-day readaloud, or just let young poetry lovers immerse them-
selves in these watery words. JMH
Liu, SiYU 
A Thousand Peaks: Poems from China; ad. and written by Siyu Liu and
Orel Protopopescu; illus. by Siyu Liu. 
Pacific View, 2002 
52p
ISBN 1-881896-24-2 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 6-12
Here's a poetry collection with a difference: thirty-six brief Chinese poems dating
from the third to the twentieth centuries appear in Chinese, phonetic notation,
direct-translated English, and a poetic translation, along with cultural background,
political details, and literary and stylistic pointers. The result is an anthology of
considerable fascination and broad utility. Even the emphases of the collection's
three divisions are somewhat unusual: nature poems may be a familiar genre, but
sections on social structure and scholar-officials (particularly focusing on the Jinshi
exam, the gateway to China's civil service for 1300 years) will open many contem-
porary readers' eyes. There's nothing dry, dusty, or offputtingly obscure about
these entries, however: clever selection and Protopopescu's sinewy adaptations
result in an array sure to catch readers' attention. Some verses will evoke sympa-
thy, such as the bitter observations of a talented young woman excluded from the
Jinshi in the ninth century (" . .. I hate my silk dress for hiding the poet inside/
and raise my head in useless envy of the qualified"-Yu Xuanji, "I See the Signa-
tures of Those Who Passed"); some will surprise, such as Mao Zedong's youthful
poetic reproof to a restrictive teacher (" . . . if they drink just from this well,/ they
will never grow"-"Song of a Well in a Small Yard"). Degrees of difficulty vary, so
those who enjoy puzzling can explore further, and those who just wish to enjoy the
verse can appreciate the imagery. Some of the background text is a bit unpolished,
and the occasional color illustrations tend towards bland unoriginality, but the
layout is neat, tidily fitting each poem's material on a single page and adding a line
drawing featuring a relevant Chinese character. The wealth of material here pro-
vides a more stimulating entree to Chinese history than any dry textbook, and it
offers possibilities for pairing with texts ranging from Maples in the Mist (BCCB
9/96) to Bosse's The Examination (10/94) to Young's Voices of the Heart (4/97).
End matter includes notes on Chinese pronunciation and on the characters in the
line drawings (which some readers will enjoy figuring out from context), a list of
additional resources, and an index, in addition to comments from the adapters.
DS
LOGAN, CLAUDIA 
The 5, 000-Year-Old Puzzle: Solving a Mystery ofAncient Egypt;
illus. by Melissa Sweet. 
Kroupa/Farrar, 2002 
42p
ISBN 0-374-32335-6 
$17.00 
R Gr. 3-5
Logan fashions a fictional preteen named Will Hunt and packs him off on real-life
Dr. George Reisner's 1924 archaeological dig at Giza, which unearthed the empty
sarcophagus (and full canopic chest) of Queen Hetep-heres. The fictional pre-
tense allows readers to follow the progress of the dig and invites readers to posit
solutions to the mysterious state of Hetep-heres' burial chamber, where the queen's
remains no longer, well, remained, yet precious burial goods lay untouched. Will's
lighthearted postcards home add little interest for true Egypto-philes, and there's
not much interpretive guidance to nudge readers toward credible conclusions con-
cerning tomb robbery and the mummy's removal; Reisner's views, and an alter-
372 
* THE BULLETIN
nate theory by modern-day archaeologist Mark Lehner, are merely summarized at
the end. Still, there's considerable value to the sidebar information (Logan pays
far more attention than other children's writers to the professional Egyptian Qufti
workers) and the journal-style exposition of the excavation's painstaking pace.
Snapshots and photographed artifacts from the expedition mingle with Sweet's
golden acrylic and watercolor scenes, and readers who patiently sift through the
fictional bits will be rewarded with an intriguing glimpse of an important excava-
tion. EB
LONDON, JONATHAN 
What the Animals Were Waiting For; illus. by Paul
Morin. 
Scholastic, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-33630-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
4-7 yrs
A young Maasai discovers what the animals await in this poetic look at seasonal
cycles on the African savanna. Concrete, rhythmic verse describes what the boy
observes in the savanna dry season: "The cows and goats are hungry, too./ The sun
has burnt the sea of grass./ In the distance, you see gazelles, waiting./ Whatare they
waiting for, Grandmother?/ Why are they waiting?/ You shall see, Tepi. You shallsee."
The boy's question-and his grandmother's answer-is repeated throughout, un-
til finally the rains come, the animals stampede toward the promise of new grass,
and the Months of Hunger are over. London's stately verse, addressed to the
young Maasai, is distant, and the repetition is more redundant than effective.
Morin's realistically depicted animals and idealized (and somewhat blurry) Maasai
are set against the majestic, light-filled backdrop of the savanna sky accompanied
by tiny photographs of the savanna and its denizens. Despite the unusual tech-
nique, the illustration style is old-fashioned and oddly enervating, emphasizing
exoticism over energy. While this look at seasons of the savanna has distinct cur-
ricular uses, some adults may still prefer the accessibility of Aardema's more styl-
ized Bring the Rain to Kapiti Plain (BCCB 5/81). JMD
MACAULAY, DAVID 
Angelo; written and illus. by David Macaulay. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 2002 
4 8p
ISBN 0-618-16826-5 
$16.00 
R 6-10 yrs
Angelo is a master plasterer, clambering up a scaffold and restoring an old Roman
church to its former glory when he encounters an injured pigeon; despite his "pro-
fessional dislike for pigeons," he takes this one home and restores her to health.
After her recovery, Sylvia the pigeon and Angelo the plasterer bond, companion-
ably sitting together in cafes and enjoying weekends in the country. More impor-
tantly, however, Sylvia assists the aging Angelo at what will likely be his final labor,
while he worries in turn about what will become of her when he's gone. This
tenderly told and genuinely touching story is a change of literary pace for Macaulay.
While there are a few bumps on the narrative's facade, it's structurally sound, with
inviting and humorous flourishes and a satisfying finish (though Angelo passes on,
he leaves Sylvia a lovingly created stucco nest atop a ledge of the church). There's
an endearing gentleness to the art as well, with Angelo resembling one of David
Small's crusty but kindly old gentlemen and the comic turns straightfaced and
quiet rather than boisterous (though the chaotic passage of traffic through the
narrow Roman streets is pretty funny, and Sylvia's more anthropomorphic behav-
ior will give young audiences the giggles). Rome is invitingly depicted, especially
JUNE 2002 
* 373
the pigeon's-eye views of the patchwork of red-tiled roofs that are the natural land-
scape of bird and plasterer, towering over narrow canyons of ochre-walled streets
and walkways. Unassuming but affecting, this is tale of friendship bound to be
popular with a wide audience. DS
MACDONALD, ALAN 
Snarlyhissopus; illus. by Louise Voce. 
Tiger Tales,
2002 [26p]
Trade ed. ISBN 1-58925-021-4 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-58925-370-1 
$5.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
"One morning, Pelican met a new animal in the jungle." Although the hippo-
potamus introduces himself clearly, Pelican manages to mangle his name, telling
the next jungle dweller he meets that the new animal is a "SPOTTYHIPPOMUS."
This inadvertent game of telephone goes on from creature to creature, resulting in
a number of silly monikers (such as "GRIPPERSNAPPERTOOTH!" and
"GULPAWOBBLETUSK!"). 
The misunderstandings culminate in a meeting
amongst the animals (all but Pelican), who assume the new creature must be a
terrible monster. When Hippopotamus arrives, he alleviates their fears, and all's
happy in the jungle. Voce's exuberant illustrations use wobbly ink lines with wa-
tercolors, showing approachable animals who, although sharing a sameness in their
uniformly wide, flat eyes, will be readily identified and enjoyed by young viewers.
Although the joke here is a simple one, the creativity of the hippopotamus misno-
mers will have young listeners giggling and making up inventive hippo names of
their own. KM
MARSDEN, CAROLYN 
The Gold- Threaded Dress. Candlewick, 2002 
73p
ISBN 0-7636-1569-2 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Oy is deeply unhappy about her outsider status at school; in her largely Latino
fourth grade, she's not only a minority but a misunderstood minority, teased for
being Chinese despite the fact that she and her family are Thai. She's therefore
easily convinced, despite her misgivings, to please class ringleader Liliandra by
bringing her silk Thai dress to school as requested. Things soon go wrong, how-
ever, leaving Oy with a ripped dress, the blame for a playground disruption, and a
note home to her parents. This is a well-worn story of absolute predictability,
complete with the boy whose teasing hides an interest in Oy and with cultural
tidbits crammed into odd places ("But Oy already felt shame burning inside her
like the nam prik sauce made of the tiny, fiery chiles Kun Mere grew in the back-
yard"). The focus on a Thai family is unusual, however, and Marsden writes with
a straightforward sweetness, especially when describing Oy's parents (in response
to the teacher's note, Oy's father writes, "I appreciate your concern. My daughter
needs a friend"). The tidy trim size, brief chapters, and overall succinctness par-
ticularly recommend this to early readers, who may appreciate a chance to explore
a subject with a little more gravity. DS
MCALISTER, MARGARET 
Ghost at the Window. 
Dutton, 2002 
[160p]
ISBN 0-525-46852-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-6
The whole village knows there's something odd about Ninian House, but they're
not talking ("It was as if the house occasionally made rude noises, but they all
374 
* THE BULLETIN
politely ignored them"); Ewan loves his new Scottish home, however, despite its
tendency to forget what era it's in and to present its occupants with the room of a
previous epoch when they open a door. Soon, though, he happens onto a less
diverting supernatural phenomenon: the plaintive ghost of nine-year-old Elspeth,
who got stuck in one of the house's timeshifts when she died decades ago, who
therefore wasn't able to depart this life properly, and who seeks Ewan's help in
freeing her to finally pass over. McAllister offers some classic ghost-story elements,
and there's a nice little twist on the usual adult/kid divide: here the adults do
know that the house has supernatural capabilities (Ewan and his parents cheerfully
discuss the house's era-switching tendencies), but only Ian is aware of Elspeth's
presence. The setup outshines the execution, though; Elspeth, despite her protes-
tations, is a perky and enjoyable presence devoid of tragic longing, so there's little
desire to send her anywhere else, and the unpacking and solution of her dilemma
are both vague and overcomplicated. This is still a serviceably spooky story, how-
ever, and it will please readers who prefer their shades on the gentle side. DS
McCoY, GLENN 
Penny Lee and Her TV; written and illus. by Glenn
McCoy. 
Hyperion, 2002 
[33p]
ISBN 0-7868-0661-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Penny Lee loves her TV: "The TV was her best friend. It kept her company
during rainstorms. It kept her warm on winter nights." However, Penny's dog,
Mr. Barkley, envies the affection Penny' lavishes on her television and will do
anything to get her attention (for instance, jumping a motorcycle through a hoop
of fire with a banner that reads, "TURN OFF YOUR TV!"). Finally, the appli-
ance "breaks" (with some surreptitious help from Mr. Barkley), and Penny and
Mr. Barkley take the TV to the repair shop. Once outside, Mr. Barkley coaxes
Penny into playing in the fresh air, and she forgets all about television. McCoy's
cartoon-style art is somewhat bland, but the drawings use crosshatching within
solid outlines to create a sense of motion that is just barely contained, particularly
in the scenes where the two characters are romping outdoors. The ending has a
twist that alleviates any stridency in the story's moral: Mr. Barkley, tired from the
day's romp, "fixes" the remote (by reinserting the batteries) and settles down alone
to watch a late-night movie. This fresh take on the tube is sure to tickle viewers.
KM
MCMULLAN, KATE 
I Stink!; illus. by Jim McMullan. 
Cotler/HarperCollins,
2002 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029849-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029848-0 
$15.95 
R* 
3-7 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 353, for review.
MEAD, ALICE Junebug in Trouble. Farrar, 2002 
135p
ISBN 0-374-33969-4 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-6
Now that Junebug, his mother, and six-year old sister no longer live in project
housing, his old neighborhood on Auburn Street has become, for the prospective
fifth-grader, "the place Mama won't even let me visit anymore," in spite of the fact
that his best friend Robert lives there. Because Robert likes Junebug but idolizes
Trevor, a gun-toting thirteen-year-old gang member, Junebug gets mixed up in a
JUNE 2002 
* 375
gang-related shooting and thus begins to understand his mother's restrictions.
Readers unfamiliar with Junebug's previous adventures (Junebug, BCCB 12/95,
etc.) are given enough backstory to allow them to join the fans anxiously scanning
the horizon for resolutions to the complex problems that face Junebug and his
peers, many of whom are-understandably-looking for stability in all the wrong
places. Mead does not underestimate the strikes against these kids (Junebug never
establishes successful contact with his jailed father) or overestimate the odds that
they will thrive (Darnell, a high-school junior, has attended six funerals so far).
Although the novel's gaze is unflinching, the naivete of the narrator softens the
focus a bit, and the tentative rescue efforts offered by the system and the commu-
nity provide hope. Readers who aren't quite ready for the moral and narrational
complexities of Monster (BCCB 5/99) will find plenty to think about in this mul-
tifaceted exploration of how easy it is to end up in the wrong place at the wrong
time. FK
MOORE, MARTHA 
Matchit. Delacorte, 2002 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90023-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72906-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Matchit is hurt and angry when his father drops him off at the
junkyard on his way out of town with his girlfriend. Matchit hadn't much liked
the original plan of staying with his bullying cousin Jake, but the symbolism of this
alternative strikes him as ominous ("My brain says, boy, you been a problem since
you was born. Now your daddy got a chance to start over"). It is clear that Babe,
the elderly junk-dealer who takes him in, doesn't know the first thing about rais-
ing kids; she begins by buying a book ("How to Raise a Kid in Ten Easy Lessons")
and all the ingredients for homemade oatmeal cookies ("Every TV show I ever saw
with kids on it has cookies"). Matchit is slow to react to Babe's blundering atten-
tiveness to his needs (she lets him furnish a junked van because "A Child Needs
His or Her Own Space") and pities her implicit belief in his intelligence, but he
does, finally, learn something about his own capabilities while living in the com-
munity of strays that Babe has gathered around her. An anticipatory prologue
makes for a confusing start and the novel is, finally, oversupplied with metaphors
and naively insightful characters; we've seen these quirky folks with kindly hearts
already in a multitude of novels. This is nonetheless surprisingly affecting in ex-
ecution, an earnest exploration of life on the social fringe that gets the emotional
details right: Matchit's inner voice exudes low self-esteem ("My brain is a monster
in my head. It gobbles up every good thought that comes along"), and his narra-
tion captures the good intentions of even those adults who fail him. Ultimately,
there is a genuine heart of gold here that readers may appreciate. FK
MURPHY, CLAIRE RUDOLF 
Free Radical. Clarion, 2002 
[208p]
ISBN 0-618-11134-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Soon-to-be-freshman Luke McHenry is poised right where he wants to be-on an
All-Star baseball team with a real shot at driving through Alaskan playoffs and into
regionals in California. His recently remarried mother has been acting even more
eccentric than usual, however, and Luke admits that he should have seen signs of
the coming maelstrom for years. Mom is actually Mary Margaret Cunningham,
376 
* THE BULLETIN
whose anti-war protests in the Sixties caused the death of a student and who has
since lived under a false identity. The last of the unprosecuted members of her
group, she is ready to negotiate a plea bargain, lay down her guilt, and entrust her
son to the care of her new husband while she serves an inevitable jail sentence.
Murphy never delves too deeply into justice debates surrounding prosecution of a
model citizen for a decades-old crime; Mary Margaret embraces the opportunity
to serve her time and her family comes around to support her wishes. Paraplegic
high-school babe Amy (herself a DUI victim), on hand to be Luke's emotional
mentor and help him set up a reconciliation between Mom and the victim's fam-
ily, is too wishful a fictional construct to be fully believed. Far more credible is
Luke's initial response to the crisis-a fury of adolescent angst over how Mom's
action will impact his baseball season-and readers will empathize with Luke even
as they're intrigued by the headline-fodder story. EB
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Simply Alice. 
Atheneum, 2002 
222p
ISBN 0-689-82635-4 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
"I guess," says Alice ruminatively, "if I had to sum up my freshman year in one
word, it would be 'changes.'" She's already broken up with longterm boyfriend
Patrick, and now she's surprised to find enjoyment in being on her own and in
getting involved with activities (such as the school newspaper and the school mu-
sical, where she's working as stage crew) that she doesn't share with best friends
Elizabeth and Pamela. In addition to those stretches, there's an appendectomy, a
sexually tinged hazing incident (which Alice writes about for the paper), a new
girlfriend for Al's brother, Lester, and the return of Miss Summers, Alice's father's
fiancee. While there are fewer dramatic turns here than in some installments of
the Alice series, there's also somewhat less of the pointed role-modeling and expla-
nation to which the more recent titles have been prone, with this book leaving
more conclusions to the reader about Alice's missteps (she really is neglecting her
understandably hurt friends) and contradictions (her raised consciousness about
sexual teasing doesn't yet seem to extend to her friends' treatment of Lester). Alice
here is solid, questioning, and funny, learning from various life experiences and
continuing to grow with her usual blend of grace and awkwardness; Alice fans will
continue to grow along with her. DS
NYE, NAOMI SHIHAB 
19 Varieties of Gazelle: Poems of the Middle
East. Greenwillow, 2002 
142p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009766-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009765-5 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6 up
In this timely volume, Nye collects her poems about growing up as an Arab Ameri-
can (her ancestry is Palestinian), including previously published poems and newly
written pieces. This rich and varied volume offers insights into the experience of
childhood in two very different worlds. Poems describing domestic settings and
the intimacy of family ("My grandmother's hands recognize grapes,/ the damp
shine of a goat's new skin") offer a window into Arab heritage that Western young
people will find accessible. Equally powerful are poems about the devastation of
war in the Middle East, such as "Lunch in Nablus City Park," which poignantly
expresses the experience of a visitor who comes to console the survivors: "When
the woman across from you whispers/ I don't think we can take it anymore/ and
you say there are people praying for her/ in the mountains of the Himalaya and she
JUNE 2002 
* 
377
says/ Lady, it is not enough, then what?" In the aftermath of September 11 and
with the recent resurgence of violence in the Middle East, this volume will fill a
need for classroom use, for young people seeking a more personal understanding
of the Middle East, and for readers seeking a connection with their own Middle
Eastern background. KM
OATES, JOYCE CAROL 
Big Mouth & Ugly Girl. HarperCollins, 2002 
[272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623758-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623756-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Generally liked jokester and junior-class VP Matt Donaghy has his life turned
upside down when someone overhears him cutting up in the cafeteria and tells the
authorities he's planning to blow up the school. Matt's school and wealthy com-
munity react largely to defend themselves, leaving Matt's friends forbidden to speak
to him and Matt suspended from school pending investigation, until Ursula Riggs
steps forward (much to her parents' dismay) and provides sound testimony to the
innocence of Matt's behavior. Bitter, self-confident Ursula, a brawny athlete who
delights in rejecting everything she can before it rejects her (her private identity is
the "truculent" Ugly Girl, who "never lets down her guard") is stunned to then
find herself genuinely caring for Matt. After a period of initial shyness the two
bond, Ursula becoming Matt's rock and support as his former friends keep a wary
distance, his parents throw themselves into a lawsuit against the school district,
and he's increasingly harassed by angry students who consider him a troublemaker.
In her first novel for young people, Oates avoids the problems of many crossover
authors and instead presents a well-paced and audience-friendly portrait of her
two protagonists. The different narrative approaches-third-person view of the
school and of Matt's experiences and Ursula's first-person narration-are clearly
contrasted, and they're accented with absolutely authentic, shorthand-laden email
texts from the two teens. Human dynamics are also authentic, both in the main
characters (Matt's adolescent blindness to subtleties is particularly realistic) and in
the community's participation in the upheaval (Matt's classmates are ultimately
rather disappointed that the drama they were relishing has proven untrue), mak-
ing this a novel of greater depth than many recent titles focusing on the dangers of
school violence. This is a compelling story, balancing its exploration of the terrible
price self-congratulatory vigilance can exact with a depiction of the strength people
may surprise themselves by finding in one another. DS
OLDER, JULES 
Ice Cream.
See review under Cooper, p. 359.
PIERCE, TAMORA 
The Circle Opens: ColdFire. Scholastic, 2002 
355p
ISBN 0-590-39655-2 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Daja, a fourteen-year-old mage with a well-developed talent for controlling fire, is
visiting the Northern city of Kugisko with her mentor, Frostpine, when a series of
suspicious fires breaks out. Bennat Ladradun (a.k.a. Ben) is a local firefighter
desperately trying to raise awareness of fire safety in a city built almost entirely of
wood. The two become fast friends, with Daja impressed by Ben's heroism and
Ben impressed by Daja's ability to affect the course of infernos. The young mage
becomes immersed in the investigation surrounding the deadly, suspicious fires,
378 
* 
THE BULLETIN
even while she begins training her hosts' twin daughters, Jory and Nia, in their
newly discovered magic powers. Daja's desire to assist Ben leads her to create a
pair of magicked gloves that protect the wearer from fire; when traces of this magic
is found at the site of a fire, Daja realizes Ben himself is the culprit. Pierce's
intriguing novel has three plot strands running concurrently: Daja and Ben's friend-
ship, the arson investigation, and Daja's shouldering of her responsibility as men-
tor to Jory and Nia. The weaving of the strands is neatly done; the momentum
builds smoothly and inevitably to the darkly disturbing conclusion, Ben's public
execution by burning. This is Pierce's third entry in The Circle Opens series (see
The Circle Opens: Street Magic, BCCB 6/01, and The Circle Opens: Magic Steps,
3/00), and the second book about Daja (the first is in The Magic Circle series). As
the series develops and the young mages mature, they deal with a more corrupt,
violent adult world, and as a result they make more complex moral decisions,
which makes for dark and compelling fantasy. JMD
PINKNEY, ANDREA DAVIS 
Ella Fitzgerald: The Tale of a Vocal Virtuosa; illus. by
Brian Pinkney. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 2002 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2493-X 
$17.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0568-4 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Pinkney and Pinkney return with another musical picture-book biography (see
also Duke Ellington, BCCB 7/98), this time of legendary vocalist Ella Fitzgerald.
Scat Cat Monroe, a jazzy feline in a zoot suit, tells Fitzgerald's life story, leading
readers through the four "tracks" of her musical career: "Hoofin' in Harlem,"
"Jammin' at Yale," "Stompin' at the Savoy," and "Carnegie Hall Scat." The gen-
eral details of an extraordinary life-when, what, where, and how-are related in
rhythmic, vivid language that matches the verve of the hand-colored scratchboard
illustrations. The narrative never misses a beat-the text croons right along, as in
the description of Ella Fitzgerald's and Dizzy Gillespie's sold-out Carnegie Hall
concert: "Man, those two were making up music in the moment. It was inven-
tion. It was frolic. It was cooler than cool. Ella put scat on the map. When she and
Dizzy threw down their skippity-hop-doo-dee-bop, every soul in the place slipped
into the jam." Scat Cat seems an unnecessary addition to the text and even more
so to Brian Pinkney's fantastical images-Ella singing onstage at the Apollo, her
head surrounded by a concentric haloes of light; Ella flying with an angel-winged
Chick Webb over the Savoy; Ella seated behind Dizzy Gillespie, sailing through
the starry night sky on his trumpet-but even so, the illustrations have an explo-
sive energy that suits their subject. A biographical note ("Ella Elemental"), a note
from the illustrator, and a brief bibliography, videography, and selected discogra-
phy conclude this tuneful tale. JMD
RAND, GLORIA 
Little Flower; illus. by R. W. Alley. 
Holt, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6480-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
The apple of Miss Pearl's affectionate eye, Little Flower is a potbellied pig who has
one trick-she can play dead with great dlan. Most of the neighbors find this a
very funny trick, and Little Flower "quickly learned that whenever she wanted
attention all she had to do was play dead." This skill comes in handy when a fallen
Miss Pearl is unable to get to the phone to call for help: Little Flower trots out
into the middle of the road and plays dead until a kind soul stops, follows the
JUNE 2002 
* 379
potbellied wonder to Miss Pearl's door, and calls for help. Unfortunately, the
otherwise amiable story loses focus, tailing off leaving a half-dozen pages of post-
rescue anticlimax that anticipate a pig-and-owner reunion that never comes. Au-
diences will nonetheless be tickled by the idea that this story is based in fact, and
Rand has clearly added her own flourish in the characterization of her porcine
protagonist; wisely concentrating on the personable (piggable?) Little Flower, she
makes this more the pet's story than the owner's. Alley's line and watercolor art
offers some compensation for the plot sag in its delicious pig portraiture: the
draftsmanship is comic yet complex, with Little Flower's expressive face the pic-
ture of woe at her owner's plight, and hatching and soft strokes of color making
the pig pettable from her perky ears to her cute little trotters. Despite the plot
problems, Little Flower is bound to garner fans. JMD
RAPP, ADAM 
Little Chicago. Front Street, 2002 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 1-88610-72-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
When eleven-year-old Blacky is sexually abused by his mother's boyfriend, his
mother hurries him to the hospital and seemingly wipes the whole incident from
her mind thereafter. Blacky is left to sort through things on his own (his troubled
and angry older sister has her own problems, and his genius younger brother is in
a world of his own), the molestation just one more blow in a life of uncertainty and
neglect, where the phone rarely works and where there's little food to go around.
He is torn between longing for the man who at least made him feel special and
wanted and hatred for the humiliation he feels (especially when word of his abuse
gets around school), and as the pressure mounts inside and from his peers, he
becomes more disruptive and more desperate. The book is particularly strong in
its treatment of human dynamics: there's cold realism in the peer relationships
that leave Blacky abandoned and tormented at school, and there's an unkempt
and understated tenderness in Blacky's strange but bolstering friendship with an-
other outcast. There are similarities here to Brock Cole's The Facts Speakfor Them-
selves (BCCB 10/97) and Jeanne Willis' The Truth or Something (reviewed below)
in both the treatment of sexual abuse and the raw depiction of a life in what seems
to be irreversible entropy. Rapp's narrative is less well-shaped, leaving readers
attuned to Blacky's world yet unsure of the point of experiencing it, but it's still a
vivid exploration of the life of a kid with little to lose. DS
RICHARDSON, JOHN 
Grunt; written and illus. by John Richardson. 
Clarion,
2002 
[2 6p]
ISBN 0-618-15974-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
"A whiskery pig and his fine fat wife had six piglets./ The last and the least they
called Wee-skin-and-bones." When this porcine ugly duckling runs ("wee-wee-
wee") from the unkind siblings and farm-mates who mock his "crinkly-crumply
ears," his.•tiddly-widdly button of a snout," and his taillessness, he meets Old-
scratch-and-snuff, a good-hearted boar, who cheers him until his tearfully grateful
parents come to take him home. The standard-issue watercolor illustrations that
accompany this conventionally purposive tale depict an idyllic English country-
side, an engagingly scruffy boar, and a simplified round-faced piglet with button
eyes; variation in layouts offers some dynamism to complement the text, which is
380 
* 
THE BULLETIN
lively and readaloud-able, if somewhat precious. Bogged down by plot, the pace
flags towards the end, but this gradual slowing may get a grunt of appreciation
from those looking for a bedtime readaloud. FK
RINALDI, ANN 
Numbering All the Bones. 
Jump at the Sun/Hyperion,
2002 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-7868-0533-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
In the closing months of the Civil War, the Kelloggs watch a new edifice rise in
their Georgia neighborhood-a camp for captured Union soldiers that will quickly
become infamous as Andersonville Prison. The Kelloggs' house slave (and Hamp-
ton Kellogg's daughter), thirteen-year-old Eulinda, has a particular interest in the
camp-her brother Neddy is known to be incarcerated there among the black
troops, and although Kellogg is willing to bring the runaway home to his labor-
strapped plantation without reprisal, Neddy would rather stay imprisoned than
lose his freedom. As the Kelloggs become more withdrawn into their own profi-
teering affairs, and the field hands make plans for their imminent liberation, Eulinda
is torn between remaining in what she believes to be relative security in the home
of her father or embracing the freedom clearly valued by the other slaves. Assisting
William Griffin and Clara Barton in their efforts to bury the Andersonville dead at
the war's end, Eulinda finally achieves a vision of life apart from the family that
refuses to recognize her. Rinaldi once again limns a fictional cast so credibly drawn
and carefully integrated into their historical era that the real-life personalities (here,
Griffin and Barton) seem comparatively stiff in their near-clinical accuracy. None-
theless, this view ofAndersonville from the perspective of those too uninformed or
indifferent or helpless to intervene in its operation should be a valuable addition to
the roster of Civil War novels. EB
RIVERS, KAREN 
Surviving Sam. 
Polestar, 2002 
205p
Papered. ISBN 1-55192-506-0 
$6.95 
R Gr. 7-12
"It happened thirty-one months ago. It's not okay to talk about it anymore. I
want to talk about him, I want to do nothing but talk about him, but no. It's not
okay." This is the dilemma of sixteen-year-old Pagan, still tortured by the death of
her twin brother, Sam, in a mountaineering accident on their fourteenth birthday.
Pagan's parents have found their own way to deal with the tragedy, which also
killed Pagan's uncle and nearly Pagan as well; she, however, remains raw and ob-
sessed ("Time doesn't heal anything. My mom can shove that little gem up her
ass"), exhausted by grieving and prone to suicide attempts yet desperately attached
to the sorrow that is all she has left of her beloved brother. Pagan's narration is
shockingly authentic in its harrowing sadness, but Rivers' artistry keeps her
protagonist's muddy despair sympathetic without bogging the reader down in
Pagan's dilemma. Her lurches forward towards--and sometimes back away from-
improvement are also credible: chemical antidepressants frighten, disappoint, and
eventually help her, as do her friends (some made anew, some retrieved from the
days before the accident). Eschewing any convenient cathartic conclusions, this
novel takes a harder road, focusing instead on the difficult incrementality of recov-
ery and on the bitter truth behind bereavement-that letting go is a further loss,
but it can be the only way to survive. DS
JUNE 2002 * 381
ROCKWELL, ANNE 
They Called Her Molly Pitcher, illus. by Cynthia von
Buhler. 
Knopf, 2002 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99187-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89187-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
The 1778 Battle of Monmouth, where woollen-clad British soldiers wilted and
finally retreated under the merciless June sun and the determined Continental
Army, produced one of the Revolution's more colorful legends-Molly Pitcher.
Although Molly's exact identity is contested, Rockwell argues in her closing note
in favor of Mary Hays, whose husband, William, can be found listed as a gunner at
that battle. Regardless, verifiable fact has long been overrun by the romance of the
legendary woman who ran pitchers of water across the battlefield to fallen Patriot
soldiers and valiantly manned the cannon when her husband was wounded.
Rockwell retells the tale with old-fashioned adulation for the good-guy Continen-
tals, respect for the formidable enemy that made the victors appear all the more
heroic, and reverence for the woman who saved the day: "As she listened to what
the tall, strong general said, Molly Hays had never felt so proud in her life. No
man who heard General Washington speak to her that night doubted that Molly
had earned her rank ... no soldier sneered at the thought of a woman being a
sergeant in his army." The print is unfortunately tiny and densely crammed onto
the textured pages, making it taxing to read, and the text has a note of authority
unjustified in such an undocumented story. von Buhler's paintings, in the warm,
golden tones of aging oils, have been crackled and distressed to suggest the passage
of two hundred years, but the glinting sidelong gaze in Molly's concluding portrait
assures viewers that a modern sensibility is at work here. A timeline of Revolution-
ary period events is appended, and although the addition seems aridly textbookish,
many readers may welcome the background information. EB
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Let's Go Home: The Wonderful Things about a House; illus. by
Wendy Anderson Halperin. 
Simon, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-82326-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
This encomium to houses covers nearly every nook and cranny, from front porch
("Cats love a front porch, and dogs do too") to kitchen ("Kitchens are delicious"),
bathroom ("Bathrooms are always wonderful, personal private little places in any
house") to attic ("There may even be a squirrel's nest there you never knew about").
Despite the initial claim that "there are many kinds of houses in the world," this is
quite a specific kind of house and an even more specific residential fantasy, which
seems troublingly reluctant to admit the attractions or even possibility of life with-
out gingerbread wreathing the eaves, white flour dusting the kitchen, and wildlife
traipsing around the perimeter. The absence of plot and the overflow of domestic
adorability will leave some youngsters searching for something more bracing, but
others may warm to the narrative's dollhouse-like charm and gentle whimsy ("Bath-
rooms are fun for kids and fun for grown-ups but not much fun for dogs").
Halperin's fine-lined, architectural style is particularly appropriate to the subject
here, with the multipaneled scenes resembling tiers of doorways and the soft pencil
textures suggesting weathered clapboard even in the landscape. Subdued colors
and broad views help keep the overstuffed rooms cozily festooned with objects a la
382 
* THE BULLETIN
Mary Engelbreit rather than jammed with clutter. Junior nestlings who yearn for
a Tasha Tudor-esque cottage all their own may find this a suitable literary resi-
dence. DS
SAY, ALLEN 
Home ofthe Brave; written and illus. byAllen Say. 
Lorraine/Hough-
ton, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-618-21223-X 
$17.00 
M 
Gr. 5-9
After a lone kayaker capsizes and finds himself sucked into an underground river,
he emerges to find himself in a mysterious desert countryside; two lost Japanese-
American girls tell him they're "from the camp" and that they're "waiting to go
home." With the two youngsters, he finds the camp, the children it incarcerates,
and nametags featuring his name and that of his mother. After waking from sleep
to a group of different children, he then sees the nametags of the internees fly away
in the wind as the internees return to freedom, and he adds the tags he holds to the
flight. From the text and the author's note, this seems to be a deeply felt personal
response to the internment camps, but the allegorical approach is unfortunately
more distancing and confusing than enlightening, leaving contextless young read-
ers floundering. The textual compression of the realization and the letting go
results in a slighting of both processes, consequently undermining the personal
significance of the experience and failing to convey the historical significance of
the internment camps. The art is most effective in its views of the mystical camp:
Say takes his ordinarily muted tones and bleaches them to a drained gray and sand,
with shadows crawling across the barren world in which these children are impris-
oned (the cover, with its image of three figures dwarfed before the tidy, unending
rows of internment shacks below the simultaneously ironic and truthful title, pro-
vides a genuine impact that the interior of the book never manages to deliver).
This may provoke some discussion, especially of the less-examined issue of con-
temporary denial of earlier generations' fate, but readers will find titles such as Ken
Mochizuki's Baseball Saved Us (BCCB 5/93) and Jerry Stanley's IAm an American
(BCCB 11/94) more moving and informative. DS
SHEARER, ALEX 
The Great Blue Yonder. 
Clarion, 2002 
[192p]
ISBN 0-618-21257-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 5-9
"As far as I can see," says newly dead young Harry, who got the worst of a run-in
with a truck, "being dead is mostly paperwork." Between the bureaucracy, the
cranky dead adults, and the absence of instructions, he's finding it a little difficult
to get the hang of the afterlife until he runs into Arthur, a young lad but an old
hand at being dead. Arthur escorts Harry on a larky trip back to the world of the
living, a trip that turns more serious when Harry visits his old haunts and his
grieving family, trying desperately to make up for his final words to his sister:
"You'll be sorry when I'm dead." Those familiar with Our Town may see some
similar themes in this British import, and Harry's ghostly rapprochement with his
guilt-ridden sister is tender and poignant; there's also some deft, gently handled
address of the way the world moves on and leaves the dead behind. These scenes
are all the more affecting for their contrast with the breezy and offhanded humor
that permeates Harry's narration, especially when describing the amorphous yet
oddly mundane life on the other side (where the dead grumble at waiting in line
and look for relatives); since readers will have genuinely enjoyed Harry's company,
JUNE 2002 
* 383
the realization of his family's loss, when it comes to both Harry and his audience,
has much more impact than it would in a darker-toned story. Even non-philo-
sophical kids will be intrigued by this answer to the age-old question: what's life
like when you're dead? DS
SINGER, MARILYN 
Quiet Night; illus. by John Manders. 
Clarion, 2002 
[2 6p]
ISBN 0-618-12044-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-5 yrs
In this cumulative rhyming story, a quiet night turns into a rowdy forest party.
Beginning with the sound of one frog who "bar-rums on a quiet night," the ca-
cophony builds with the addition each group of animals ("Two owls whoo-hoo,"
"Three geese honk-honk," etc.). The transition from tranquil to frantic continues
until ten campers are revealed in a nearby tent, yawning as the chorus of night
animals awakens them from sleep: "All that stirring, whirring, creeping,/ All that
whining, all that peeping./ Is there anybody sleeping?/ What a NOISY night!"
Singer writes appealing onomatopoeia for the various animals ("Four fish whap-
slap"), and Manders' illustrations depict the woods in rich blues, greens, and browns,
with forest occupants whose gaping mouths and flying fur/feathers/fins convey
enthusiastic noisemaking. Young listeners will be delighted to join in, making
animals noises and waking up the neighbors. Team this with The Napping House
for a wide-awake storytime. KM
Sfs, PETER Madlenka's Dog; written and illus. by Peter Sfs. 
Foster/Farrar,
2002 
34p
ISBN 0-374-34699-2 $17.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Madlenka (of Madlenka, BCCB 10/00) yearns for a dog; unfazed by her parents'
firm refusal, she happens upon an imaginary dog and takes him, in his red collar
and leash, out for a walk. On her stroll around the block she meets friends and
neighbors (many appearing in the previous book), all of whom greet her dog with
pleasure and appreciation, each of whom sees her dog differendy ("Oh, he's white
and short, says Mr. McGregor . . . Well, I like his spots, says the tourist"). An
encounter with her friend Cleopatra and Cleopatra's imaginary horse leads to some
satisfying let's-pretend play until it's time to go home, whereupon Madlenka re-
turns-with a pack of pooches trailing behind her. The text is warm and simple,
operating primarily as a point of reference for the art, which is the real dog-treat
here. Sfs' intricate filigree lines offer their usual detailed pleasure, and he's added
an ingenious conceptual component to the artwork: Madlenka's commenting
neighbors (unfortunately still the ethnic reductions of the previous title) sport lift-
able flaps, which reveal themselves as children with their own canine companions,
making clear that they're seeing their own beloved childhood dogs in Madlenka's
invisible pup. While some youngsters may need a bit of help making the leap, the
imaginative connection is original and the playing out of Madlenka's fantasies is
conceptually alluring. It's also visually ravishing, especially in the elegantly em-
broidered scenes of Madlenka's excursions with Cleopatra; additional elements,
such as die-cut holes revealing Madlenka's and Cleopatra's faces in the various
fantasy scenes, a recurrent overhead map of the block showing Madlenka's progress,
and a dog-breed chart at the end will give youngsters more to pore over. Both dog
lovers and young fantasists will relish Madlenka's trip around the block. DS
384 
* THE BULLETIN
SOTO, GARY 
Body Parts in Rebellion: Hanging Out with Fernie and Me; illus. by
Regan Dunnick. 
Putnam, 2002 
[80p]
ISBN 0-399-23615-5 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Forty-one poems-from two perspectives but in one voice-celebrate the defin-
ing moments of two lifelong friends. The unnamed speaker prosaically but rhyth-
mically explains "How Coach Told Me I Didn't Make the Cut" ("'Deeper, deeper,'
I heard him yell") and describes the emphatic love note written by Fernie under
the influence of"three bowls of cereal, / The flakes coated with sugar" ("Marta, he
wrote, I have a secret:/ I LOVE YOU! I LOVE YOU! I LOVE YOU!"). The span
of time covered-from preschool through preadolescence-makes it a little diffi-
cult to pinpoint an audience for this eclectic collection. Still, Soto's implicit nos-
talgia for the good old days when the friends "lived off each other's happiness" will
engage some older readers, while younger readers are more likely to connect with
the moody energy of Soto's characters; both will appreciate the humor, accessible
images, and emotional honesty of a poetic voice that recognizes the extent to which
the significant moments of childhood are often "small activities on a small street."
Edgy pen-and-ink illustrations that include speech bubbles, arrows, and labels flesh
out both the literal and the figurative sides of these quirky slices of life. FK
VOAKE, 
CHARLOTTE 
Pizza Kittens; written and illus. by Charlotte
Voake. 
Candlewick, 2002 
34p
ISBN 0-7636-1622-2 
$15.99 
M 
4-6 yrs
Voake's three little kittens are not only fussy eaters (apparently they only like pizza),
they are terribly ill-mannered at the dinner table. After a disastrous dinner of fish
sticks and salad, the table is left a dreadful mess and Dad prophesies a change:
"Tomorrow we will all eat together. You will eat your food and try to be helpful."
The next evening the family sits down for their evening meal (peas and water) but,
despite the kittens' best efforts, chaos ensues and dinner winds up mostly on the
floor. The third time is the charm-Dad makes pizza, and everyone is happy.
The boorish kitties are messily appealing, but the dialogue is repetitive and the
pace slow; the tale is also a bit soft in the denouement department, suggesting that
if you make a big enough mess at the dinner table or spoil dinner often enough,
your parents will make you anything you want. Voake's line-and-watercolor illus-
trations feature squiggly-lined, elongated felines around a dining table covered
with unrecognizable (except for the pizza) bits of food and drink. The earth-toned
illustrations float on cream-colored pages, crowded and unanchored. Ultimately,
the mildly humorous elements of the tale are not enough to make it a success,
either as slapstick or as etiquette. JMD
WILUS, JEANNE 
The Truth or Something. Holt, 2002 252p
ISBN 0-8050-7079-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 9-12
Willis, probably most familiar to American audiences from her comedic picture
books (Earthlets, as Explained by Professor Xargle, BCCB 4/89), takes quite a differ-
ent literary tack here in her chronicle of young Mick. Born in postwar Britain,
Mick lives with his mother and, occasionally, the man he calls his father; he's
thrilled with his younger brother, Terry, but haunted by memories of a never-
spoken-about sister, Eileen. His disorganized, broke, and shady mother leaves
him to his own devices and sometimes just leaves him, period, and he finally ends
JUNE 2002 
* 385
up living with her parents after she's put in prison. There he discovers family he's
never known, including two older siblings and his real father, but he continues to
feel rootless and unwanted; finally he moves in with his birth father and becomes
the victim of his father's sexual molestation, which leads to tragedy. This has some
definite thematic resemblance to Cole's The Facts Speak for Themselves (BCCB
10/97) in its examination of a kid's years of being tossed around, and the picture it
paints is vivid, stark, and often violent, and all the more poignant for the connec-
tions Mick does sometimes manage, such as that with his adoring younger brother,
Terry, from whom he's eventually separated. This is more specifically rooted both
in period and place, however, with many details untranslatable and therefore wisely
untranslated but also challenging to young American readers; in that and in its
focus on a protagonist much younger than most readers (Mick is early school age
at the start of the book and hardly a teenager by the end) it resembles Rachel
Anderson's Paper Faces (BCCB 11/93). Teens to whom this world is not opaque
(fans of British movies such as Wish You Were Here or the older kitchen-sink dra-
mas of the period will recognize it immediately) will find this an absorbing ac-
count of a boy adrift and struggling to stay afloat. A glossary of British colloquialisms
is appended. DS
WOOD, FRANCES M. 
Daughter ofMadrugada. Delacorte, 2002 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90038-4 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32719-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Grandfather's word has always been law at Rancho Madrugada, and although thir-
teen-year-old Cesa de Haro would prefer to ride the range with her brothers, she
never seriously questions the hierarchy of authority within their family or her des-
tiny to follow starchy Tfa in the role of family matron. In 1848, however, what
she regards as the natural order--de Haro prosperity based on land and cattle-
shatters when Mexico loses the war with the United States and gold fever sweeps
the land, drawing Indian laborers and vaqueros off their ranch, and sending the
first trickle of American settlers onto the fringes of their now unprotected hold-
ings. As younger sons try to persuade Grandfather to make peace with modern
ways, and the aging don stubbornly digs in his heels, Cesa observes how Tfa firmly
steps in to keep the ranch functioning, and she begins to appreciate her own dedi-
cation to the land and her Californio heritage. Wood draws a realistic picture of
first contact between privileged Californios and Western prospectors and settlers,
as the Spanish hold the uncouth, unmannerly Americans in contempt and the
Americans regard the Spanish as arrogant, unskilled aristocrats with more property
than they can possibly use. Cesa's decision to retain her Mexican citizenship and
move with Grandfather back to Mexico City may not be every reader's idea of a
perfect ending, but it underscores the historical reality that, "like the Indians be-
fore them, the Californios became a people dispossessed." EB
WORTH, VALERIE 
Peacock and Other Poems; illus. by Natalie Babbitt. 
Farrar,
2002 
40p
ISBN 0-374-35766-8 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4 up
It's been nearly a decade since the death of Valerie Worth, creator of gemlike brief
lyrics in collections such as All the Small Poems and Fourteen More (BCCB 2/95);
now comes a small coda in the form of this collection of twenty-six poems, only a
386 
* THE BULLETIN
few of which have been previously anthologized. The entries occasionally evince a
certain flatness and literality instead of the imagistic stillness at which the poet
excelled, but there are nonetheless quite a few worthy Worth-y entries with glori-
ous arrangements of sounds (under the bed is no "Wolf," but "... a silent/ patient,
watchful/ Bristling darkness") and plainspoken description of freshness and im-
mediacy (the icicles in "Icicles" disappoint because "they only/ taste of/ the roof."
This isn't the finest collection of Worth's verse, but it's still a bookful of elegant
and approachable poetry that's sure to be welcomed by readers and teachers.
Babbitt's precise, modulated pencil drawings nestle quietly in corners, perfect part-
ners for the poems' unassuming revelations. DS
ZOEHFELD, KATHLEEN WEIDNER 
From Tadpole to Frog; illus. with photographs
by Dwight Kuhn. 
Scholastic Reference, 2002 
32p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-439-31633-2 
$3.99 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Notwithstanding the title, Zoehfeld actually starts pre-tadpole, with frog spawn,
and moves through the basic stages of frog development (a beginning note identi-
fies the species in question as the wood frog) from egg to adult frog in an easy-to-
read format. Several boxes entitled "Take a Closer Look" isolate a developmental
trait ("A tadpole inside its clear jelly egg," or "Close-up of a tadpole's gills") for
closer examination. The sentence construction is occasionally rather involved for
neophytes ("Tadpoles do not look much like the frogs they will become!"), but the
layout, with its large-print text set off in blocks surrounded by ample space, will
appeal to beginning readers. Kuhn's larger-than-life full-color photographs bleed
off the pages, enhancing the text with their step-by-step illustrations. A short
glossary is included in the back of the book, along with a rather general note for
related activities, including the URL for the San Francisco Exploratorium's web-
site. Though beginning readers may stumble occasionally, the photographs pro-
vide the visual clues to meaning in this unusually succinct early piece ofnonfiction.
EAB
JUNE 2002 
* 387
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
STAN, SUSAN, ed. 
The World through Children's Books. 
Scarecrow, 2002 
324p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8108-4198-3 $27.95
This extensive and useful annotated bibliography, sponsored by the United States
Board on Books for Young People, follows Children's Books from Other Countries
(which included books published between 1950-1996). This second volume picks
up where the first volume left off, "listing international books published in the
United States from 1996-2000" and including "books written by authors residing
in the United States but set in other countries." The book includes an introduc-
tion to international children's literature by Carl M. Tomlinson, an annotated
bibliography of English-language recommended titles organized by region and
country, and a selection of resources (awards, publishers, sources for foreign lan-
guage and bilingual books) related to international children's books. Each of the
701 annotations includes complete bibliographic information, recommended age
levels, format, a plot summary, and brief critical commentary, sometimes adding
additional tidbits such as awards won. All annotations are initialed, and annota-
tors and their affiliations are listed at the beginning of the bibliography. In her
introduction to this volume, former president of USBBY Elizabeth Hearne states
that this book "represents the practical ideal of the United States Board on Books
for Young People-that stories help us understand our differences and at the same
time reveal our common humanity." Those with similar goals would do well to
add this informative, well-organized volume to their selection tools. JMD
388 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Rapp; Willis
Activism-fiction: Murphy
ADVENTURE: Cadnum; Colfer;
Fama
African Americans: Green; Haskins;
Pinkney
African Americans-fiction: Mead;
Rinaldi
Africa-stories: Kurtz; London
ANIMAL STORIES: Briggs; Byars;
Cronin; MacDonald; Singer
Animals: Arnosky; Aruego
Animals-stories: Kurtz
Arab Americans-poetry: Nye
Archaeology-fiction: Logan
Art and artists-fiction: Alphin
Asian Americans-fiction: Marsden;
Say
Babies-fiction: King-Smith
Babysitting-fiction: Graves
Baseball: Green
BEDTIME STORIES: Richardson;
Singer
BIOGRAPHIES: Giblin; Green;
Haskins; Pinkney; Rockwell
Birds-stories: James; Macaulay
BOARD BOOKS: Falconer; Fox
Books and reading-fiction: Abbott
Boxing: Haskins
Brothers and sisters-fiction: King-
Smith; Rivers
California-fiction: Wood
Careers: Jackson
Cats-stories: Voake
China-poetry: Liu
Civil War-fiction: Rinaldi
Community helpers: Caseley;
McMullan
CONCEPT BOOKS: Falconer; Fox
Construction-fiction: Doyle
Contests-fiction: Ahlberg
COOKBOOKS: Crespo
COUNTING BOOKS: Falconer
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Ahlberg; Cadnum; Colfer;
Easton; Flinn; Mead; Murphy;
Willis
Death and dying-fiction: Rivers;
Shearer
Death and dying-stories: Macaulay
Dogs-stories: McCoy; Sfs
Ducks-stories: Cronin
Egypt, ancient-fiction: Logan
Ethics and values: Flinn; Mead;
Murphy; Oates
Families-fiction: Ahlberg; Moore;
Rapp; Rivers; Willis
FANTASY: Abbott; Armstrong;
Briggs; Byars; Clements; Colfer;
Hoffman; King-Smith; Lee;
Pierce; Say; Shearer
Farms-fiction: Briggs; Denslow
Farms-stories: Cronin
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Cadnum
Food and eating: Cooper; Crespo;
Older
Food and eating-stories: Voake
Foster care-fiction: Moore
Friendship-fiction: Alphin; Easton;
Flinn; Mead; Oates;
Friendship-poetry: Soto
Friendship-stories: Macaulay
Frogs: Zoehfeld
Gangs-fiction: Mead
Geography: Levy
JUNE 2002 
* 389
GHOST STORIES: McAllister;
Shearer
Grandfathers-stories: James
Grandmothers-fiction: Denslow
Grief-fiction: Rivers
Growing up-fiction: Naylor
Growing up-poetry: Soto
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Cadnum; Doyle; Rinaldi; Willis;
Wood
History, Asian: Liu
History, European: Giblin
History, U.S.: Rockwell
Holocaust, the: Giblin
Horses-fiction: Byars
Houses: Rylant
HUMOR: Cronin; Graves;
MacDonald; McCoy; Rand;
Singer
Insects: Jackson
Invisibility-fiction: Clements
Language arts: Fletcher; Holbrook;
Janeczko; Liu
Latinos-fiction: Wood
LEGENDS: Cadnum
Magic and magicians-fiction: Pierce
Make-believe-stories: Sis
Manners-stories: Voake
Mermaids-fiction: Hoffman
Mexico-fiction: Wood
Monkeys-stories: Kurtz
Mothers and sons-fiction: Murphy
Mothers-stories: Kurtz
Music and musicians: Pinkney
MYTHOLOGY: Fisher
Nature study: Arnosky; Aruego;
Jackson; Zoehfeld
Noises-stories: Singer
Pets-fiction: Easton
Pigs-fiction: Briggs
Pigs-stories: Falconer; Fox; Rand;
Richardson
POETRY: Fletcher; Holbrook;
Janeczko; Levy; Liu; Nye; Soto;
Worth
Prejudice-fiction: Marsden
Quebec-fiction: Doyle
Quests-fiction: Lee
Reading aloud: Fama; Levy; Nye;
Worth
Reading, beginning: Zoehfeld
Reading, easy: Ahlberg; Briggs;
Byars; Denslow; Graves; Marsden
Reading, reluctant: Crespo; Colfer;
Fama; Haskins; Jackson; Older
Revolutionary War: Rockwell
RHYMING STORIES: Singer
Rivers-fiction: Doyle
School-fiction: Alphin; Flinn;
Marsden; Naylor; Oates
SCIENCE FICTION: Clements;
Jeapes
Science: Arnosky; Aruego; Jackson;
Levy; Zoehfeld
Scientists: Jackson
Seasons-stories: London
Sexual abuse-fiction: Rapp; Willis
Ships and sailing-fiction: Fama
Slavery-fiction: Rinaldi
Social studies: Caseley
Sports: Green; Haskins
Storytime: Cronin; Macaulay;
MacDonald; McCoy; McMullan;
Rand; Richardson; Voake
Suicide-fiction: Alphin
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
McAllister
SURVIVAL STORIES: Armstrong;
Fama
Teachers-fiction: Ahlberg; Doyle
Television-stories: McCoy
Trucks-stories: McMullan
Twins-fiction: Rivers
Vampires-fiction: Abbott
Violence-fiction: Flinn; Oates;
Willis
War-fiction: Wood
Water-poetry: Levy
West, the-fiction: Wood
Women's studies: Green; Rockwell
World cultures: London
World War II: Giblin
Writers and writing: Fletcher;
Janeczko
Writers and writing-fiction: Alphin
DORLING' 
^
BOOST READING SKILLS WITH BOOKS
KIDS LOVE TO READ
DK Readers is a multi-level learning-
to-read program combining DK's
highly visual style with appealing
stories at four graduated levels. The
great variety of subjects appeal to
reluctant readers and older students
struggling with reading progress.
Read-together stories for children
learning to read. Short sentences, simple
vocabulary, word repetition, and visual
clues help children leam new words.
----
Perfect for children who have started to
read on their own, but still need a little
help. Stories contain more words, longer
sentences, and are slightly more complex.
--
@-~~
An ideal level for children who are able
to read on their own. Combines more
captivating stories with more text, more
complex sentence structure, and faster pace.
--------
Rich vocabulary and challenging
sentence structure increase the interest of
proficient readers. Includes more back-
ground information and fascinating facts
that bring the stories to life.
$3.95 Paperback, $12.95 Hardcover
to order, call toll free 877.342.5357
or by fax at 877.781.5131
TITLES 
ALIGNED 
WITH
ACCELERATED
READER
the complete list of
DK Reader titles is
available on
www.dk.com
ISBN: 0-7894-8517-6. 
pb
ISBN: 0-7894-8516-8, 
heI
ISBN: 0-7894-5422-X. h
W 
IUULUc u
the Bri
ISBN:0-7894-5457-2. p
ISBN:0-7894-6093-9.hc
^rtnn7h90l 
rUTnTim; e
I~
~3~~jI
Universit
1325 Sou
Champai
CI.S.A.
RETURN ~
~~~r
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2001 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.orglccb/
2. 
When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and password.
This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit number but
may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
i~~~i~r
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A.
USA 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
B'
C 
-.-·-·
ii
~LS
;NIL
0008-9036(200206)55:10; 1-C
