ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
.I 
^ *.
SKirkus Reviews pointer
DMITRI
THE ASTRONAUT
Story and full-color pictures by Jon 
Agee
"Agee scores again with this utterly engaging tale of
interplanetary friendship.. A charmer."-Kirkus Reviews
"It's me!" says Dmitri. "I'm back from the moon!" But
unfortunately nobody remembers him anymore. If only
Dmitri knew that Lulu, his loyal lunar pal-who stowed
away in his sack of rocks-has become an overnight sen-
sation. The whole city is puzzling over Lulu's crayon draw-
ings of a mysterious figure. Who on earth could it be?
"Preschoolers will find this a beguiling picture book,
memorable for its expressive illustrations and the mutual
affection of the two main characters."-ALA Booklist
Ages 3 up. $14.95TR (0-06-205074-5); $14.89LB (0-06-205075-3)
MICHAEL DI CAPUA BOOKS * HARPERCOLLINS PUBLISHERS
F
If you aren't reading your own issue of
THE BULLETIN N
OF TE 
CENTER FR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
we have a special introductory offer for you!
4 
h : 
:IBI ll 
g~~:
I Individuals
" Institutions
Name
Address
City
State 
7 
Zip
I
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
February 1997
Vol. 50 No. 6
I
A LOOK INSIDE
197 THE BIG PICTURE
A Drop of Water: A Book ofScience and Wonder written and illus. with
photographs by Walter Wick
198 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
202 * The Hunterman and the Crocodile: A West African Folktale adapted and
illustrated by Baba Wague Diakite
208 * Nappy Hair written by Carolivia Herron; illustrated by Joe Cepeda
223 * The Gypsy Game by Zilpha Keatley Snyder
223 * Over the Top of the World: Explorer Will Steger's Trek Across the Arctic
written by Will Steger and Jon Bowermaster
229 
e The Friends by Kazumi Yumoto
230 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
232 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Lisa Mahoney, Reviewer (LM)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
Susan S. Verner, Reviewer (SSV)
Amy E. Brandt, Graduate Research Assistant (AEB)
Pam McCuen, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1997 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Walter Wick, from A Drop of Water: A Book of Science and Wonder ©1997 and
used by permission of Scholastic Press.
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 
197
THE BIG PICTURE
A Drop of Water: A Book of Science and Wonder
written and illus. with photographs by Walter Wick
"We are going to spend an hour today in following a drop of water on its travels. If
I dip my finger in this basin of water and lift it up again, I bring with it a small
glistening drop out of the water below and hold it before you. Tell me, have you
any idea where this drop has been? What changes it has undergone, and what
work it has been doing during all the long ages it has lain on the face of the earth?"
-Arabella 
B. Buckley, The Fairy-Land ofScience, 1878
Both this opening quotation and the book it introduces invite readers to
see the world of science in a new way, with eyes refreshed by a unique visual inter-
pretation of the everyday. Children (and librarians) are already familiar with Walter
Wick from his collaborations with Jean Marzollo on the "I Spy" series (ISpy Christ-
mas, ISpy Funhouse, ISpy SchoolDays, etc.), in which objects, identified in rhymes,
are hidden in elaborately constructed, theme-related sets designed and photographed
with meticulous, joyful intensity by Wick. But this title is a departure from that
series' deliberately cluttered, crowded fun.
In A Drop of Water, Wick turns his camera's eye to fifteen simple science
experiments involving water and its properties. A discussion of "water's smallest
parts" is illustrated by a greatly enlarged photograph of the head of a shiny, silver
pin covered with shimmering droplets of water. (The extraordinary nature of this
photograph is further emphasized by an insert of the pin at its actual size.) The
elasticity of water is vividly and graphically depicted in a series of photographs
showing a drip from a faucet as it drops into a pool of silvery liquid, causing mer-
curial ripples. A brown egg splashes into a clear glass of water, the splash captured
so perfectly it looks like blown glass. An experiment with soap bubbles presents
the usual soapy sphere, followed by unusual curlicues and cubes. 
Sequentially
arranged time-lapse photographs illustrate the processes of condensation, evapora-
tion, and cloud formation.
Outstanding visuals combine with science facts seemingly without ef-
fort. A page full of snowflakes set against a shaded blue background is fascinating
not only for its visual impact, but for the simplicity and elegance of the scientific
concept it illustrates: "When a snowflake melts, its intricate design is lost forever in
a drop of water. But a snowflake can vanish in another way. It can change directly
from ice to vapor." A sequence of five photographs shows a single snowflake as it
gradually disappears. The dramatic interaction of water and light is shown in the
photo of a single glass of water refracting the rays of a beam of light, resulting in a
luminous rainbow cast on dark paper. From surface tension to capillary action,
from condensation to evaporation, Wick leads the reader from experiment to ex-
periment in eminently clear language and extraordinarily vivid images that makes
simple scientific concepts memorable and magical.
198 
* THE BULLETIN
This title is an elegant synthesis of science and art: the spare, almost
architectural purity of Wick's compositions for each individual image or sequence
of images is riveting; the close-up photographs are breathtakingly distinct; and the
clarity provided by the combination of concept, text, and photography of this
quality is noteworthy. Concluding notes give tips on how to successfully complete
each experiment.
In an author's note "About This Book," Wick gives some background on
his career as a photographer, his fascination with science, and his collection of
science books from the nineteenth century, explaining that many of the experi-
ments in this book are the same as or similar to those used in books to introduce
science to children a hundred years ago. The need to communicate scientific
concepts to the young with clarity and precision is a given. The ability to do so is
a combination of knowledge, craft, and art, and Walter Wick apparently has a gift
for all three. (Imprint information appears on p. 226.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
//
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AARDEMA, VERNA, ad. 
The Lonely Lioness and the Ostrich Chicks: A Masai Tale;
illus. by Yumi Heo. 
Knopf, 1996 
32p
Library ed. 0-679-96934-9 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-86934-4 
$17.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
A lonely, childless lioness diverts four ostrich chicks away from their mother, and
the distraught mother ostrich appeals to a variety of savannah animals for help in
getting them back. The fierce little mongoose challenges the big cat with "Lioness,
you are a bigger fool than I thought you were!" Angrily preoccupied with the
mongoose, lioness doesn't notice when Mother Ostrich gathers up her chicks and
walks them home, "tuk-pik, tuk-pik, tuk-pik." A picture-book adaptation of a
story originally published in an earlier Aardema collection, this is distinguished by
the quality of its illustrations. Heo's paintings have the same playful characteris-
tics of her The Green Frogs (BCCB 10/96): the animal characters interact in a free-
floating, fantasy environment as lioness droops in the branches of a tree, mongoose
lolls in the sun, and ostrich leads her chicks home in an orderly line. The energy of
the compositions reflects the action of the plot, and the combination is a successful
one. This Masai folktale has a strong internal chronology of events that can be
easily adapted to creative dramatics and interactive storytimes. Source notes are
included. JMD
AYRES, KATHERINE 
Family Tree. 
Delacorte, 1996 
165p
ISBN 0-385-32227-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Tyler is worried when her sixth-grade class is required to do a project on family
trees: she knows it hurts Papa to talk about Tyler's mother, who died long ago in
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 
199
a car crash, and she knows Papa won't talk about the rest of the family, whom she
has never met. Soon Tyler's curiosity makes her push Papa farther than she has
before, and she finds out the truth: Papa was an Amishman who fell in love with
a writer when she came to do a book on his community; when he married her,
both families cut the couple off. The depiction of Tyler's awareness of and uncer-
tainty about her difference is subtle and convincing, and Ayres credibly allows the
family's practices and beliefs to reflect Tyler's father's upbringing even as he re-
fuses to acknowledge it. The plot contrivances and the melodramatic aspects (Tyler's
maternal grandparents never knew Tyler existed, and Tyler brings the families
together again) overwhelm the story, however, and Tyler's reading of her mother's
diary is both sentimental and cliched. Still, this is a gentle and romantic story of
hidden identities and long-lost families, and many young readers will relish it. DS
BARBER, BARBARA E. 
Allie's Basketball Dream; illus. by Darryl Ligasan. 
Lee &
Low, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 1-880000-38-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-8 yrs
"Someday I'm going to be the best basketball player ever!" Allie declares. She has
a brand new basketball (compliments of her father) with which to practice, but she
soon learns that, if she wants to improve, she will have to endure both her own
initial lack of skill and the comments of other kids at the playground. Barber is
hardly subtle about any sexist aspect of the game: three of Allie's friends make
remarks to the effect that girls can't or shouldn't play basketball and the older boys
laugh when Allie initially fails to sink a shot. The theme of perseverance, though
admirable, is equally overdrawn. The shared love that Allie and her father feel for
basketball and her father's encouragement of her interest are engaging details that
add interest to characters whose appeal is dissipated by the plot's preachiness. Kids
who also love the game will appreciate Allie's pride in owning a basketball and the
excitement she feels when one of her shots finally drops through the net. Al-
though the illustrations-drawings reworked using digital techniques-have a bright
slickness suitable to the sport and to the optimistic tone, that slickness can become
too pronounced, homogenizing faces and settings. This book is neither slam dunk
nor air ball, just a good try that bounces off the rim. LM
BARNES, JOYCE ANNETTE 
Promise Me the Moon. 
Dial, 1997 
171p
ISBN 0-8037-1798-9 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Annie, now thirteen (two years older than she was in The Baby Grand, the Moon in
July, andMe, BCCB 1/94), is beginning to have some genuine teen problems. She
and her boyfriend Claude have had what looks to be an unbreachable rift; she's
been invited to apply for admission to the magnet school across town, which firmly
marks her as an egghead; and, though she never acknowledges it, adolescent moodi-
ness and attitude are starting to pervade her every thought. There are quite a few
subplots going on around these main stories, which makes things meander a little,
and the story ties up awfully neatly, but Barnes writes freshly and with tenderness
of Annie's sometimes painful growth. Annie's narrative voice is particularly be-
lievable in its self-doubt (can she really be the astronaut she dreams of being when
she only gets a C in math?) and willful blindness (how could her boyfriend be so
angry with her just because she told him the very hurtful truth?). The warm but
understated depiction of a close-knit African-American family and community
200 
* THE BULLETIN
(the book is set in Cincinnati in 1971) gives the book-and, apparently, Annie-
a sense of groundedness that contributes to the book's general air of hopefulness.
Annie is an engaging heroine, and kids will enjoy watching her blossom. DS
BARTOLETTI, SUSAN CAMPBELL 
Growing Up in Coal Country. 
Houghton,
1996 
147p illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-77847-6 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Inspired by the stories her Italian in-laws told of coming to northeastern Pennsyl-
vania coal country, Bartoletti researched primary and secondary sources, from per-
sonal family histories to mining inspection records, to piece together this picture of
daily life in the Pennsylvania coal mines. The text is a combination of anecdotes
and history, covering the division of labor in the mines (breaker boys, nippers,
spraggers, and miners), the roles of the "sweethearts of the mines" (the mules) and
the "harbingers of disaster" (the rats), the role of women and families, and life in
the patch villages owned and run by the coal companies. The context is a bit
sketchy (a timeline and a map would have been useful) and Bartoletti doesn't foot-
note nearly enough, but the danger and tragedy of life in the mines and the bravery
and loyalty it engendered have an inherent drama that makes this compelling read-
ing. The layout is clean, spare, and attractive, with black-and-white archival pho-
tographs placed generously throughout. A bibliography is included. JMD
BENTLEY, JUDITH 
"Dear Friend": Thomas Garrett & William Still: Collaborators
on the Underground Railroad. Cobblehill, 1997 
[128p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-65156-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Discussing the correspondence between these antebellum abolitionists-Garrett, a
white Maryland Quaker, and Still, a free black activist for the Anti-Slavery Society
in Philadelphia-Bentley demonstrates how cooperation between black and white
"stationmasters" provided stronger links in the escape route than members of ei-
ther race could have offered working alone. The letter exchange discloses the perils
faced by the runaways, plans for transporting the "contraband" northward, and
occasionally even their settlement in the free states of Canada. Peripatetic organi-
zation unfortunately mars the delivery of information throughout this volume as
Bentley skips around chronologically, interjecting laudatory remarks and character
sketches at will. Legal ramifications of the Fugitive Slave Act are not clearly ex-
plained, and readers may be confused by the observation that "under Pennsylvania
law [slaves] would be free as soon as they entered the state" even as the Dred Scott
decision effectively revoked that right. Despite these flaws, readers and report
writers may find it worth their while to sift and sort through the narrative to re-
trieve eyewitness accounts of the Underground Railroad. EB
BUNTING, EVE 
The Blue and the Gray; illus. by Ned Bittinger. 
Scholastic,
1996 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-590-60197-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
6-9 yrs
As the young narrator hangs around the framework of his family's new house, his
father tells him and his best friend J.J. tales of a Civil War battle that was fought in
the field just beyond their subdivision. The two friends-one white and one black-
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 
201
are troubled to learn that many of the soldiers who fought on opposite sides of the
battle had once been friends too. Since this particular battlefield remains un-
marked, the boys resolve to make their own homes and memories a sort of living
monument to the fallen soldiers and, when the narrator finds a bullet amid the
construction rubble, he throws it into the sky rather than keep it as a souvenir.
This slender tale fairly groans under the weight of its good intentions, but neither
the sensibility nor the solemn, Veteran's-Day-style text rings true to a child's expe-
rience. Two boys living in close proximity to battle sites could scarcely be so
ignorant of the Civil War, and the narrator's imaginings, as portrayed in Bittinger's
hazy oil paintings, sentimentalize and sanitize the bloody affair. Didactic verse,
punctuated by the occasional rogue rhyme, swings from adult ("The three of us
look out across a field/ all hillocky and hummocky/ with tufted grass and stubby
flowers") to banal ("My dad says that's the saddest kind of war there is,/ though
every war is sad/ and most are bad"). Suggestions for further reading are appended.
EB
CERULLO, MARY M. 
The Octopus: Phantom ofthe Sea; illus. with photographs by
Jeffrey L. Rotman. 
Cobblehill, 1997 
58p
ISBN 0-525-65199-3 
$16.99 
R Gr. 4-8
This is a spellbinding look at the octopus, up close and personal. The color pho-
tographs are crisp and the writing equally so in a layout nicely balanced between
text blocks and visuals. Cerullo covers the life cycle of the octopus and its place in
the unique group of cephalopods in accessible, descriptive language that dispels
popular myths and replaces them with more fascinating fact. Camouflage, regen-
eration, and jet propulsion are just a few of the octopus' tricks of the trade, and
Cerullo brings them to briny life, including chatty information on topics such as
the venomous, four-inch-long blue-ringed octopus of the South Pacific and the
interactions between humans and octopuses in captivity. A glossary, bibliography,
and index are included. JMD
COOPER, MICHAEL L. 
Hell Fighters: African American Soldiers in World War
I. Lodestar, 1997 
[96p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-67534-5 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
While library shelves sag under the weight of first-rate Civil War and World War
II books, materials on the First World War are somewhat harder to come by.
Cooper packs a lot into a little space in this account of the 369th Regiment, U.S.
Army (nicknamed the Hell Fighters) that, despite its beginnings as an ill-equipped
and poorly trained National Guard unit from Harlem, so distinguished itself on
the Western Front that it was awarded the Croix de Guerre by the French govern-
ment. Yet even as foreign states honored them, these soldiers returned to face, in
many cases, discrimination and abuse both outside and within the military, which
reported that "niggers were feeling their oats a bit .. instructions had been given
to take it out of them quickly, just as soon as they arrived, so as not to have trouble
later on." The 369th's experience of trench warfare was, however, anything but
unique, and the account of this regiment's deployment offers readers a vivid glimpse
of life along the Front, in which "big battles... were infrequent. Most of the time
soldiers manned muddy or dusty trenches and waited for something to happen."
Period photos enhance the text, and an index is included. EB
202 
* 
THE BULLETIN
DELANEY, MICHAEL 
Deep Doo-Doo. Dutton, 1996 
165p
ISBN 0-525-45647-3 
$14.99 
R Gr. 4-6
In a clever play on election-year huffery and puffery, Delaney serves up a generous
helping of political satire. Twelve-year-olds Bennet and Pete use their respective
electronic and journalistic skills to disrupt the television broadcasts of a hypocriti-
cal governor running for re-election. Through their electronic wizardry, they over-
ride the station's signal and present, instead, a spokesdog-Pete's black Lab, Gus,
decked out in a Dracula mask. As Gus stares soulfully into the camera, Pete reads
his prepared scripts, using a disguised voice. Of course, Bennet's dad is the crack-
erjack reporter covering this story, but believability is never really the issue. The
utter looniness of the story is amplified by the many obvious parallels with
Watergate-an anonymous source, meetings in parking garages, a fearless reporter.
The plot will cause anyone over thirty to suffer flashbacks, and much of the not-
so-subtle comedy may be lost on youngsters, but none of that gets in the way of the
broadly punny humor. Even the clairvoyantly challenged will foresee the rather
pat ending, but this one still gets the vote for laughs. SSV
DEMI, ad. 
One Grain of Rice: A Mathematical Folktale; ad. and illus. by
Demi. 
Scholastic, 1997 
[36p]
ISBN 0-590-93998-X 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Claiming to stockpile against famine, the raja has for years demanded an unfair
portion of his subjects' rice, but once hunger strikes, he feasts instead of sharing.
When a clever villager returns the rice that falls from a basket bound for the palace,
she asks as reward only one grain, to be doubled each day for thirty days. Every
subsequent double-page spread shows animals delivering larger amounts of rice
until the climactic fold-out of four pages of elephants lined up in ten rows of
twenty-five or twenty-six each. The villager gathers the last of her reward and
shares it with all the hungry people-including the raja. Intense crimsons and rich
golds emphasize the power of royalty, while Demi's tiny, precise figures set against
vertically geometric backgrounds seem especially suited to this Indian story about
counting on a grand scale. A concluding chart shows the exact numbers mounting
up and added together for a grand total of 1,073,741,823. Although different in
style and tone from David Schwartz's How Much Is a Million? (BCCB 8/85), the
two would make entertaining quantitative companions for the same age group. A
source note is included. BH
DIAKITI, BABA WAGUi, ad. 
The Hunterman and the Crocodile: A West African
Folktale; ad. and illus. by Baba Wagud Diakitd. 
Scholastic, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-89828-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
4-7 yrs
On a pilgrimage to Mecca, Bamba the Crocodile and his family grow faint, "their
food and water diminished, and then finished." When Donso the Hunterman
appears, they beg him to tie them together and carry them on his head back to the
river. That done, they threaten to eat him. Donso asks a cow, a horse, a chicken,
and a tree to intervene, but they all point out the injustice of humans to animals-
until Rabbit, feigning disbelief that Donso could tie up the crocodiles and carry
them, asks the crocodiles for a demonstration. Thus, the crocodiles are tricked
and trapped again. Most variants stop here, as is the case with the well-known
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 
203
Indian tale "The Brahman, the Tiger, and the Jackal," but Diakite's version goes
on to resolve the situation: the crocodiles shed tears that will help Donso's sick
wife get well, in exchange for which he releases them (without lingering nearby!).
The narrative style is as rhythmic as the story episodes themselves. The questioned
characters begin their speeches with an exclamation ("Mook!") and end by turning
away with characteristic sounds repeated three times: "dingi-donga" for the cow,
"keteba" for the horse, "ko" for the chicken, "sha" for the tree branches. Rhythm
is also emphatic in Diakite's paintings on ceramic tile, in which dark shapes are
outlined and decorated with patterned, thick white lines, all against a horizontally
textured, sunset-orange background. The figures are solid, the folk-art borders
simple, and the white space well balanced with the strong images. An author's
note gives some cultural context and background on other variants, three of which
are listed from recent collections and a picture book. BH
DOYLE, BRIAN 
Uncle Ronald. Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 1997 
137p
ISBN 0-88899-266-1 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Now Canada's oldest living resident, Old Mickey tells the story of the crucial time
in his childhood, "November, 1895, when the army came up from Ottawa to
attack the people around the little town of Low," and when his mother sent him
up to stay with his uncle Ronald in order to escape his father's vicious beatings.
Mickey finds his gentle uncle, his cheerful cousins ("the O'Malley girls," middle-
aged twins), his uncle's rescued hard-luck horse, and the townsfolk a wonder and
a joy, and he follows with fascination their crafty struggle against the army's at-
tempt to collect back taxes. Underneath the lighthearted war of wits, however,
lurks the fear that his father will follow to collect Mickey and his newly arrived
(and lately battered) mother, and that they will never be safe from his violence. As
did Gary Paulsen in Harris andMe (BCCB 1/94), Doyle blends rustic humor with
an inclusion of life's darker side, managing to balance both tones well without
undercutting either. The clever rural folk are individual and entertaining, verging
on tall-tale characters without ever becoming stereotypes, and the banter is amus-
ing; Mickey's father is realistic and deeply frightening, and many readers will cheer
the old-fashioned, unequivocal resolution that frees Mickey from him forever.
There's more seriousness than in Doyle's Spud Sweetgrass books (BCCB 7/96),
but the freshness of the writing, the richness of the cast, and the resilience of the
comedy will draw the author's fans. DS
DURBIN, WILLIAM 
The Broken Blade. Delacorte, 1997 
[16 0p]
ISBN 0-385-32224-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
With his thumb severed in a household accident, Pierre's father is unable to make
his annual canoe trek to Grand Portage with the voyageurs, and Pierre, who feels
responsible for the accident, signs on as an oarsman to provide much-needed in-
come for the family. Durbin wastes little time before plunging into the action,
which transforms Pierre from classroom-softened boy to hard-muscled man under
the rough tutelage of the crew. Practical jokes, vicious fistfights, treacherous rap-
ids and violent lake storms, and the death of an honored crewman all play a part in
Pierre's education, and by the return trip to Montreal, the young man is a sea-
soned veteran who wisely withholds advice and allows a new cub on the river to
learn lessons through experience. Pierre's musings about home and school intrude
204 
* THE BULLETIN
from time to time, but action-packed river scenes dominate the novel. This look at
the early nineteenth-century Canadian fur trade should appeal to reluctant readers
as well as adventure buffs, and it may be a welcome suggestion for middle-school
historical fiction reports. EB
FOREST, HEATHER, ad. 
Wisdom Tales from Around the World. August House,
1996 
156p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-874830478-3 
$27.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87483-479-1 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Jataka tales from India, Zen tales from Japan, and Sufi tales from the Middle East
are just a few of the attractions in this collection of fifty tales. The theme of the
collection is wisdom, and the fine line between humor and irony is notably bal-
anced. Forest's brief retellings (the average length is two pages) are succinct and
clear, her language straightforward, and her selections well-organized. The occa-
sional versifications (taking the form of concluding morals or stories in verse) while
pithy, are not a strong component. The tales range from culture to culture, conti-
nent to continent, with examples from European, American Indian, and African
traditions, as well as Christianity, Judaism, and the Ancient Greeks. The austere
but attractive design includes a large typeface, generous white space, and black-
and-white borders based on graphic motifs and textile designs from the countries
of origin. This collection is a valuable resource for storytellers and librarians as
Forest's notes are extensive, providing a springboard to individual research of tale
variants. A list of proverbs from around the world is included. JMD
FREEMAN, MARTHA 
Stink Bomb Mom. 
Delacorte, 1996 
154 p
ISBN 0-385-32219-4 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Aurora (Rory) and her aging hippie mom, Doria, live in a laid-
back home filled with countless pet rodents, reptiles, and one spectacular little
mutt, Agnes. Rory's best friend, Pookie, lives with her dad the mayor, her mom
the perfect housewife, and her toddler brother Barney in a tense, albeit enviably
tidy, home. With the help of Pookie, the self-possessed Rory copes with her ditzy
mother (whose latest New-Age job is helping the gullible tap into their primal
energies through aromatherapy, hence the title), an absentee father, threats to her
pets, and her first crush, maintaining her equilibrium in the face of cougars, miss-
ing children, and animal control officers. Freeman's brisk pace and agreeably sar-
castic dialogue keeps the transparent yet entertaining plot whizzing satisfactorily
along, propelled by human buffoonery and canine angst. Freeman's tone is
stratospherically light but not without a certain edginess that lends what little cre-
dence this spoof requires. An easy booktalk with an admirably level-headed hero-
ine, this title comes out smelling like a rose. SSV
GLIORI, DEBI 
The Snow Lambs; written and illus. by Debi Gliori. 
Scholastic,
1996 [3 5p]
ISBN 0-590-20304-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
When the first fat snowflakes begin to fall, Sam and his father bring the sheep in
from the field. Only Bess the sheepdog realizes that one sheep is missing and
promptly heads out to fetch the ewe home. The book begins with full and double-
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 
205
page illustrations of Sam and his father gathering in the sheep, but then each double-
page spread splits into two panels of varying proportions. While one panel shows
the family's activities in the farmhouse, the other depicts Bess' adventures rescuing
the errant sheep. The panels show Bess as she finds the sheep, digs a path through
the snow, guides the ewe through the spooky woods, and-climactically-discov-
ers a way across the swirling waters of Stony River. Once home, the very pregnant
ewe bears a pair of "snow lambs" while Sam rewards his dog with a hug. Gliori's
ewe is appropriately big-eyed and timid while Bess radiates canine confidence and
courage. (Just take a look at the King-of-the-Mountain illustration in which Bess
poses in noble profile against a huge moon and a suddenly snowless sky.) Gliori's
watercolors, which subtly blend grays, purples, and greens in the outdoor scenes
and yellows and reds inside Sam's house, effectively contrast the bitter cold of the
snowstorm with the warmth of the farmhouse interiors. Children will appreciate
Sam's concern for his dog and his joy when Bess and sheep come safely home. LM
GOODMAN, JOAN ELIZABETH 
The Winter Hare. Houghton, 1996 
255p
ISBN 0-395-78569-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Twelfth-century England is in the grip ofwarfare between the forces of King Stephen
and those of the Empress Matilda, both claimants to the throne; twelve-year-old
Will Belet belongs to a family that supports the Empress. Will is sent off to Ox-
ford Castle, where his step-uncle the earl takes him on as a page, and where Will
encounters power plays, treachery, and battle, culminating in his spiriting away of
the Empress Matilda from the besieged castle. This is near-generic historical fic-
tion ("The peasants waved their ox-goads and shouted 'Hurrah!' as their lord and
his men passed by"), with often unsubtle characterization and a piling on of events
rather than any clear momentum. There's a fair amount of energetic swashbuck-
ling, gentle moralizing, and atmospheric castle-life details (the depiction of siege
life is particularly unusual), however, and it's all set in a period that's dramatic but
fictionally underserved for younger readers (older readers can explore it with Ellis
Peters' Brother Cadfael). This doesn't have the imaginative reality of Cushman's
Catherine Called Birdy (BCCB 6/94), but young knight wannabes may want to
have a look. Historical notes are appended. DS
GORRELL, GENA K. 
North Star to Freedom: The Story of the Underground
Railroad. Delacorte, 1997 
168p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-385-32319-0 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Gorrell's history of the Underground Railroad is, more precisely, an introduction
to the political history of slavery in the United States and Canada, emphasizing the
earlier rejection of slavery by Great Britain and, subsequently, Canada, that made
our northern neighbor a viable destination for runaways. The famous escapes of
Henry "Box" Brown, Ellen and William Craft, and Harriet Tubman will probably
be familiar to U.S. readers, as will the efforts of abolitionists such as John Brown
and William Lloyd Garrison. But Gorrell's title supplies a piece of the Under-
ground Railroad puzzle generally neglected in standard accounts-as the free States
came under increasing pressure to enforce the Fugitive Slave Acts, Canada firmly
refused to extradite runaways or cooperate in slaveholders' recovery of property:
"To the runaway's question 'Where can I be safe?' there was at last an answer."
Period illustrations, an index, and source notes are included. EB
206 
* THE BULLETIN
GOTTFRIED, TED 
Alan Turing: The Architect of the Computer Age. 
Watts,
1996 
128p 
illus. with photographs 
(Impact Biographies)
ISBN 0-531-11287-X 
$22.70 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Alan Turing is a fascinating and enigmatic figure, and what with Masterpiece The-
atre scheduled to present Breaking the Code, the dramatized story of his life, popu-
lar interest in him will probably rise. Gottfried's biography examines the intellectual,
the personal, and the political aspects of Turing's life, discussing Turing's achieve-
ments as a wartime codebreaker and as a pioneer of computational theory as well
as his homosexuality and his eventual prosecution and chemical castration for that
then-illegal offense. This biography makes good use of sources, especially Alan
Hodges' pivotal, informative, and extremely dense monograph, to present Turing's
life at a YA-accessible level; its suggestion that the enforced chemical treatment
was directly responsible for Turing's suicide seems to be an original, if question-
able, assertion. Turing's personality was apparently a difficult one to convey and
the mathematics can be dizzying for the lay reader, but the text does a good job
with the small space it has. Though it does not, as jacket copy suggests, go on to
argue that his achievements have been obscured as a result of anti-gay prejudice, it
does explain the post-Turing revolutions in computers and in gay and lesbian civil
rights. Endnotes, a list of further resources (including web sites), and an index are
included. DS
GRAHAM, HARRIET 
A Boy and His Bear. 
McElderry, 1996 
196 p
ISBN 0-689-80943-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
On a chance errand to the bear pits, Dickon, a tanner's apprentice in Elizabethan
England, finds he has a gift for communicating with the animals, one young bear
in particular. With the Master of the Bear Garden's blessing, he spends his off
hours training the cub and they bond further. Soon, however, Dickon's talent
incurs enmity and suspicion among the locals and, after several attempts on his
life, he and the cub are forced to flee to France with the aid of friends. There's an
old-fashioned flavor to the story, with romanticism apparent in Dickon's relation-
ship with the cub, the occasional interpolations of the bear's point of view, and the
portrayal of the traveling circus folk with whom Dickon throws in his lot; the story
also wanders around a bit when Dickon and his ursine friend do the same. It's an
appealingly different approach to the animal-story genre, however, and Dickon's
trusting relationship with the bear will please many young readers, who will un-
derstand the rightness of Dickon's final decision to set his friend free. DS
GRAY, LIBBA MOORE 
Little Lil and the Swing-Singing Sax; illus. by Lisa
Cohen. 
Simon, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80681-7 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
When Mama Big Lil gets sick, Uncle Sudi Man pawns his saxophone to get the
medicine she needs, and "hallelujah-amen the medicine helped a bit. Mama Big
Lil got a little better but the laughter stayed away while the horn gathered dust on
a dingy cluttered shelf." Little Lil knows that Uncle Sudi Man's saxophone is the
only thing that will make Mama Big Lil altogether well, so she draws a picture to
take to the pawn shop to trade for the horn. This family story, based on the
author's memories of a jazz-loving uncle, is set during the Christmas season but
deserves to be told all year round. Gray's text has the cadence of an oral tale, the
musical narrative combining with Cohen's vigorous visual images in a joyful paean
to making the people we love happy. Cohen's strongly geometric acrylic paint-
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 
207
ings, with thick black outlines like coloring-book art, have a vitality and jump
suitable to this rhythmic story. The restoration of Uncle Sudi Man's sax results in
a spontaneous dance on their apartment rooftop, as the family listens to Uncle
Sudi Man's "angel-sweet, blue-curling notes rising like a prayer above the white
December clouds." JMD
GREGORY, VALISKA 
When Stories Fell Like Shooting Stars; illus. by Stefano
Vitale. 
Simon, 1996 
4 0p
ISBN 0-689-80012-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
"Two stories fell like shooting stars-one told of Fox, one told of Bear," and it is
up to the reader to decide which of these original stories is true. When Fox discov-
ers the sun, "red as hearts and yellow as gold, trembling" in the branches of a tree,
a succession of animals wrestles for control over night, day, and shadows, ulti-
mately destroying the earth. The storyteller Bear, however, protects the moon that
falls to the earth; he recruits Spider and Hawk to carry the moon home and gives
them the strength to succeed by telling them the "old stories." While the emphasis
on Bear's solemn wisdom ("The moon is ours to tend, but not to own") slows this
story's pace a bit, Fox's story strides forth with vivid metaphors and the cumula-
tion of conflict to its fiery climax. Vitale's two-dimensional figures scatter in a
Paul Klee-like landscape that is anything but flat: the palette paints a sharp con-
trast between dark and light, the grain of the painted wood boards offer contour
and texture. Some readers may find the stories provocative, but others may be put
off by the rambling text and preachy subtext. AEB
GRIFFIN, ADELE 
Rainy Season. 
Houghton, 1996 
200p
ISBN 0-395-81181-3 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 6-8
Unlike his twelve-year-old sister Lane, who is easily pushed into an anxiety attack
at the slightest possibility of danger, younger brother Charlie has no concept of
risk or consequences. The relationship between Lane and Charlie forms the heart
of the novel, as Lane fights Charlie, hates him, and ultimately saves him. The
palpable tension between the two results in an insidious undercurrent of unex-
plained danger, as Griffin builds suspense with small indications that things aren't
quite right. The revelation that their oldest sister Emily was recently killed in a car
accident involving the whole family places Charlie's risk-taking and Lane's safety
neurosis in perspective as part of the family's pathological grief-their mother has
excised Emily from all the family photos and will not acknowledge her existence.
It is only when Lane and Charlie break the taboo of speaking about their sister that
the tension is relieved, and the image of Lane opening a box of photographs and
reclaiming the older sister she loves is one that will remain with readers long after
the book is closed. Set on an army base in the Panama Canal Zone during No-
vember, 1977, the story offers a strongly evoked but never intrusive milieu, the
politics present but always in the background. JMD
HAN, OKI S., ad. 
Kongi and Potgi: A Cinderella Story from Korea; ad. by Oki S.
Han and Stephanie Haboush Plunkett; illus. by Oki S. Han. 
Dial, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1572-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1571-4 
$14.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Less ornate in graphic tone than Ruth Heller's illustrations for Shirley Climo's The
Korean Cinderella, this picture book nevertheless features a similarly sharp contrast
208 
* THE BULLETIN
of colors and a closely related textual variant, which Han's jacket copy attributes to
her father's telling. Even young listeners will be able to compare the heroine's
animal helpers-an ox, a frog, and some sparrows-with those in western variants
familiar from Perrault, the Grimms, or even Disney. Of course, the tired old
father, the jealous stepmother/stepsister, the gallant prince, and the "jewellike slip-
per" are all recognizable, as are the radiant angels that parallel the dead mother or
godmother of European sources. Against detailed background scenes of tradi-
tional village life, Han's figures are posed, even occasionally stiff, but the composi-
tions are fluid and the patterning vivid. In both school and public libraries, this
will enrich collections that emphasize folklore to connect with ethnically diverse
populations. BH
HERRON, CAROLIVIA 
Nappy Hair; illus. by Joe Cepeda. 
Knopf, 1997 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-97937-9 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-87937-4 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
4-8 yrs
At a family picnic, Uncle Mordecai expounds upon the nappy nature of young
Brenda's hair, comparing the combing of it to "scrunching through the New Mexico
desert in brogans in the heat of summer." When he is chided for his observations
he expands upon them in an expository conceit that includes nappy hair for Brenda
as part of God's great plan. The resulting call-and-response is glorious: "And the
Lord./ Well. / The Lord in heaven./ What you say./ The Lord who brought the
Israelites out of Egypt./ Yes, he did./ He looked down on this cute little brown baby
girl./ He looked at her./ He looked at her and he say 'Well done.'/ Yep./ He say 'I
got me one.'/ That's what he said./ 'One nap of her hair is the only perfect circle in
nature.'" Cepeda's bright palette serves him well in this exuberant story, distin-
guishing each expressive family member by style or dress: Uncle Mordecai, in a
dark blue shirt, red bow tie and yellow pants, sits on a sky-blue porch with a pink
railing. Brenda herself energetically races through the pages in a neon-green dress
with a yellow ruffle and black and white high tops, joyfully heading for her obvi-
ously sublime destiny. Sitting around a picnic table set on fresh green grass, Brenda's
family celebrates their togetherness-and her hair. JMD
HICKOX, REBECCA 
Zorro and Quwi: Tales ofa Trickster Guinea Pig; illus. by Kim
Howard. 
Doubleday, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-385-32122-8 
$14.95 
R 
4 -7 yrs
In this retelling of a Peruvian trickster tale an irresistibly clever guinea pig, Quwi,
subs for the more traditional mouse as the perfect wily protagonist. From the first
double-page spread, Quwi (whose name in Peru, according to an appended author's
note, is the Quechua word for guinea pig) is depicted as a winsome rodent of
incomparably cagey competence. The object of Quwi's clever tricks is Zorro, the
always hungry fox, who exults, "Here you are, trapped and ready to be my break-
fast," whereupon Quwi sighs, "I would be happy to be your breakfast, for some-
thing far worse is about to happen." Something far worse does happen, but always
to Zorro, compliments of Quwi's ingenious quick-on-his-paws thinking. Vibrantly
hued paintings with unusual angles serve as a robust backdrop to the fiery red,
triangular proportions of the fox and the furry plumpness of the piebald Quwi.
Our toothy hero leads the greedy fox into one ridiculous predicament after the
other, and the hilarious slapstick finale when the unfortunate fox, a pot stuck on
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 
209
his head, mistakes the sleeping farmer's head for a rock, is sure to bring the house
down. PM
HOBAN, RUSSELL 
The Trokeville Way. 
Knopf, 1996 
118p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98148-9 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-88148-4 
$17.00 
M 
Gr. 6-9
Nick Hartley, almost thirteen years old, loses a fight with bully Harry Buncher,
buys a jigsawed watercolor painting from a washed-up magician named Moe Nagic,
and finds himself in a surreal fantasy world where there are no easy answers. The
watercolor painting acts as entryway into a dreamscape wherein Nick encounters
other dreamers and seekers including Cynthia, his real-life crush; Zelda, Moe Nagic's
lost love; and his own parents. Artless wordplay abounds: the bridge in the paint-
ing is "the brudge" (to rhyme with grudge), Nick and the other dreamscapers are
lost in the little wood/would, and the jigsaw puzzle is a juzzle. Nick's quest through
the dreamscape is apparently his journey into male adulthood, and it is marked by
his finally beating up Harry Buncher, his dating Harry's sister, and his first overt
sexual response-to Cynthia's mother, who turns out to be Zelda, Moe's lost love:
"Wow! Cynthia's mother, the Zelda who'd kissed me in the little would! I was
having quite a rich fantasy life in those moments and I could feel in my underpants
that Mrs. Jeffreys had well and truly dragged me across the threshold of puberty."
This unwieldy combination of elements never gels into an involving storyline.
Any sense of pacing is tossed out the window very early on, and the rambling plot
never recovers from the absence of momentum. JMD
HORWITZ, MARGOT F. 
A Female Focus: Great Women Photographers. Watts,
1996 
127p 
illus. with photographs 
(Women Then, Women Now)
ISBN 0-531-11302-7 
$22.70 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Women have been involved in photography from the very beginning, and Horwitz
chronicles a multitude of notable artists in the medium. Chapters group photog-
raphers (all American) chronologically and thematically, discussing household names
(Dorothea Lange, Imogen Cunningham, Diane Arbus, Margaret Bourke-White)
and a plethora of lesser-known but significant artists and professionals. The book
draws generously on the photographers' own words, and an insert includes sample
photographs from many of the subjects. There's too much in a short space, how-
ever, and the effect is that of rushing from one annotation to another rather than a
cohesive exploration of photographic history; the cursory descriptions of personal
lives rarely inform the artistic accounts as they were seemingly intended. Sylvia
Wolfs Focus: Five Women Photographers (BCCB 11/94) has more impact, but
serious young photographers will appreciate the breadth of Horwitz' account.
Endnotes, a bibliography, and an index are included. DS
HOWE, JOHN, ad. 
The Knight with the Lion: The Story of Yvain; ad. and illus. by
John Howe. 
Little, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-316-37583-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
This retelling of a twelfth-century romance relates the story of Yvain, "the bravest
and most gentle knight of all King Arthur's court." Having conquered the Black
Knight, Yvain is captured by the lady Ludine but, assisted by her handmaiden
Lunete, succeeds in persuading Ludine to marry him. In a succession of lushly
illustrated events, he breaks a vow, loses his wife, loses his mind, regains his reason,
210 
* 
THE BULLETIN
acquires a lion companion, saves several damsels in distress, and wins the day-
and his wife-once again. Phew. There's a lot going on here, all illustrated in
Howe's appropriately romantic, full-page watercolors filled with golden-age im-
ages of knights and ladies, armor and horses, dragons and lions. Howe does a
creditable job of making this somewhat obscure, complexly plotted romance ac-
cessible to younger readers. When they come looking for adventure stories about
questing knights, reach for this one. A source note gives information on medieval
writer Chretien de Troyes and his contribution to Arthurian romance literature.
JMD
JAMES, MARY 
Shoebag Returns. 
Scholastic, 1996 
14 4 p
ISBN 0-590-48711-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
The redoubtable roach of earlier fame (Shoebag, BCCB 3/90) now resides at Miss
Rattray's School for Girls, a high-toned establishment that has just admitted its
first male student, Stanley, the spoiled son of an alum. Stanley's only shot at
friendship is with fellow outsider Josephine Jiminez, who acts out her social frus-
trations by smashing her dolls against the wall; together they thumb their noses at
the school socialites by forming their own club, the Butters, to rival the hoity-toity
Betters. What little plot there is revolves around Stanley and Josephine; Shoebag
is largely relegated to popping in and out of the students' t-shirts during his hu-
man transformations, bringing scraps to his family (now living in the cook's
Macintosh computer), and of course, escaping from the clutches of a spider with
the help of ex-roach/boy, Gregor Samsa. Pacing is sluggish, tension is slight, and
roach jokes are showing signs of wear, but James' deadpan humor retains some of
the sparkle of the original Shoebag. "'I was not a club type, anyway,' said Stanley's
father. 'I was not a snob until I married your mother."' EB
JOHNSTON, ANDREA 
Girls Speak Out: Finding Your True Self 
Scholastic,
1997 
[2 4 0p]
ISBN 0-590-89795-0 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-9
The Girls Speak Out programs have met across the country and enabled a wide
variety of girls and women to meet together to examine the pressures and possibili-
ties of womanhood. Andrea Johnston, one of the founders of the program, at-
tempts here to put its effects into literary form by describing the ideology and
process of the sessions and interpolating them with anecdotes and writings from
selected Girls Speak Out groups. The result, unfortunately, is a disjointed muddle:
the chapters could have been reversed with little alteration to the impact, which
means it's not clear what each activity is supposed to achieve or how it fits into the
overall Girls Speak Out purpose. The writings from program participants are
well-meaning and earnest but authentically amateurish; a small sampling would
have been more effective than the two twenty-five page collections, the length of
which has the unfortunate effect of diminishing the individual voices' clarity and
weight. Literary excerpts (from books for youth as well as for adults) similarly
diffuse the focus instead of providing specific inspirations. The writing overall is
energetic but cliched and rambling, with enthusiasm often deteriorating into ro-
manticism. There are occasional glimpses beyond into what could be a fascinating
experience, but the book ultimately fails to convey the program's merits. DS
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 211
JONES, K. MAURICE 
Spike Lee and the African American Filmmakers: A Choice of
Colors. Millbrook, 1996 
160p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-56294-518-1 
$16.90 
R Gr. 8-12
Chronicling directors ranging from Oscar Micheaux in the 1920s to John Single-
ton in the 1990s, this overview ofAfrican-American filmmakers ultimately focuses
on the notable Spike Lee. The author does an admirable job of placing each direc-
tor within the context of American society at his or her time: he points out the
irony that the success of "coon and mammy" roles in white films led directly to
segregated "race" films and the lucrative blaxploitation movies. Building on that
cinematic history, today's acclaimed African-American directors are making some
of the best films in the world. Despite occasional hyperbole (is Lee really on a
mission from God, as the author asserts, or is he just out to do the right thing?) and
his tendency to paint with a broad brush ("Whites in positions of authority tend to
consider blacks like Lee 'difficult"'), Jones has done a commendable job distilling
a great deal of cinematic history into accessible prose. A little more attention to
detail, less repetitious language, and a little less sermonizing could have improved
the end product. This is still a handy resource for high-school report writers or
any kid captured by the glow of the silver screen. Extensive documentation in-
cludes endnotes, film chronologies, bibliography, and an index. SSV
KEILLOR, GARRISON 
The Sandy Bottom Orchestra; by Garrison Keillor and Jenny
Lind Nilsson. 
Hyperion, 1996 
263p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2145-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0173-5 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Set apart from the "normal" kids in school by her musical talent (she is a gifted
violinist), fourteen-year-old Rachel views her life through intelligent if somewhat
desperate eyes, seeing "a mother who corrects everyone's grammar and a father
who stands in the den conducting La Boheme, in a town where nothing ever hap-
pens." The action of the novel revolves around Rachel playing in the Dairyland
Symphony Orchestra, blissfully indulging in her first crush (reciprocated), and
figuring out a way to deal with her overpowering yet loving mother. While a
strong sense of nostalgic innocence permeates the text, the point of view is always
true to Rachel's somewhat wistful tone of voice, and her emotional responses have
an adolescent clarity that is positively heartrending. Characterizations are some-
times less than three-dimensional (Rachel's music teacher is a flamboyant Italian
maestro, and Mayor "Broadbutt" is a bit too much the strip-mall entrepreneur),
but such characters are nonetheless humorously sketched and are offset by such
gems as the individually drawn members of the orchestra, a stage mother from hell
and her protege son, Rachel's parents, and the gently rendered Rachel. The end-
ing is a happy combination of State Fair, Pollyana, and Seventeenth Summer. "They
wandered around the crowd-Mother was a big hit, Daddy was happy, and she
was holding hands with a sweet boy. Rachel thought she had never felt quite so
happy." Me neither. JMD
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
The Tale ofAli Baba and the Forty Thieves: A Story from the
Arabian Nights; illus. by Will Hillenbrand. 
Holiday House, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1258-X 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
The text here is a breezily told version of the well-known tale wherein poor wood-
cutter Ali Baba gains the booty of thieves and defeats their plans of vengeance with
212 
* THE BULLETIN
the help of the slave Marghana. More of an illustrated short story than a picture
book, this version is less condensed than Walter McVitty's Ali Baba and the Forty
Thieves (BCCB 12/89), but the pacing is brisk and the adventure, as always, ap-
pealing. Hillenbrand's illustrations are a complete contrast to the distant Eastern
formality of Margaret Early's art for McVitty's adaptation. His mixed-media art
relies on rich contrasting hues just this side of gaudy, and the figures are humorous
enough to keep the violence fantastical; the levity, however, never deteriorates into
cartooning, and there's depth and texture in the mottled planes of color as well as
an appropriate menace underlying the bright exoticism of the images. There are a
lot of kids who really don't know where "Open, Sesame" came from; this is allur-
ing enough and unbabyish enough that they'll enjoy reading to find out. DS
KRENSKY, STEPHEN 
Lionel and His Friends; illus. by Susanna Natti. 
Dial,
1996 
48p 
(Dial Easy-to-Read)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1751-2 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1750-4 
$12.99 
R Gr. 2-4
In four short chapters, Lionel (hero of five previous books by the same collaborat-
ing team) copes with a best friend getting a bad case of politeness, a jelly and
peanut butter sandwich instead of peanut butter and jelly, an older sister with
plans to send him to the moon, and a broken window resulting from a wild base-
ball. The text is simple but not simplistic, with the concerns of the young protago-
nist and the secondary characters treated gently and without condescension. The
sense of humor is consistent throughout Krensky's text, and it is nicely reflected in
Natti's watercolor and pencil illustrations, which depict a facially expressive, cul-
turally inclusive group of school children. JMD
LEWIS, J. PATRICK 
The Boat ofMany Rooms: The Story ofNoah in Verse; illus. by
Reg Cartwright. 
Atheneum, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80118-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
3-5 yrs
What could be more tedious than forty days and nights of rain? One answer is
Lewis' collection of poems relating the Genesis tale of Noah and his animal-filled
ark. Hackneyed language ("God, raging in His heaven,/ Surveyed the wretched
earth/ And wept to see humanity/ To which He'd given birth"), awkward syntax
("Though Noah's heart was humble,/ He who was without blame/ Knew all along
to right the wrong/ That God might call his name"), and sometimes silly word
choice ("Hark!" the Breath of Heaven thundered,/ "This is my covenant with
you,/ With all the children of your children,/ And with the universal zoo") make
the individual poems ineffective at conveying either images or emotions. Taken as
a whole, the constant shifting of tone between Biblical grandeur ("Then God took
thought for Noah,/ And stilled His heavenly cup"), attempted profundity ("Let
the lowly slug pearl the footpaths of Asia Minor"), and light humor ("All animals
aboard!" cried Noah./ "From pachyderms to protozoa!") prevents the collection
from achieving any sort of cohesion. Each double-page spread features one un-
titled poem and one illustration. Cartwright's oil paintings resemble collage, as if
images have been cut from paper and then physically laid on top of one another,
giving each illustration a simultaneous depth and flatness. Forms are simple, well-
defined, and generally cheerful. Although this book could be used to teach chil-
dren the basic elements of the traditional Bible story, it certainly won't rev up
religious instruction or bring excitement to Sunday school. LM
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 213
LONDON, JONATHAN 
What Newt Could Do for Turtle; illus. by Louise
Voce. 
Candlewick, 1996 
[33p]
ISBN 1-56402-259-5 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
3-6 yrs
"A red-spotted newt crawled out from his winter bed in the mud. 'Help!' cried
Newt. 'I'm stuck!"' Newt is then rescued from his muddy predicament in this
predictable, episodic picture book that follows Newt and Turtle's friendship through
the seasons. As platitudes drip from page to page ("'That's what friends are for,'
said Turtle"), a rock-sitting Newt ruminates on the repeated refrain: "What can I
do for Turtle?" The seasons pass and Turtle continues his boy-scout (make that
reptile-scout) heroics, rescuing Newt from the likes of a cottonmouth snake and
an alligator. So when Newt finally gets the chance to upend his friend who has
been "attacked" by a bobcat, he does it because, as we all too well know, "that's
what friends are for!" (What we don't know is why Newt's spots keep turning
darker -
going from red to almost purple during the course of the story.) The
illustrations do provide splashes of brilliant, seasonal color with lots of double-
page spreads, but if you're looking for examples of loyal friendship you might be
happier revisiting Frog and Toad. PM
MCCLINTOCK, BARBARA 
The Fantastic Drawings ofDanielle; written and illus. by
Barbara McClintock. 
Houghton, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-395-73980-2 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
While Danielle's bearded and bespectacled father photographs wintery street scenes
in turn-of-the-century Paris, fantastic drawings snake from Danielle's drawing pad
like the genie from Aladdin's lamp. Bare-branched trees bloom with enormous
cabbage roses; promenading Parisians garbed in browns and grays become finely
dressed birds or giraffes out walking their pet goldfish and sporting elaborate mil-
linery. Even though Papa disapproves of her far-from-realistic drawings, Danielle
can't stop herself from embellishing flowers with human features or sketching a
wealthy goat who will buy Papa's pictures and rescue them from poverty. When
Papa falls ill and their money runs out, Danielle ventures out with Papa's camera
but finds little success. Fortunately, she meets a kindred spirit and employer in
Madame Beton, an artist whose paintings are as fanciful as Danielle's, and all ends
happily ever after with pastries all around. Paris emerges through architectural
details and overhead angles. Full-page spreads are balanced with tiny vignettes,
and the tone consistently strikes a balance between Papa's seriousness and Danielle's
whimsy. While the sparse text is sometimes self-conscious and perhaps unneces-
sary, it is appropriate to the rags-to-riches, sickness-to-health story. Budding non-
conformists will take heart. Use with Diane Goode's Mama's Perfect Present (BCCB
12/96) for a contrasting presentation of place and of the value of art. AEB
MCDONALD, JOYCE 
Comfort Creek. 
Delacorte, 1996 
194 p
ISBN 0-385-32232-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Quinella Ellerbee has lost her mother to the traveling music circuit and her sixth-
grade-newspaper editorship to a prissy archrival, and she's mad. She's mainly mad
at her father for making them move their old house to a swamp with no plumbing
or electricity. But underneath, she's mad at him for forbidding them to talk about
her mother, and, as she finally discovers at the end of the novel, she's furious at her
mother for leaving. There are lots of subplots: Pa-Daddy has lost his job with a
214 
* THE BULLETIN
rapacious mining company, another company threatens to strip-mine the swamp
and Quin's grandparents' orchards, Quin fights with her two sisters and befriends
a boy who teaches her how to make money off cypress-knee lamps, Pa-Daddy has
been hiding Mom's letters, a fight develops between the mining men and the more
environmentally aware farm folk. The story gets crowded, meandering sometimes
into overexplanation and into a tidy ending when Pa-Daddy, who is penniless,
turns out to have bought Quin's favorite quilt, which was sold at a fund-raising
fair to hire a lawyer for the cause he hates. There is a world built here, though, and
a narrator who acts out her negative emotions in realistic outbursts. BH
MATAS, CAROL 
More Minds; by Carol Matas and Perry Nodelman. 
Simon,
1996 
188p
ISBN 0-689-80388-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
After rescuing the Gragians from the existential mind manipulation of the dictator
Hevak in Of Two Minds, Princess Lenora of Gepeth is not content to sit quietly at
home contemplating her trousseau. When a giant invades the north, headstrong
Lenora sneaks off to imagine him out of existence. However, she soon discovers
that the Balance, which sets limits to the Gepethians' ability to turn their imaginings
into reality, has been disrupted and imagination/reality becomes seriously out of
control. Lenora finds herself battling chaos on behalf of the order she had rebelled
against before. The story is hampered by excessively long scenes, and it's stretched
out by super-explanatory dialogue, surreal descriptions of Balance-less life, and
relentless bickering. Fiance Prince Coren is the only character who betrays any
emotional depth, reacting to illogical events with sensitivity and occasional spirit,
while Lenora turns anger, elation, and impatience on and off like hot and cold
water faucets. Young readers who appreciate enterprising princesses may enjoy
Lenora, who certainly knows how to get what she wants. AEB
MAYO, MARGARET, ad. 
When the World Was Young: Creation and Pourquoi
Tales; illus. by Louise Brierley. 
Simon, 1996 
77p
ISBN 0-689-80867-4 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Ten pourquoi stories from a variety of cultures are elegantly retold and illustrated
in this attractively designed collection. Mayo retells "The Girl Who Did Some
Baking," about why people have different colored skins, "The Magic Millstones,"
a variant of "Why the Sea is Salt," "The Mud on Turtle's Back," about the origin
of solid earth, and seven other tales from American Indian, Polynesian, and Cen-
tral American cultures, among others. Brierley's watercolors, while not culturally
specific, are effective, her oversized characters quite suitably placed in mythic sur-
roundings accentuated by an emphasis on light and dark tones and warm and cold
colors. The retellings are concise and cogent, and Mayo's notes are extensive,
giving available print sources and variants. This a good resource for storytellers
and librarians as well as an accessible, engaging title for young readers. JMD
MEDEARIS, ANGELA SHELF 
Haunts: Five Hair-Raising Tales; illus. by Trina Schart
Hyman. 
Holiday House, 1996 
37p
ISBN 0-8234-1280-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
These five ghost tales won't be on your shelves long, as they are accessibly short,
gleefully scary, and blessed with terrifically horrific cover and interior art by Trina
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 215
Schart Hyman. Each tale opens with the illustration of a glowing-eyed skull, and
the haunted house atmosphere is enhanced by full-page pen and ink drawings. An
author's note states that the tales have been retold from folklore or from imagina-
tion, but no specific sources are given. From the opening tale of "The Fiddler
Man," in which a ghost dog helps a girl save her brother from a sinister musician,
to a ragtime variant of "Aaron Kelly's Bones," in which a dead husband comes
back for one last dance with his faithless wife ("Last Dance at the Dew Drop Inn"),
to the concluding retelling of "Wait Till Martin Comes" ("Waiting for Mr.
Chester"), Medearis has a grand old ghostly time. The kids will, too. JMD
MELTZER, MILTON 
Weapons 6- Warfare: From the Stone Age to the Space Age;
illus. by Sergio Martinez. 
HarperCollins, 1996 
85p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024876-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024875-0 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Longbows and missiles and tanks, oh my! Meltzer plunges right into his macabre
subject in this compendium of all the ways throughout history that folks have tried
to kill each other. Beginning with the wooden club and ending with thermo-
nuclear bombs, readers are dished up juicy descriptions and justifications of weap-
onry and strategy, topped off with a sprinkling of history. The short entries, which
average little more than a page each, make it easy to check on that favorite weapon
while dodging those less intriguing. Meltzer ultimately makes no attempt to hide
his contempt of warfare ("mad folly"), but this is a book for which curious would-
be warriors would gladly shelve their Nintendo controls-at least for a while.
Martinez's black-and-white drawings illuminate the narration and contribute to
its drama (a thumbnail illustration of a handgun and a kid's sneaker, while simple,
drives home a point about youthful fatalities). A bibliography, index, and an au-
thor biography are included. SSV
MILLER, DEBBIE S. 
Disappearing Lake: Nature's Magic in Denali National Park;
illus. by Jon Van Zyle. 
Walker, 1997 
[33p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8475-5 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8474-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Miller takes her audience on a tour of the Alaskan vernal lake which swells each
spring with the melted snow running off the mountains, and then evaporates in
the summer heat. As the lake transforms, it becomes host and home to a variety of
permanent and transient wildlife residents, from moose and caribou to mosqui-
toes and fairy shrimp. Miller describes their comings and goings and the lake's
metamorphosis in smooth, often poetic prose: "Creeks that bubbled and sang
their way to the lake are now bright green paths specked with flowers and wild
chives." Van Zyle's double-page paintings are a bit stiff, but they highlight the
attention-grabbing animals while carefully detailing their changing habitat. This
title, however, concentrates exclusively on the spring and summer states of the
lake, and listeners receive little information on what happens to components of
this ecosystem during the long span between freeze and thaw. Concluding "Field
Notes" supply this information for some species, but without the accompanying
visuals, the data are comparatively dry. Armchair naturalists will enjoy the view
nonetheless, and science teachers may find this an inviting introduction to an ecol-
ogy unit. EB
216 
* THE BULLETIN
Moss, CYNTHIA 
LittleBigEars: The Story ofEly; illus. with photographs by Martyn
Colbeck. 
Simon, 1997 
[34p]
ISBN 0-689-80031-2 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Ely, a young bull calf, and his elephant family live in Kenya in a protected wildlife
park called Amboseli. He was born with a near-fatal handicap-he was unable to
stand or walk, hence unable to suckle or seek shade. The baby elephant triumphs,
ultimately, through tremendous determination and with the obvious help of his
mother. Moss has worked in elephant conservation for almost thirty years in Af-
rica and has collaborated with Colbeck on two documentaries, and she clearly
knows her stuff. While it's unclear whether or not this story is derived from the
documentaries, it'hardly matters-the pictures and text can confidently stand alone.
Colbeck's photos of Ely from birth through his first year offer a fascinating glimpse
into elephant development and socialization-we see him learning to eat grasses
and drink water, walk without tripping over his trunk, in general just mastering
survival in an unforgiving environment. Moss's narration is affectionate if a bit
anthropomorphic, yet still matter-of-fact enough to successfully avoid cutesiness.
This is sure to be a crowd-pleaser of elephantine proportions. SSV
MYERs, ANNA 
Spotting the Leopard. Walker, 1996 
14 6p
ISBN 0-8027-8459-3 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
In this sequel to Red-Dirt Jessie (BCCB 10/92), Jessie's younger brother H.J. faces
two major problems. The first is how to help Jessie realize her dream of going to
college and becoming a veterinarian at a time when their father can barely keep the
family going with his earnings from a WPA job. The second is how to save an
escaped leopard-which H.J. once saw pacing miserably in a nearby zoo-from
getting shot in the fields where it's hiding nearby. A subplot fits into the overall
theme of reaching for dreams when H.J.'s uncle risks and loses his new motel in an
investment scam. None of this feels crowded because Myers drives the dramatic
action with believable characters, natural dialogue, and a consistently developed
first-person narrative. The climax is genuinely sad and certainly more convincing
than the denouement, which is neatly manipulated and entirely too cheerful. On
the other hand, readers who have experienced the novel's tone of sustained con-
cern will be relieved to see at least part of the trapped-animal/human dilemma
resolved. BH
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Slam! Scholastic, 1996 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-590-48667-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
A junior in high school, Gregory "Slam" Harris has a game, at least on the basket-
ball court. Off the court, he's not so sure-his grandmother is dying, his mother
thinks he needs a role model in a three-piece suit, and he and his best friend Ice
(who also has a game and NBA dreams) seem to be drifting apart. Myers has a
neat trick of making the reader see the world through Slam's streetwise, life-naive
eyes as he observes his close-knit family, his girlfriend Mtisha, and Harlem's 125th
Street. Reminiscent of the narrative voice in June Jordan's His Own Where (BCCB
12/71), Slam's language is rhythmic and slangy, uncontrived and immediate. The
realization that Ice is "in the life," dealing crack and possibly other drugs, causes
Slam to focus with even more intensity on his own future: "Maybe if I could get
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 
217
my game right, all my game, on and off the court, I would get over." The conclu-
sion is hopeful, and the basketball scenes are tough. JMD
NAIDOO, BEVERLEY 
No Turning Back: A Novel ofSouth Africa. 
HarperCollins,
1997 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027506-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027505-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 6-9
Sipho leaves his impoverished mother and abusive stepfather in their township
shanty and flees to the Hillbrow district of Johannesburg where, he has heard,
children can survive on the streets. Promptly accepted into a gang of malunde
(street children), he learns how to push supermarket carts and panhandle for spare
change. On the heels of a raid of the gang's outdoor digs, Sipho finds shelter in a
shop entrance, is befriended by the owner's daughter, and takes up temporary
residence with her well-to-do family. Accused of stealing, he takes to the streets
again but eventually joins a gang friend at the Themba Shelter, a refuge and school
for malunde. Naidoo shepherds her hero through his trials like a literary guardian
angel, never quite allowing any threat (e.g., police raids) to become too dire or any
temptation (e.g., glue sniffing) to become too strong. Readers will surely sense,
however, that Sipho's struggles have been toned down for middle-grade consump-
tion and that street kids are unlikely to end up happily singing "Forget about the
past/ and build a new nation" at a Peace Day rally. EB
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
On Guard. Dutton, 1997 
[160p]
ISBN 0-525-45759-3 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Fourth-grader Mikey (from When the Water Closes Over My Head, BCCB 9/94) is
back, and he's out for a medal. To be more specific, an Olympic medal-which
his teacher gives at the end of every week to a student for a particular skill, achieve-
ment, or quality. Feeling middled-out as the second in his four-kid family, Mikey
despairs of ever being special enough to merit a medal until he discovers the sport
of fencing. He's hooked (though his mother's afraid he'll be stabbed) and begins
lessons immediately, finding that the confidence and skill in his new m&tier is
starting to pay off in noncombatant life as well. Napoli is excellent at depicting
Mikey's general tendency towards uncertainty, his frustration at his lack of family
stardom, and his passionate attachment to his new field (his dedicated obsession
matches that of any young balletomane); the portrayal of Mikey's growing friend-
ship with a new boy, Bill, is deftly drawn, evincing wisdom about the perplexities
and pitfalls involved in youthful alliances. Especially with its lure of an offbeat and
glamorous sport, this will please many young readers who understand the diffi-
culty of parrying the world's thrusts. DS
NAYLOR, 
PHYLLIS 
REYNOLDS 
Ducks Disappearing; illus. by Tony
Maddox. Atheneum, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-31902-9 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Young Willie and his mother enjoy a fine view of a mama duck and her ducklings
from their table in the motel restaurant, but what begins as a simple counting
activity turns into a disappearing act as ducklings begin to vanish. Willie is deter-
218 
* THE BULLETIN
mined to solve the mystery: "Something bad was happening to the ducklings, and
it was happening very fast." As duck numbers quickly go from eleven to three,
Willie seeks the help of the motel workers to no avail ("'Well, they're not in my
vacuum cleaner,' the man said with a laugh, and went on with his work"). Washed-
out watercolors lack energy and the pleasant, pudgy cast are cartoonish and stiff,
but the double-paged spread of the hapless ducklings in their storm-drain prison
ably captures their scary plight in drab browns and grays. Despite the bland art-
work this is strong storytime drama, and young listeners will enjoy counting the
decreasing population of ducklings, meeting various motel personnel, and applaud-
ing Willie's detective work as the rescue of the chubby ducklings is successfully
completed. PM
NIRGIOTIS, NICHOLAS 
No More Dodos: How Zoos Help Endangered Wildlife; by
Nicholas and Theodore Nirgiotis. 
Lerner, 1996 
112p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-2856-8 
$17.96 
R 
Gr. 6-12
This examination of human efforts to retain and restore populations of endan-
gered species covers a lot of territory previously slighted in children's books. The
Nirgiotises begin by describing the twentieth-century shift in zoo focus to the
preservation of species and the resulting physical changes in captive animal habi-
tats; they then go on to explain zoo breeding programs (including multizoo data-
bases that help link up appropriate mates), the use of frozen semen and embryo
transfer, and release programs. The text is a bit on the dense side, but it's packed
with unusual information that links specific and involving anecdotes to general
questions. Avoiding the easy oversimplification of many endangered-species books,
it touches on a variety of areas-science, economics, politics-and thereby gives a
greater sense of the context in which preservation issues are discussed and deci-
sions made. Though clearly an advocate for its viewpoint, the book mentions the
controversies over many of these procedures and policies. Additional information
is provided in sidebars covering topics ranging from the Endangered Species Act of
1973 to basic genetic concepts of dominance and recessiveness (which unfortu-
nately includes the debunked simple-dominance theory of eye color as its example);
attractive color photographs often don't explain much, but they give the book's
issues a visible focus and keep the pages appealing. Kids who really want to get
beyond the harp-seals-are-cute level of ecological concern will find this invaluable.
A list of conservation organizations, glossary, bibliography, and index are pro-
vided. DS
OPPENHEIM, SHULAMITH LEVEY, ad. And the Earth Trembled: The Creation ofAdam
and Eve; illus. by Neil Waldman. 
Harcourt, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200025-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
This retelling, based on the work of ninth-century Islamic scholar Abou-Djafar al
Tabari, foreshadows the coming of the prophet Muhammud and portrays a God
who engineers man's creation by force of his decree, against the reasoned protest of
the angels and the outcry of Earth itself. A host of weighty theological proposi-
tions will challenge listeners and readers well past picture-book age: God creates
man to assuage his own loneliness; Soul's reluctance to enter Adam's body ("I am
loathe to exchange the boundless universe for a narrow home") brings death into
the world; Eve's first cognition is of her subservience ("My love for you already is
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 
219
greater than yours for me. So have I been created"). While the text is graceful and
provocative, Waldman's acrylic paintings-swirling pointillistic full-page compo-
sitions-depict dumpy angelic and mortal figures afloat in a technicolor universe.
This primal fantasyland is even more startling when contrasted with Oppenheim's
companion piece Iblis (BCCB 4/94), in which Ed Young's illustrations emphasize
the tension between darkness and light inherent in tales of man's creation and fall.
EB
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
Prairies; illus. with photographs by William
Mufioz. 
Holiday House, 1996 
4 0p
ISBN 0-8234-1277-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-5
"No one thought about saving the prairie, which seemed empty and lonely," but
this nonfiction survey about prairies could get some readers headed in that direc-
tion. Organized into five chapters, a lively and concise text covers the American
prairie, plant life, animal inhabitants and preservation/restoration efforts. The
obvious strength of this photoessay is the inclusion of one or more striking photo-
graphic images on every spread. Stark, lonely sweeps of prairie and sky are expertly
captured and the prairie populace is well represented, whether it be the coneflower
("a common prairie wildflower") or the well-known prairie dog. Little-known
facts ("the elk, grizzly bears, and wolves that we associate with forests also once
lived on the prairie") mingle with more mundane ones ("a quarter of the earth's
land is covered by grasses"). 
Patent's reproachful tone sometimes impedes the
flow of information, but her mild indictments against those who made prairie
restoration necessary may engender further discussion on what should and shouldn't
be plowed and plundered. A map, glossary, and index are included. PM
PLOURDE, LYNN Pigs in the Mud in the Middle of the Rud; illus. by John
Schoenherr. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-56863-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
When Mama, Papa, Sister, Brother, and Grandma all pile into the family Model T
for a drive, they're in for a sloppy rendezvous with barnyard animals blocking the
road, or "rud" (which flap copy suggests is the rural Maine pronunciation). "Pigs
in the rud!" Grandma says. "Oh no. Won't do." And indeed it won't, so Brother
gets out to shoo, squeal, rut (which apparently doesn't mean what it could), and
reel, all to no effect as the blissfully aloof porkers continue to wallow in the rud.
Not since Mr. Gumpy's Motor Car has an outing been so endearingly doomed, as
Sister takes on the hens, Mama tackles the sheep, and Papa fights the bulls, all
unsuccessfully. Finally, the family matriarch herself realizes that it's "000000-
EEE! Up to me," and she causes a stampede out of the road with a hearty "TIME
FOR SUP!" Grandma empties the rud all right, but she is knocked down into the
muck herself to the barely contained delight of Brother and Sister. The spare text
with its rhythmic refrain will have readaloud audiences chanting along in no time.
Schoenherr's line and watercolor illustrations are generously laid out with ample
white space. His animals are expressive without being cutesy or anthropomorphic
(the oinkers are sublime although the bulls oddly resemble buffaloes). Grab this
one for wallowingly great fun. SSV
220 
* THE BULLETIN
QUATTLEBAUM, MARY 
The Magic Squad and the Dog of Great Potential; illus. by
Frank Remkiewicz. 
Delacorte, 1997 
[112p]
ISBN 0-385-32276-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In this sequel to Jazz, Pizzazz, and the Silver Threads (BCCB 2/96), ten-year-old
Calvin has changed his focus from hamsters to dogs. He has convinced Alfred
Ludlott, the eccentric poet who minds Calvin and his little brother after school, to
provide a foster home for Train, a shelter dog, while Calvin teaches Train some
manners in order to make him more attractive to a new home. The inevitable
happens, and Calvin gets attached to the dog, but all ends happily when Train's
new home doesn't want him after all and he becomes a permanent resident at
Alfred's. The story here is extremely slight and rather unlikely (Quattlebaum ini-
tially explains the work of animal shelters well, but few shelters would permit their
charges to be handed around as cavalierly as is Train), with a rather contrived end
and a predictable subplot about Calvin's involvement in his friend's magic show.
There's a liveliness to the writing that keeps the book zipping along, however, and
kids will enjoy the slapstick and Calvin's attachment to goofy Train. Reviewed
from an unillustrated galley. DS
RIGGIO, ANITA 
Secret Signs: Along the Underground Railroad; written and illus. by
Anita Riggio. 
Boyds Mills, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56397-555-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
As Luke and his mother prepare panoramic candy eggs for sale, Mama explains
why she must pass along information regarding the new safe house for runaways.
Luke, who is deaf, protests about the danger-a neighbor's barn has just been set
ablaze by slavecatchers. As they discuss the importance of their real mission in
town-to meet a contact at the general store-a bounty hunter bursts into their
home and accuses them of aiding escaped slaves. Mama can only convince the
man that they must get their wares to town; it is then up to Luke to use their candy
eggs to pass the vital message to the "girl in the indigo shawl" who lingers among
the other customers. The story is contrived and unlikely; Riggio's notes supply
information about the American School for the Deaf and about the Underground
Railroad but offer no evidence that sign language was used by the deaf to facilitate
actual escapes. Young listeners who are unfamiliar with the Underground Rail-
road will undoubtedly have a list of questions for the adult reader, but menace-
laden and cliched oil paintings leave little doubt that the gaunt, sinister man in the
slouch hat is a villain of the first order, and that wide-eyed poppet Luke and his
mother are on the side of the angels. EB
ROBERTS, TARA, ed. 
Am I the Last Virgin? African American Reflections on Sex
andLove. 
Simon, 1997 
[112p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-689-80449-0 
$15.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-81254-X 
$3.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
Eleven brief personal narratives by young African-American women reflect on early
sexual experience. The editor explains her decision not to have sex before she's
ready, despite social pressure. Two women, one attacked as a child and one as an
adult, describe the effects of rape on their lives. A woman tells how sex with her
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 221
boyfriend strains her relationship with her mother; another woman adulates the
African-American matriarchy in which she attained maturity; and others speak of
being lesbian, of coping with unequal relationships, of getting an abortion, of
getting AIDS, of recovering from incest, of reverence for a grandmother who en-
couraged self-respect. The writing has some inexplicable moments ("For it is be-
cause of the open sharing I've enjoyed with other women that I felt a cyst on my
mother's ovary"), some strange stylistic twists ("It secretly thrilled each of them
that their seed would be the first one I might carry"), and some downright gram-
matical glitches ("As my best friend, I shared practically everything with her").
However, the book is informal, accessible, and candid, and it will probably circu-
late nonstop, so get lots of paperbacks. An extensive concluding resource directory
and short profiles of the contributors are included. BH
RUSSELL, BARBARA TIMBERLAKE 
Blue Lightning. Viking, 1997 
[128p]
ISBN 0-670-87023-4 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Calvin Doogan's life changes when, out of a not-so-clear blue sky, he gets hit by
lightning. He nearly dies in the hospital but recovers, and then finds out that the
spirit of a boy who did die in that same hospital at the same time has come back
home with him. Rory is serious trouble, making mischief on the Doogan family
farm and even starting a fire in Calvin's bedroom, but his real bitterness is that
Calvin will play on the county All-Star team-in Rory's position of pitcher. Russell
lays the parallels and connections on awfully thickly (aside from the simultaneous
fatality and the baseball position, Rory's and Calvin's fathers were best friends also
competing for the same spot as pitcher), and some of the setups seem more dra-
matically necessary than emotionally logical. The return-of-the-spirit theme is
provocative, however, and Rory's genuine dangerousness (and the author's easy,
unsentimental prose) keeps things from being too wistful. Readers who like some
action-especially baseball action-in their ghost stories will want-to step up to
the plate for this one. DS
SCHAEFER, CAROLE LEXA 
The Squiggle; illus. by Pierr Morgan. 
Crown,
1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-70048-4 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-70047-6 $17.00 
R 
3-6 yrs
Walking to the park with her class, a little girl finds a bright red ribbon curled on
the sidewalk. She picks it up, and in swirling the red "squiggle" it becomes "Slither!
swish! the dance of a big scaly dragon," or "Ripple shhh-the circle of a deep still
pool," or "Ah-whoosh. The rise of the full fat moon." Each stretch of the child's
imagination is illustrated with a physical change in the environment, as the pic-
tures reflect that which she sees in her mind's eye a la Harold and the Purple Crayon.
The tone of Morgan's marker and gouache illustrations is earthy, the dark greens
and golds, subdued purples and blues supported by the slightly speckled back-
ground paper. But the red squiggle, along with the child's imaginary pictures, is
highlighted in a cleaner, brighter palette. Visual elements reflect a strong Chinese
influence in the clothing of the children, the use of red as the color of emphasis,
and the overall compositions. In the end, the little girl demonstrates the magical
qualities of the ribbon to her classmates, and "Then, off we go to the park in our
slither slish, push-a-pat, snap, tah-dah, crack crickle hiss, tug KA-BOOM! ripple
222 
* 
THE BULLETIN
shhh, ah-whoosh, squiggle of a line." This is a storytime treat that is sure to result
in a squiggly line of preschoolers happily roaming through the stacks. JMD
SCHAMI, RAFIK 
Fatima and the Dream Thiefi tr. by Anthea Bell; illus. by Els Cools
and Oliver Streich. 
North-South, 1996 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-654-7 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-653-9 
$15.95 
R 6-9 yrs
Hassam, the only son of a poor widow, is tricked out of his wages-and his dreams-
by an unscrupulous employer. His twelve-year-old sister Fatima goes to the castle
of the wicked lord seeking justice (and a bit of revenge) and, with quick wits and a
great deal of nerve, succeeds in retrieving her brother's dreams, ten pieces of gold,
and a variety of other worldly goods. Cools and Streitch's watercolor illustrations
depict a quasi-Eastern Mediterranean setting, with characterizations reminiscent
of Quentin Blake. The compositions are an unusual combination of off-kilter and
dead-on perspectives that have an appropriately dreamlike yet energetic character.
This tale is built along a traditional folkloric plotline (a young employee turns the
tables on a dishonest employer by making him angry) but has the additional charms
of a strong female protagonist, the fantastical element of dream-eating, and a hu-
morous, engaging text. JMD
SCHWARTZ, HOWARD, ad. 
The Wonder Child & Other Jewish Fairy Tales; ad. by
Howard Schwartz and Barbara Rush; illus. by Stephen Fieser. 
HarperCollins,
1996 
66p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023518-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023517-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-6
A young girl's soul resides in a jeweled necklace, a black cat saves a child lost in the
forest, and some hard working tailors rid their hometown of a troublesome giant
in three of these eight fairy tales from the Jewish tradition. Schwartz and Rush are
fine collaborators, and their retellings are a strong combination of literary style and
storytelling vernacular that works whether read silently or aloud. Notes indicate
that the tales are from Egypt, Morocco, Libya, and Eastern Europe, and they give
sources and commentary on the variants for each. The book's design is clean and
attractive, with generous amounts of white space and clear text. Fieser's pastel
illustrations consist of a visual vignette for each title heading and a full-page graphic
for each story, and they portray the attractive good guys and gruesome bad guys
expected from a satisfying fairy tale. A glossary of Hebrew terms is included. JMD
SHALANT, PHYLLIS 
The Great Eye. 
Dutton, 1996 
150p
ISBN 0-525-45695-3 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Lucy's looking forward to spending the summer training Hobart, a young guide-
dog hopeful, and she's happy that her sister, Anna, will be back from college. A
pall is cast over things, however, by the absence of Lucy's father, who has with-
drawn to Australia, and by Anna's acquisition of a boyfriend who seems to be in
the way whenever Lucy wants some sisterly closeness. Lucy pours out her feelings
about these unpleasant changes to her computer, nicknamed The Great Eye, by
writing volumes of poetry, but that outlet may not be enough to support her when
it becomes clear that Hobart's success isn't guaranteed and Lucy's father's depar-
ture from the family isn't temporary. There are too many plot strands going on in
the book, unfortunately, and Shalant never quite brings them together. Though
the poetry is pretty, it slows down the pace and never really sounds like something
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 223
Lucy would have written. The book depicts Lucy's anxiety and her anger well,
however, and kids will relate to her feverish concern both for the family that seems
to be disappearing around her and for the dog who is having such difficulty mea-
suring up to expectations. Kids drawn by the blend of family and dog story may
find this a satisfying read. DS
SNYDER, ZILPHA KEATLEY 
The Gypsy Game. 
Delacorte, 1997 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-32266-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
It's been a long time since Snyder's The Egypt Game, but twenty years go by like
nothing in the world of fiction. Now April, Melanie, Ken, Toby, and little Marshall
are changing their backyard Egyptian world into a Gypsy camp and preparing to
enter the world of the Rom (it turns out that Toby is part Gypsy, so he's intent on
being the king). As a result of mysterious problems at home, Toby runs away,
pleading with the former Egyptians not to give away his whereabouts, and they are
forced into a moral quandary-do they notify Toby's worried father or do they
keep faith with their friend? The focus is too diffuse, unfortunately, with subplots
about the Gypsy game, the would-be Gypsies' discovery of the persecution of the
real Gypsies, the plight of the local homeless, and the melodramatic reasons be-
hind Toby's flight, resulting in a lot, especially a lot of social conscience, packed
into a small space at the expense of the story's momentum. Snyder is still a good
writer, however, and the multicultural and age-diverse gang of characters retains
much of its original charm. This won't entirely satisfy fans of the first book, but
they'll enjoy seeing what their fictional friends are getting up to. DS
STANDIFORD, NATALIE 
Astronauts Are Sleeping; illus. by Allen Garns. 
Knopf,
1996 
34 p
ISBN 0-679-86999-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
While three sleeping (and unrestrained) astronauts float about the cabin of their
space shuttle, the author muses about the stuff of their dreams. We learn, after a
quasi-poetic catalog of heavenly bodies, that instead of dreaming about "stars-/
Monstrous fires in blackest ink/ Clustered into galaxies" or "Volcanic Venus, siz-
zling hot," the astronauts dream of life on Earth-more specifically, rosy-hued
scenes from their childhood. The basic premise of the book--dreaming of the
familiar, rather than of the unexplored-is comforting; however, the text, with its
irregular and uneven rhyme and disjointed and arrhythmic sentences, is not. The
tone is further disrupted by pastel illustrations that impose a Technicolor solar
system upon a deep, blue space. As a result, objects (planets, space ship, astro-
nauts) are toy-like, suggesting finity rather than infinity. Despite its nostalgic
tendencies, the book has the potential for numerous kid-inspired variations on the
theme. What do nomads, deep sea divers, or mountain climbers dream? AEB
STEGER, WILL 
Over the Top of the World: Explorer Will Steger's Trek Across the
Arctic; written by Will Steger and Jon Bowermaster. 
Scholastic,
1997 
[6 4 p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-84860-7 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Even jaded "been-there, read-that" adventure fans are bound to shiver through
Steger's journal-style narrative of his team's 1994 dog-sled and canoe-sled journey
from Siberia; over the North Pole, and into Canada. From its disastrous start (at
224 
* THE BULLETIN
which point one highly trained team member quit after a brush with an icy death)
the trek was marked by one perilous adventure after another. While the crew was
unprepared for above-average temperatures which resulted in treacherously un-
stable ice, wide leads ("rivers" of water between ice cracks), and overheated dogs,
greater shocks were to come: "A wall of ice, 20 feet tall and as long as a football
field, was moving our way as if being pushed by the blade of a giant bulldozer....
All we could do was watch, helplessly." Steger's narration has a tense immediacy,
and plenty of color photographs draw readers even further into the action. Inserts
about outfitting the team are particularly informative; sidebars introducing indi-
vidual sled dogs are a welcome bonus. Kids locked in the grip of winter will
definitely rethink their definition of cold. EB
STROM, YALE 
QuiltedLandscape: Conversations with Young Immigrants. 
Simon,
1996 
80p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-80074-6 
$18.00 
R Gr. 5-9
Instead of old-timers reminiscing about Atlantic voyages and Ellis Island, Strom
offers the viewpoints of children who have come to the United States during the
last decade. For each child, the book presents two or three pages of material,
primarily first-person reflections culled from interviews, as well as photographs,
information about the countries of origin, and small world maps highlighting where
each child was born and where he or she now resides. The children range in age
from ten to seventeen years and come from lands as diverse as Fiji, Peru, and
Ethiopia. The layout is somewhat textbookish, and its repetitious nature makes
the book drag if read straight through; children may prefer to dip into it here and
there. Both Strom and his interviewees express whole-hearted support of immi-
gration without ducking the all-too-common reality of crowded apartments and
menial jobs. Native-born children may be jolted by new perspectives on America
("I think Russian young people are more independent than American kids, and
more mature") and will enjoy discovering what life is like for kids in other coun-
tries ("Girls [in Belarus] never wore nail polish to school or bangs in their faces").
Use with Judith Greenberg's Newcomers to America (BCCB 7/96) for an in-depth
look at youthful immigrants today. A detailed, double-spread map, bibliography,
source notes, and an index are included. LM
TAYLOR, THEODORE 
Rogue Wave and Other Red-Blooded Sea Stories. Harcourt,
1996 
184p
ISBN 0-15-201408-X 
$16.00 
Ad Gr. 6-10
Three new tales join five older works (reprinted and slightly revised magazine sto-
ries from the '50s and '60s) to form this new collection. Some tales will have
immediate appeal for middle-school readers. The title story follows the efforts of
a teenage boy to free his sister from the cabin of their overturned boat, while "The
Butcher," in which a young man takes revenge against the great white that killed
his father, packs the thrills of Jaws. Most, however, feature adult protagonists in
situations with which younger readers will have limited knowledge or experience:
"Wingman, Fly Me Down" involves a blinded pilot's attempt to land on an air-
craft carrier, "Hauling Gold" follows a plot to purloin a shipment of gold en route
from South Africa, and "The O'Tannenbaum Affair" recounts the efforts of a
British interrogator to elicit information from a captured German submarine cap-
tain. The string of happy endings suggests that, with enough pluck and ingenuity,
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 225
all adversaries-even the sea itself-can be licked. Fans of sea stories will recog-
nize that this just ain't so, but they may enjoy these briny yarns nonetheless. EB
TEMKO, FLORENCE 
Traditional Crafts from Mexico and CentralAmerica; illus. by
Randall Gooch and with photographs by Robert L. and Diane Wolfe. 
Lerner,
1996 
6 4p
ISBN 0-8225-2935-1 
$16.13 
Ad 
Gr. 3-7
Children's-craft guru Temko offers eight projects based on artifacts from south of
the Rio Grande, each accompanied by a paragraph or two of cultural background
notes. While younger children should have little difficulty cutting and stringing
tissue paper for Mexican Papel Picado, rolling clay for a vividly hued Tree of Life,
or tracing figures on crumpled brown bags to replicate Mayan Otomi Figures, it
will require more dexterity to produce a Guatemalan Worry Doll or to cut the
sharp-edged aluminum trays for "tin" ornaments. Visual and written directions
are generally clear, although instructions for Guatemalan weaving fail to indicate
how to anchor the loom, how to tie on new colors, and how to bundle the weft
threads that are passed through the loom. Although Temko explains that mola
fabrics are layered and then cut down, her own directions for simplified molas
have the layers built up, giving crafters little experience with the real process. Re-
producible patterns, a metric conversion chart, and a reading list of current fiction
and non-fiction materials on Central America are nice touches, though, and the
colorful format and eye-pleasing layout invite crafters to give some of these a try.
EB
WARDLAW, LEE, ad. Punia and the King ofSharks: A Hawaiian Folktale; illus. by
Felipe Davalos. 
Dial, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1683-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1682-6 
$14.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Ten toothy sharks and their greedy king guard an underwater cave "filled with fat
lobsters red as sunset, sweet as coconut." Punia and his mother have been living
on yams and poi ever since Punia's father was eaten by the sharks when he dared
fish in the lobster cave, and Punia is seeking a change of diet. In a series of con-
frontations, Punia tricks the sharks into leaving the cave long enough for him to
retrieve lobsters, ultimately ridding the cave of the sharks forever. Wardlaw's re-
telling has character and bite, and her trickster Punia, depicted by Davalos as a
dark-haired, dark-eyed mischief maker, is a slyly appealing character. Watercolor-
and-ink illustrations in full and double-page spreads are outlined in blue, with
occasionally awkward compositions and drafting. The sharks, while not realisti-
cally drawn, are formidable foes with an array of formidable teeth, and they are
enough to put the fear of swimming in the hearts of any reader. This is an easy
sell-a strong, unusual story with a likable hero who outwits that fascinator from
the deep, the great man-eating shark. Specific source notes are included. JMD
WARREN, JAMES A. 
Cold War: The American Crusade against World Communism
1945-1991. Lothrop, 1996 
288p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-688-10596-3 
$16.00 
R Gr. 9-12
This informative introductory history of the Cold War is broad enough to appeal
to high school students, yet detailed enough to fill the needs of undergraduate
college courses. Warren describes and explicates the high points of the post-war
226 
* THE BULLETIN
era (Truman Doctrine, Marshall Plan, Berlin Airlift, Korean War, McCarthyism,
Vietnam, detente, the collapse of communism) in clear if sometimes stodgy prose.
The author is restrained, yet his obvious (and admitted) pro-American sympathies
shine forth in such statements as "During the cold war years [America] was the
leading proponent of basic democratic principles and institutions." To his credit,
Warren quickly follows up by acknowledging the arrogance of American power:
"Even the most ardent supporter of that era's U.S. foreign policy must recognize
that many of the initiatives designed to combat communism may have done little
but strengthen its hold." Warren dramatically describes just how close the world
came to nuclear holocaust during the Cuban missile crisis while explaining its
importance to the superpowers. He admits that, in retrospect, the cold war wasn't
all bad-i.e., today's emerging countries bring a lot of chaos with them ("self-
determination has brought many headaches"). Helping the teen reader make sense
of all this are a selected chronology of pertinent events, maps, tables, and an exten-
sive (and challenging) bibliography; endnotes and an index are also included, as is
an inset sheaf of photographs. SSV
WICK, WALTER 
A Drop of Water: A Book of Science and Wonder; written and
illus. with photographs by Walter Wick. 
Scholastic, 1997 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-22197-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
See this month's Big Picture, p. 197, for review.
WILLIAMS, CAROL LYNCH 
The True Colors of Caitlynne Jackson. Delacorte,
1997 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-385-32249-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Twelve-year-old Caitlynne and her slightly younger sister, Cara, have a hard time:
their mother is abusive both physically and verbally as well as neglectful, and the
girls are cut off from the rest of the family and from most of their classmates.
Things get scarier when their mother announces she's leaving them on their own
for the summer so she can go away and finish the book she's always wanted to
write. Despite the support of Caitlynne's longtime friend, now boyfriend, Bran-
don, the isolation, the burden, and the deprivation when the money and food run
out becomes too much for the girls, and they finally realize they need to call on
their grandmother for help. The concept that the increasing hardships are giving
Caitlynne the strength to deal with and separate from her abusive mother seems a
bit grafted onto the main plot, but the story is gripping and believable. The des-
peration and up-close parental menace are originally and powerfully depicted, and
readers familiar with Williams' previous books (Kelly andMe, BCCB 3/94, Adeline
Street, 4/95) will recognize the smooth style and some of the other elements here
(the sisterly closeness, the friend-becoming-boyfriend). Fans ofVoigt's The Home-
coming (which Caitlynne acknowledges as an inspiration) will appreciate this un-
sentimental story of kids dealing with an impossible situation. DS
WILLIAMS, JEAN KINNEY 
The Amish. 
Watts, 1996 
1 1 1p
illus. with photographs 
(The American Religious Experience)
ISBN 0-531-11275-6 
$20.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
The Amish are a trendy topic these days (see Raymond Bial's Amish Home, BCCB
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 227
5/93, etc.), but this book covers more ground than most. Drawing extensively on
adult resources, Williams first traces the history of the Amish and then goes on to
examine their faith, their lifestyle, and their constant examination of the latter in
view of the former. This is clearer than most books about the differences between
various Amish communities and the variance in rules, and about the changes that
have been accepted in many communities (though there's no mention of the re-
cent surge in rollerblading). Unfortunately, glitches and conceptual discontinuities,
most of which could have been solved in editing, mar the book repeatedly: after
explaining the absence of electricity, the text then refers to a farmer's answering
machine; mules are repeatedly identified in the illustrations as horses; the book
never explains where, if the Amish are reluctant to be photographed, all the photos
in the book come from. The pictures also tend to be smudgy and dark, stodgy in
composition and captioning even outside of the old-fashioned look of their sub-
jects. These are frustrating drawbacks in an otherwise capable and informative
overview. Endnotes and a list of sources for further reading (including websites)
are appended; there is an index. DS
WILLIAMS, MARCIA, ad. 
The Iliad and the Odyssey; ad. and illus. by Marcia
Williams. 
Candlewick, 1996 
34 p
ISBN 0-7636-0053-9 
$17.99 
R 
Gr. 2-6
Yes, it's true. Both Greek epics gallop along here in thirty-two pages of sprightly
comic strips, starting with a golden apple "to the fairest" (which creates dissension
among three goddesses who ask Paris to choose which one of them is most beauti-
ful) and ending with Odysseus' triumph over the suitors who have plagued his
wife Penelope while he fights the Trojan War and then voyages home. The format
is a little hyperactive but perfectly tuned to the CD-ROM generation. Each epi-
sode gets a full page or double spread, with lots of graphic slapstick and wisecracks
from gods and mortals alike ("Greeks and chips, Yum, Yum!" shouts a Telepylus
cannibal harpooning one of Odysseus' men). If there's a guaranteed appetizer for
Homer's entree, this is it. In fact, kids can sample Williams' whole buffet, includ-
ing similar treatments of King Arthur (BCCB 3/96), Sinbad the Sailor, Robin
Hood (5/95), and Don Quixote-and for dessert, they can guzzle down Williams'
version of various Greek myths (BCCB 1/92). BH
YEE, PAUL 
Ghost Train; illus. by Harvey Chan. 
Groundwood/Douglas &
McIntyre, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-88899-257-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Twelve-year-old Choon-yi may have been born with only one arm, but with it she
is able to paint flowers that almost "give off fragrance" and sketch animals that
seem to "breathe and move." After her father is killed building railroad passes in
America, Choon-yi's ability to draw a true-to-life "fire-car" provides the means by
which the spirits of her father and of other Chinese railroad workers find peace.
The story is reminiscent of Yee's "Spirits of the Railroad" (from Tales from Gold
Mountain, BCCB 3/90) though it deals less directly with the injustices suffered by
the Chinese laborers, focusing instead on the relationship between Choon-yi and
her father and on how the girl sees both America and the trains for the first time.
Chan's illustrations suit the story's somber air, using muted grays and browns in
which the occasional striking color (Choon-yi's blue jacket, a glint of orange light
228 
* THE BULLETIN
on the glass-covered dials of the ghost train's engine) becomes all the more vivid.
Backgrounds have a swirling, smoky appearance that suffuses the pictures with an
enigmatic atmosphere of steam, sorrow, and spirits. Yee uses precise details
("She ... saw everything: the painted numbers on each car, the polished wooden
steps, the dark oil clinging to the wheel axles") and powerful imagery ("Rivers shot
like fiery silver dragons through steep canyons") to create a rich atmosphere. Al-
though this is hardly the cheerful collaboration displayed in Yee and Chan's Roses
Sing on New Snow (BCCB 8/92), the conclusion offers the comforting knowledge
that the souls of the dead "will finally find their way home." LM
YORINKS, ARTHUR 
Frank &Joey Go to Work; ISBN 0-06-205800-2; Frank &Joey
Eat Lunch; ISBN 0-06-205801-0. 
Each book: illus. by Maurice Sendak. 
di
Capua/HarperFestival, 1996 $4.95 
12p 
R 3-5 yrs
They're a classic beefy guy/dweeby guy comedy team, appearing here in a duet of
board books as construction workers on a New York City rooftop. In the first
adventure, Joey gets stuck in a steel tub of cement mix, and Frank pulls him out,
but leaves Joey's pants behind; number two finds Frank sharing his lunch-a hero
sandwich of prodigious length-which Joey promptly drops off the roof onto a
straight-laced pedestrian. Frank, Joey, and the tools of their trade are photographed
and set onto a Sendakian cartoon cityscape. The ubiquitous biplane buzzes the
rooftops, and a host of humans and animals peer from their aerie windows, pro-
viding a visual laugh track with their aghast expressions. In a board book every leaf
counts, and one might wish that Yorinks had allowed for frames featuring the
falling sandwich and showing how Joey stepped into the cement in the first place,
but the hoagie-on-the-head and funny underwear are guaranteed to raise a riot
with the rugrats anyhow. EB
YORK, DUCHESS OF 
The Royal Switch; ISBN 0-385-32177-5; 16 3p; Bright Lights;
ISBN 0-385-32178-3; 165p. 
Each book: illus. byJacqueline Rogers. 
Delacorte,
1996 
NR Gr. 4-6
Having formerly chronicled the adventures of a helicopter (Budgie the Little Heli-
copter), the Duchess now moves to a pair of preteen girls, American commoner
Emily and English princess Amanda. Nearly identical, the two girls accidentally
switch places in the first book and live each other's lives until they meet up and
realize what's happened; in the second book, Amanda's visit to New York means
that she and Emily get to tour the city together and are instrumental in solving a
crime. The never-believable switcheroo plot is well worn-Full House's Olsen
twins seem a natural for trotting through any made-for-TV movie that might en-
sue-and ultimately the books are dead bores because nothing actually happens.
Amanda-as-Emily lectures tourists on Queen Victoria, and Emily-as-Amanda dem-
onstrates to a noble cousin how she holds her breath until her face turns red; in the
next book, many useful statistics about New York monuments are imparted, with
only a quick couple of pages to deal with a kindly homeless boy and the jewel
thieves (whose vulgarity, in true Nancy-Drew villain style, is what alerts the girls to
their iniquity). The books seem unable to decide what to make of Emily's life:
sometimes the point of the pairing seems be showing that American commoners
can be distant from their parents too; sometimes it seems to be contrasting Amanda's
formal and restricted existence with Emily's freer one. Nor does there seem to be
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 
229
much in the way of insiderly insights into the life of a princess-there's nothing
here that wouldn't fit previous stereotypes, except possibly a jab at Americans who
are trying to pretend to be British (a rather impolitic satiric target considering how
much of the prospective audience probably fits into that category). These could
have been completely unrealistic but entertaining lighthearted romps, but the con-
stant substitution of uninteresting talk for action makes them slow slogging in-
deed. DS
YUMOTO, KAZUMI 
The Friends; tr. by Cathy Hirano. 
Farrar, 1996 
170p
ISBN 0-374-32460-3 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-8
Three sixth-grade Japanese boys-Yamashita, Kawabe, and Kiyama-are insepa-
rable. When Yamashita's grandmother dies, the three boys become fascinated
with the idea of death and determined to see a dead body. They begin to spy on an
old man due to "drop dead at any minute." But the old man has life in him yet,
and he draws them into a warm, supportive relationship that each boy desperately
needs: Yamashita, because his mother is pressuring him to be more than the fish-
shop owner his father is; Kawabe, who thinks of his absent (divorced) father as if
he were dead; and Kiyama, whose parents are having difficulty due to/resulting in
his mother's heavy drinking. Yumoto places the boys squarely within their soci-
ety, showing the expectations and pressures of the adult world while concentrating
on the dynamics among the boys and between the boys and the old man. Nar-
rated by the sensitive Kiyama, the novel never loses the unsullied, unforgiving,
humorous clarity of the twelve-year-old view that the world is easily understood
once you know the rules. Gently paced, the action is calmly involving, as the old
man tells the boys of his wartime experiences, teaches them the proper way to hang
clothes and peel pears, and demonstrates the merits of acceptance and survival.
The boys' deathwatch becomes a nurturing experience, and when the old man
dies, the reader must smile with Yamashita as he says, "After all, we have a friend in
the next world watching out for us! Doesn't that make you feel invincible?" JMD
230 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Hunt, Peter, ed. International Companion Encyclopedia of Children's Literature.
Routledge, 1996. 923p. ISBN 0-415-08856-9. $130.00
You're not hallucinating: that is the page count and that is the price. And the
word "omnibus" should have been in that title somewhere; the scope is astound-
ing. Size-wise, at least, this is definitely The Big Book in professional reading,
hence the big review.
So what all does this behemoth cover? Well, there are five sections, each
containing a multitude of individually authored articles (the book offers eighty-six
articles in total). Theory and Critical Approaches introduces different schools of
literary criticism and their implications for children's literature: approaches range
from the bibliographic (authored by Peter Hunt himself) through the feminist and
psychoanalytic to the new historicist. Types and Genres covers not only the early
history of children's literature but also just about every kind of children's literature
known, including stalwarts such as folklore and picture books as well as less feted
literatures such as information books and children's magazines. The Context of
Children's Literature examines how books come to be-in pieces on book design
and publishing history-then goes on to explore, in essays on reviewing journals,
censorship, prizes, and translation, what we do with them once they're here. Ap-
plications of Children's Literature examines the use and dissemination of children's
literature in education, librarianship, and therapy. The World of Children's Lit-
erature contains twenty-six essays on regional/national children's literatures and is
every bit as global an overview as it sounds.
The list of contributors is star-studded, with names that will be recogniz-
able for people from all manner of disciplines. Perry Nodelman, lona Opie, Karen
Nelson Hoyle, Hugh Crago, Jerry Griswold, and Anne Pellowski are just a few
examples, but the bench here is quite deep. The majority are British (as is the
preponderance of literature discussed), but there's no lack of applicability to or
representation from other countries, especially the English-speaking. Nor is there
a damping down of individual voices, so that styles are entertainingly varied and
viewpoints sometimes intriguingly contradictory between articles.
There are drawbacks, of course. Most of these pieces can serve as no
more than an introduction to a topic worthy of a book-length, or several books-
length, treatment, and readers familiar with the more extended writings of a con-
tributor may not find anything inherently new in his or her offering here. Some of
the articles unavoidably echo each other, and some of the sections are more loosely
organized than others. Space exigencies or no, it would be nice to know more
about the contributors than just their professional affiliations. (It's also a shock, in
this context, to discover that an article entitled "Major Authors' Work for Chil-
dren" uses "major" to mean "adult.")
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 231
The combination of context and rich breadth, however, is incomparable;
for every article topic a reader knows cold there will probably be dozens that he or
she has only heard of. Want to learn about the history of the pony-story genre?
Alison Haymonds provides a well-sourced account. If you're interested in know-
ing about college classes in children's literature, Tony Watkins can explain. Hugh
Crago shares a psychologist's insight into the bibliotherapeutic use of children's
books. Expand your knowledge past the English-language tradition by looking at
Marie Laurentin's overview of children's literature in francophone Africa, or Menna
Lloyd Williams' discussion of Welsh-language texts.
The international tour could in fact be its own book, but it would be a
shame to miss out on the wider conceptual world and its interconnections. Four
score of experts here provide succinct and inviting examinations (complete with
source notes and suggestions, sometimes extensive, for further reading) of four
score topics in a wild and diverse field. If there's a desert-island book of children's
literature criticism, this is it. DS
232 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Durbin
Africa-folklore: Aardema; Diakite
African Americans: Cooper; Jones;
Roberts
African Americans-fiction: Barnes;
Myers, W.
African Americans-stories: Barber;
Gray; Herron
Amish: Williams, J.
Amish-fiction: Ayres
Animals-stories: Aardema;
Diakite; Graham; Gregory;
Hickox; London
Arctic: Steger
Art and artists: Horwitz
Art and artists-stories:
McClintock
Astronauts-stories: Standiford
Baseball-fiction: Russell
Basketball-fiction: Myers, W.
Basketball-stories: Barber
Bible: Lewis
BIOGRAPHIES: Gottfried; Jones
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Griffin
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Schami
Bullies-fiction: Hoban
Canada: Gorrell
Canada-fiction: Doyle; Durbin
Child abuse-fiction: Doyle;
Williams, C.
Christmas-stories: Gray
Civil War-stories: Bunting
Computers: Gottfried
Construction-stories: Yorinks
Deafness-stories: Riggio
Death and dying-fiction: Griffin;
Yumoto
Divorce-fiction: Shalant
Dogs-fiction: Freeman;
Quattlebaum; Shalant
Dogs-stories: Gliori
Dreams-stories: Schami;
Standiford
Ducks-stories: Naylor
Ecology: Miller; Nirgiotis; Patent
Elephants: Moss
England-fiction: Goodman;
Graham; York
Ethics and values: Barnes; Doyle;
Forest; London; Myers, W.
Explorers and exploration: Steger
Families-stories: Herron
FANTASY: Hoban; Matas
Fathers and daughters: Ayres
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
McDonald
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Barber; McClintock
Fathers and sons-fiction: Delaney
Fencing-fiction: Napoli
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Aardema; Demi;
Diakitd; Forest; Gregory; Han;
Hickox; Howe; Kimmel; Mayo;
Schami; Schwartz; Wardlaw
Friends-fiction: James; Krensky
Friends-stories: Bunting; London;
Yorinks
FUNNY STORIES: Delaney;
James
Ghosts-fiction: Medearis; Russell
FEBRUARY 1997 
* 
233
Ghosts-stories: Yee
Grandmothers-fiction: Williams,
C.
Gypsies-fiction: Snyder
Hair-stories: Herron
Hawaii-folklore: Wardlaw
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Barnes; Doyle; Durbin;
Goodman; Graham; Griffin;
Myers, A.
History, U.S.: Bartoletti; Bentley;
Bunting; Cooper; Gorrell
History, world: Meltzer; Warren
Homelessness-fiction: Naidoo
Homosexuality: Gottfried
Imagination-stories: Schaefer
Immigration: Strom
India-folklore: Demi
Industry: Bartoletti
Insects-fiction: James
Islam: Oppenheim
Japan-fiction: Yumoto
Judaism-folklore: Schwartz
Knights and chivalry: Howe
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Goodman
Korea-folklore: Han
Latin America-fiction: Hickox
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Hoban; Quattlebaum
MAKE AND DO BOOKS:
Temko
Marine life: Cerullo
Math-stories: Demi
Middle Ages-fiction: Goodman
Mining: Bartoletti
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Freeman; Williams, C.
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Gray
Mothers and sons-stories: Riggio
Motion pictures: Jones
Music and musicians-fiction:
Keillor
Music and musicians-stories: Gray
MYSTERIES: York
Myths, classical: Williams, M.
Nature study: Miller; Nirgiotis;
Patent
Photography: Horwitz
Pigs-stories: Plourde
Politics: Warren
Politics-fiction: Delaney
Prairies: Patent
Princesses-fiction: Matas; York
Reading aloud: Demi; Forest; Schwartz
Reading, beginning: Krensky
Reading, reluctant: Williams, M.
Religious education: Ayres; Lewis;
Oppenheim; Williams, J.
Runaways-fiction: Snyder
SCHOOL STORIES: Napoli
Science: Wick
Sharks-stories: Wardlaw
Sheep-stories: Gliori
SHORT STORIES: Taylor
Sisters-fiction: Shalant; Williams, C.
Slavery: Bentley; Gorrell
Slavery-stories: Riggio
Social studies: Strom
South Africa-fiction: Naidoo
SPORTS STORIES: Myers, W.; Napoli;
Russell
Storytelling: Aardema; Demi; Diakite;
Forest; Han; Kimmel; Mayo; Schwartz;
Wardlaw; Yee
Storytime: Aardema; Diakite; Gliori;
Gray; Herron; Hickox; Naylor;
Plourde; Schaefer
Thieves-stories: Kimmel; Schami
Trains-stories: Yee
Uncles-fiction: Doyle
Uncles-stories: Gray
Underground Railroad: Gorrell
Voyages and travel: Steger
Voyages and travel-fiction: Taylor
War: Meltzer
War-stories: Bunting; Gregory
Water: Wick
Weapons: Meltzer
Winter-stories: Gliori
Women's studies: Horwitz; Johnston;
Roberts
World cultures: Strom; Temko
World War I: Cooper
Zoos: Nirgiotis
I r
.
S. 
.
-
A 
3 
-
-
-
of up-to-date boos,
reco-- 
~dgnized 
contenlt 
spciaists 
and
Syout')ll find information on hunch
addressig 
general issues in elementa 
education as well a5
along wih expert guidance in the deveopment of th~e prol
Appox.300 pp.a 
* 
996~ 
*~ ISN0-82424874-9) * $8 U.S. andn Cia
coutries:
Capture your students' attention...
Appeal to their imagination...
Use this selective index to choose from today's best pic-
ture books whatever your content area of interest-lan-
guage arts, graphic and performing arts, social studies,
science and mathematics, and much more.
Criteria tor including titles in this selective index include
literary and artistic quality, curriculum application, appeal to youth, and avail-
ability in most children's literature collections. A bibliography of professional
resources is also provided.
Approx. 496 pp. 1996 * ISBN 0-8242-0867-6 * $38 U.S. and Canada, $43 other
countries
Order Now!
Phone: 1-800-367-6770/Outside of U.S. & Canada: 1-718-588-8400 *
Fax Toll-Free: 1-800-590-1617/Fax outside U.S. & Canada: 1-718-590-1617 *
By mail *Emai: custserv@info.hwwilson.com
H.W. Wilson * 950 University Avenue * Bronx, NY 10452-4224
http://www.hwwilson.cm 
w42A
Save 15% as a new subscriber to The Bulletin, published by the University of Illinois Press in
cooperation with the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science.
[ Please enter my subscription to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, beginning
with the current volume, at the rate checked below Published monthly except August.
0 Individuals
1 Institutions
Introductory
- $29.75
D $34.00
Nassme
A a-
Zip-- 
-
Renewal
* $35.00
0 $40.00
Outside US.A., add $7.00 for postage
Please mail form to the University of Illinois Press, BCCB, 1325 South Oak Street, Champaign,
IL 61820. Credit card orders may be placed by phone -
call 217-333-8935. 
BI
00,
Payment options
0 Charge my E MasterCard 0 
VISA
Exp. Date 
Account No.
Signature
D Check enclosed, payable to: University of Illinois Press
(In U.S. dollars on U.S. banks)
O Purchase order enclosed
-IUM- 
-- 
-
--
Name
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
The most outstanding
White Socks Only
by Evelyn Coleman
Illustrated by Tyrone Geter
"A quiet, stunning foray into
segregated Mississippi.... The
most outstanding title for 1996."
-1996 Smithsonian Magazine
Notable Children's Book
"A wonderful, touching story."
-American Bookseller
Spring 1996 Pick of the Lists
0-8075-8955-1, $15.95, Ages 5-9
0008-9036(199702)50:6*;1 -G
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
*'j^rA^' * ->*,*!* 
; * .jV'
/i^^',. '':* {-'*'"* . *M'
