H!
I LLINI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
r"- 
· I
Three friends are back for a new adventure....
"And what a madcap whirl it is!"*
FRIENDS GO ADVENTURING
Written and illustrated by Helme Heine
"The long-awaited further adventures of the offbeat trio from Friends
(1982 
harlie Rooster, Fat Percy the Pig, and Johnny Mouse-and a
flat-out duet of words and art." 
-pointered 
review, Kirkus Reviews
*[Heine's] 
watercolors are great: colorful, lively, and intrinsically fumny.
.A 
worthy successor to the first book and a 'must-have for most
libraries." 
-starred 
review, School Library Journal
"Heine endows this tale with childlike exuberance as he embraces a busy
day bursting with the most unlikely happenings." 
-Publishers Weekly*
0-689-80463-6 * $16,00 US/$21.50 CAN * Ages 4-8
MARGARET K. McELDERRY BOOKS
An imprint of Simon a Schater Children's Publishing Division
1230 Avenue of the Americas * New York, NY 10020
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
May 1996
Vol. 49 No. 9
A LOOK INSIDE
289 THE BIG PICTURE
Sky: A True Story of Resistance During World War II by Hanneke Ippisch
291 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
293 * Nellie Bly's Monkey: His Remarkable Story in His Own Words; written by
Joan W. Blos and illustrated by Catherine Stock
299 * Step by Wicked Step by Anne Fine
306 * Black Horses for the King by Anne McCaffrey
311 * I Feel a Little Jumpy Around You: A Book of Her Poems &r His Poems
Collected in Pairs; comp. by Naomi Shihab Nye and Paul B. Janeczko
315 * Crash by Jerry Spinelli
320 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
321 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Acting Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan S. Verner, Reviewer (SSV)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Roger Sutton, Editor Escapee (RS)
Tara L. Rivera, Editorial Assistant (TLR)
Lisa Mahoney, Graduate Research Assistant (LM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Deborah Stevenson, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center,
51 Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1996 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Susan Leopold, from Sky: A True Story ofResistance During World War II
©1996 and used by permission of Simon and Schuster.
MAY 1996 
* 289
THE BIG PICTURE
Sky: A True Story of Resistance During World
War II
by Hanneke Ippisch
For an adult, memoir is a matter of personalized history. For a child,
memoir is a matter of personal story. These are not mutually exclusive categories,
of course, and many books and readers cross over, but in general adults select
autobiographies that center on a subject relative to their own memories or previ-
ously formed interests-a favorite movie star's gossip, for instance, or an influen-
tial political leader's reflections. 
For most children, on the other hand,
autobiographies are an introduction to memories, which they haven't stockpiled
with much perspective yet, and to interests still unclarified. Juvenile memoirs
must therefore first and foremost snag children's attention with strong storytell-
ing, including some elements of dramatic action.
Sky, Hanneke Ippisch's recollection of her work as a teenage Dutch resis-
tance worker, is an especially vivid narration comprising brief chapters that each
centers on an involving incident, along with photographs, newspaper clippings,
correspondence, popular poems, cartoons, and other graphic artifacts. The first
six chapters reflect, in specific descriptions that are never nostalgic, Ippisch's con-
tented childhood before the war; the next thirty-three offer a contrast, beginning
with May 10, 1942, when the Germans invaded the Netherlands, and ending with
the aftermath of the occupation in 1945. The episodes of Ippisch's constantly
escalating involvement as messenger for the underground, guide for Jews escaping
to the countryside, assistant to leaders of the movement, and political prisoner in a
Nazi dungeon are all the more gripping for the simple, unsensationalized authorial
tone. Ippisch is confident enough of her details to let them speak without too
much embellishment, and the resulting understatement reinforces the factual na-
ture of incredible situations, such as the time Ippisch is entrusted with delivering
five million Dutch guilders ("worth about three million U.S. dollars in 1944") one
hundred kilometers on her bicycle before curfew. With the winds against her, she
finally grabs hold of a passing German truck and, smiling broadly whenever the
driver waves, hitches a speedy ride to her destination near the German border.
Through her assignments, readers learn about the highly organized, se-
cret financing of the railway workers' strike, which stopped all the trains in Hol-
land and slowed the German transport of prisoners eastward and supplies westward.
Readers also learn the specifics of hunger ("We ate toothpaste, which was still
available, and tulip bulbs") and the imperative of silence: "The Jews under the
floor could not make any noises-absolutely none. They were totally silent for a
whole week, all eight of them. After the Germans left [the house], seven came out
of the hiding place, white and thin and very weak, but alive. One of them had died
290 
* THE BULLETIN
very quietly." Readers learn the stress of arrest (Ippisch's colleagues were shot and
she was sentenced to life imprisonment) and interrogation: "The [Dobermans]
now started to growl and began to sniff my legs and skirt."
The section about Ippisch's period in solitary confinement (for shouting
war news to other political prisoners through a drainpipe) without light, heat,
blanket, bed, or food is especially notable for its interweaving of dreams, memo-
ries, and reality. And a final section is unusually honest as she admits to having
enjoyed the sight of a crowd persecuting collaborators and considers how the war
altered everyone's ethics. Ippisch spends little time, however, on expository pas-
sages: she makes her points through telling us what happened with a minimum of
explanation or confession. There's no self-indulgence or self-pity in these tales of
hardship; they function more as expression than self-expression.
At one point Ippisch states, "We in Holland never talked much to each
other about feelings. It's not that we did not have feelings, we simply kept them to
ourselves. The Dutch people were and are, in general, quite stoic." Even Ippisch
and her father, a minister who was also active in the underground, never discussed
their work, although she finds out after the war and includes here a story about his
trying to deliver important Allied papers to resistance workers only to find their
house taken over by Germans. He escapes detection by chatting amiably with the
officers, in perfect German, about his intent to roust the inhabitants (whom the
Germans later shoot) to church. The success of both father and daughter de-
pended on self-control.
Because of Ippisch's control in carrying out her resistance mission, lives
were saved; because of her control in writing about her resistance mission, we can
remember the lives that were saved along with those that were lost. Memory
thrives on strong storytelling. Born from oral narrative, memoir has become an
increasingly productive genre of adult literature and, more slowly, of children's
literature ranging from picture books to young adult nonfiction. In particular,
World War II memoirs-for both adults and children-have emerged powerfully,
as aging victims who remained silent for half a century feel compelled to bear
witness before they die. As a survivor, Ippisch has shaped her past into memorable
"chunks," sequential episodes that inject history with personality; instead of de-
scribing this book, I found myself telling stories from it to family and friends.
Even the graphic records have a scrapbook appeal, each representing a mini-tale of
its own: forged permits, for instance, or bits of folded toilet paper which the
prisoners used to scratch messages, fold, and sew under laundry marks.
Sky is not a descriptive catalogue of self-revelation but an involving ac-
count in service of vital history. And it is above all a story-even pre-adolescents
will stay for the story. This re-creation of one person's experiences can become an
extraordinary experience for countless young readers. (Imprint information ap-
pears on p. 303.)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor
MAY 1996 
* 291
ANNOUNCEMENT
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books is pleased to announce the appoint-
ment of Janice M. Del Negro as Editor. Currently consultant for children's and
public library services for the State Library of North Carolina, Del Negro brings to
her new position many years and facets of experience with young people and their
literature. Prior to her job in North Carolina, Del Negro worked for more than
thirteen years as a children's librarian for the Chicago Public Library, including
five years as Assistant Director of Systemwide Children's Services. As an adjunct
faculty member of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science at
Rosary College, she taught courses in children's library services and in storytelling.
Del Negro has presented workshops on storytelling throughout the country. She
has been a reviewer for Booklist since 1992, before which she contributed to School
Library Journal and Kirkus Reviews. An active member of the American Library
Association, Del Negro has served on the Newbery committee and is currently a
member of the Caldecott committee. Del Negro replaces Roger Sutton, who left
The Bulletin in March to become editor-in-chief of the Horn Book Magazine. Del
Negro's stated priorities for The Bulletin include-in addition to the maintenance
of high caliber criticism-electronic outreach and active networking with sub-
scribers. She also plans to add new features such as subject-specific annotated
bibliographies, a Blue Ribbon Reader list with suggestions for use of the books
with children and young adults, and a selective annual guide for parents.
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, DAVID A. 
Young Cam Jansen and the Missing Cookie; illus. by Susanna
Natti. 
Viking, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-670-86772-1 
$11.99 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Old-well, older Cam Jansen is already a mainstay of the early chapter book set;
here the detecting whiz with the photographic memory gets a shot at beginning
readers. The contrivance-that Cam can "click" a scene into her memory-has
always allowed for a certain amount of convenience in her stories, and the bare-
boned format here only exacerbates the artificiality of the device. Jason thinks
someone has stolen the chocolate-chip cookie from his lunch box, but Cam's
memory and natural smarts indicate that in fact Jason's dog took the cookie before
Jason came to school that day. Her deduction that the fact that there are crumbs
inside the box (rather than on a table) means that the cookie was eaten from the
box is questionable; her appeal is not. Full-color pictures by Susanna Natti (illus-
trator of the older series as well) give a few clues and lighten the load. RS
292 
* THE BULLETIN
ASHABRANNER, 
BRENT 
Our Beckoning Borders: Illegal Immigration to America;
illus. with photographs by Paul Conklin. 
Cobblehill, 1996 
99p
ISBN 0-525-65223-X 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
While Ashabranner's latest in a line of distinguished immigration-themed books
does provide an updated picture of this controversial topic, it unfortunately seems
most like a desultory revisiting of The Vanishing Border (BCCB 3/88). Although
the newer book makes brief mention of illegal immigrants arriving in this country
via the Canadian frontier, or via boat or plane, the focus, as in The Vanishing
Border, is on our border with Mexico and the various efforts of immigration offic-
ers to control illegal entries. The first book contained more personalizing anec-
dotes where this one relies more on statistical evidence, sometimes dizzyingly piled
up: "A study by the INS in the 1980s calculated that each 1 million illegal aliens
cost federal, state, and local governments $2.25 billion a year in education, law
enforcement, health, and other benefits. Taxes paid by each 1 million illegals
(principally federal and state income taxes and sales taxes on goods purchased)
were estimated to $995 million, leaving a net cost of $1.30 million for each 1
million illegal immigrants." Although the book is not as involving as its predeces-
sors (see also Still a Nation of Immigrants, BCCB 10/93, etc.) it is a useful
supplement. Conklin's black-and-white photographic portraits of individuals-im-
migrants, border patrol agents, shelter workers-involved in the issue help coun-
terbalance the abstractness of the text. RS
BAUER, JOAN 
Sticks. 
Delacorte, 1996 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-32165-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
All that stands between ten-year-old Mickey Vernon and the youth nine-ball cham-
pionship is thirteen-year-old Buck Pender, a bully with the dual advantages of
professional coaching and skill at psychological intimidation. Mickey's secret
weapon has just rolled into town in a shiny green Peterbilt-Joseph Alvarez, one-
time friend of Mickey's deceased father, who is willing to help Mickey clean up his
poor technique and handle Buck's aggression. There's never any real question as
to the outcome of the match, and pool enthusiasts are assured of a happy ending.
Bauer, however, has cluttered her table with several shallowly developed subplots:
Mickey's mother has personal reasons to resent Alvarez, Mickey's best friend Arlen
(a gifted math-aholic) orchestrates their joint science-fair project, and another friend,
Francine, carries on about becoming a magician and a nun. While each story
strand is individually entertaining, together they impede the momentum of the
plot and detract from the main event. Readers who really want to soak up some
pool-hall ambiance should try Sid Hite's Even Break (BCCB 1/96), but readers
satisfied with just a dip in the pool could give this one a shot. EB
BLEGVAD, LENORE 
A Sound of Leaves; illus. by Erik Blegvad. 
McElderry,
1996 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-689-80038-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Citified Sylvie is both apprehensive and excited about her week at the seashore
with Mom, Grandpa, and little brother Dell. No matter that their borrowed ac-
commodations are austere; her room has luxuriant and exotic (to her) foliage just
outside the window screen, and the ocean is as amazing as she had hoped. It even
MAY 1996 
* 
293
looks as if her new acquaintance, Claire, will turn out to be a great friend. Claire's
local buddies, however, are skeptical of this "slum kid" interloper, and soon Sylvie
is ditched and heartbroken. Finally, after some family support and a few hours to
think things through, Sylvie concludes, "Couldn't they get along, all of them, if
they really tried?" and renews her friendship with Claire. This level-headed and
comfortable resolution reflects adult wishful thinking rather than a child's authen-
tic experience, and readers who have been stung by the verbal barbs of strangers
will recognize this for the idealized portrayal it is. However, this warm and lei-
surely chapter book may be just the ticket for youngsters counting the days 'til
summer vacation. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. EB
BLOS, JOAN W. Nellie Bly's Monkey: His Remarkable Story in His Own Words;
illus. by Catherine Stock. 
Morrow, 1996 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12678-2 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12677-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-5
The last leg of Bly's famed seventy-two-day trip around the world is fondly re-
called by McGinty, a monkey Bly purchased in Singapore. Modeled on Bly's very
real (but presumably less articulate) mascot, McGinty regards their adventures
with serene curiosity and records them with prim formality ("Mishaps and misun-
derstandings awaited in San Francisco... it was feared that the ship's bill of health
had been left behind. . . . On hearing this, my mistress fell into despair"). Ink
vignettes and softly blended watercolors with crisply defined details offer a pleas-
ing melange of exotic tourist spots, storms at sea, spacious staterooms, and smoky
milltowns; a double-page printed map of the route is also included. Blos surpris-
ingly makes no mention ofVerne's Phileas Fogg, whose fictional record Bly set out
to beat, but she supplements her narrator's necessarily truncated view of the tour
with introductory and concluding material on Bly's race against time and about
her other journalistic and managerial work. EB
BODE, JANET 
Hard Time: A Real Life Look at Juvenile Crime and Violence; writ-
ten by Janet Bode and Stan Mack; illus. by Stan Mack. 
Delacorte, 1996 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-385-32186-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Bode, a collector of first-hand accounts of adolescent concerns in Heartbreak and
Roses: Real Life Stories of TroubledLove (BCCB 9/94) and Trust and Betrayal: Real
Life Stories ofFriends andEnemies (BCCB 6/95), here examines juvenile crime and
violence. Through poems, narrative prose, and cartoon strips, we hear a diversity
of voices, including those of Sean, a seventeen-year-old who killed his mother;
Randall Watson, the project coordinator who teaches writing workshops to teens
in prison; and Tanya, the fifteen-year-old whose letter to the author describes her
decision to lead a straight life. However, the text dedicates more time to recount-
ing tales of the juveniles' criminal acts than discussing their consequences. While
the action-oriented cartoon strips mix humor with grim reality, the still-frame
strips containing a group of students answering the question "Do crime and vio-
lence affect your life?" interrupt the flow and are full of contrived-sounding re-
sponses ("I've ripped a tag off a mattress"). The explanation for the background
research is also problematic: the reader is left hanging as to the validity and accu-
racy of the study because Bode never clearly identifies the cities in which she con-
294 
* THE BULLETIN
ducted her research, does not tell how much prose is the exact wording of an
original speaker, and does not explain why she chose statistics from newspapers
instead of primary sources. Teens will nonetheless find the subject topical and the
variety of factoids, actions, and cartoons appealing. A glossary, a booklist, and a
list of organizations are appended. TLR
BUNTING, EVE Market Day; illus. by Holly Berry. 
HarperCollins, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025368-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025364-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Cast as the present-tense narration of a young girl named Tess, Bunting's memory
of a monthly event traditional in Irish towns has the idiosyncratic ring of truth:
"There's a bit of a commotion over by the churchyard. One of the goats got away
and stole Mrs. McAfee's petticoat off her clothesline and dragged it back to the
square. He had the double frill eaten half off before he was caught." What keeps
the sights and sounds from becoming a descriptive catalogue is the friendship be-
tween Tess and Wee Boy ("He's seven, same as me, but he never grew past four").
They alternate picking out and paying for candy from "Harry Hooey's sweetie
stall"-this week Wee Boy treats with a "penny poke of gob stoppers." By the end
of the day Tess has given away her penny, half to a musician on the street and half
to get Wee Boy's fortune told by Madame Savanna, who predicts from her seat
beside the gypsy caravans that Wee Boy will be as big and brave as he ever needs to
be. This is more portrait than story, but the place and persons portrayed are
authentic and lively. The artist has done her homework, from the opening land-
scape of sheep grazing along steep seaside mountains, to the town square bustling
with people and livestock, to details of clothing and even Wee Boy's typical hair-
cut. The shapes are rounded nostalgically and the contrasting hues softened by
shadows and textured blending. A viewer could wish for less cartooned faces, since
Berry's drafting is otherwise subtle, and perhaps for a less obtrusive typeface than
the bold and blocky letters jumping out from stark-white half- and full-page sec-
tions of text. However, visual motifs related to the compositions help unify each
spread, and the overall design is jaunty. BH
BURGESS, MELVIN 
The Baby and Fly Pie. Simon, 1996 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-80489-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Davey's one dream is to have the baker Luke buy him away from service in Mother
Shelley's gang of rubbish kids, who pick through the city tip for salvage and, in
return, are given some food and a place to sleep. When Davey (a.k.a. Fly Pie) and
his shady colleague Sham stumble upon a dying kidnapper and his hostage, a baby
"worth" seventeen million pounds, it seems that his ship has come in: if he simply
enlists older sister Jane's help and returns the baby for the reward, a contented life
as a pastry-maker is assured. But between the tip and the good life stand rival
gangs looking for a cut in the deal, death squads out to "clean" the streets of indi-
gent children, and a divisive power struggle between Jane and Sham. Burgess
evokes a convincing picture of future London plagued by overpopulation and in-
flation, and his stage is artfully set for a tense confrontation between the gamins
and the privileged class. Though the plot suggests breakneck action, peril is threat-
ened more often than it is realized. Rambling narration, which frequently di-
gresses to Davey's musings over his and his sister's future, slows down the pace.
MAY 1996 
* 295
Only in the final chapters, when efforts to return the baby to her mother have
backfired and the trio is destitute and on the run, does the reader reap any thrills.
Still, readers who like their fiction played out in grimy streets and murky by-ways
may enjoy this look at a future gone quite believably wrong. EB
CAVANAGH, HELEN 
The Last Piper. Simon, 1996 
[14 8p]
ISBN 0-689-80481-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Christie is thirteen and her little brother Mikey is five; they've accompanied their
mother on a long business trip to Scotland, but they weren't prepared for the
strange effect it has on Mikey. He seems to know things he couldn't about the
place they're staying, and it becomes increasingly clear that he is, in fact, the rein-
carnation of their hostess's murdered brother, returned to clear his name. This is
a cheerfully unlikely story, which breezily invents and avoids facts to suit itself (the
original murder would have taken place during World War II, but there's no men-
tion of the war, for instance), and it's set in a Hollywood version of Scotland that
has more kitsch than atmosphere ("See if it doesna get yer own Scots blood poundin',
lass"). The theme of the meeting between past and future, however, is one of
enduring fascination, Cavanagh's story is clear, dramatic, and internally consis-
tent, and young readers will be drawn both by the concept and by the accessibility
of the text. Fans of the supernatural not quite ready for Susan Cooper's The Boggart
(BCCB 4/93) or Alan Garner's The OwlService (12/68) may appreciate the cut of
The Last Piper's tartan. DS
CHARBONNEAU, EILEEN 
Honor to the Hills. Tor, 1996 
192p
ISBN 0-312-86904-3 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
This third entry in the Woods Family saga focuses on sixteen-year-old Lily, grand-
daughter ofAsher Woods (featured in The Ghosts ofStony Clove), who seems des-
tined to follow the family tradition of falling in love with outsiders and misfits.
Just off the boat from Ireland, Hugh Delaney arrives at Stony Clove with a letter
of introduction to the Woods family, and Lily is almost instantly smitten. Her
affections are entirely requited, but Hugh, ignorant of local family rivalries and
naive concerning rising racial tensions under the new Fugitive Slave Laws of 1850,
jeopardizes their romance through an unfortunate alliance with the bigoted Chase
family. This latest title will be best appreciated by readers who already know the
Woods family, as Charbonneau skillfully weaves in familiar personalities and subtle
references to the family history with a new storyline involving this next generation's
attempts to secure justice for their black neighbors. Patient newcomers can cer-
tainly sort through the extensive cast of family members, but the initiated will
know what to make of Sally Hamilton's ghost, painted madam Rebecca Chase,
and the red ribbon that Asher Woods takes from Gran Ginny's hair on the day he
dies, and they will be treated to both a good love story and a good cry. EB
CHARLES, FAUSTIN, comp. 
A Caribbean Counting Book; illus. by Roberta
Arenson. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 1996 
[24p]
ISBN 0-395-77944-8 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Not so much a counting book as a book of counting rhymes, this is a collection of
numerical verse from Barbados, Cuba, Jamaica, the Bahamas, and other Carib-
296 
* THE BULLETIN
bean islands. Kids from everywhere will recognize the cumulative or subtractive
forms here, such as "Ten little green bananas hangin' on a line,/ A bird eat one,/
Dat left nine" and "Mosquito one/ Mosquito two,/ Mosquito jump in the old
man shoe." Charles notes that he has attempted to retain the original rhythm and
text in those verses he has translated; it's not clear which of the poems started out
in a different language, but they all have the chanting swing of oral tradition and
the lilt of Caribbean dialects. Scansion traps may sometimes slow down the un-
wary reader-aloud, but listeners will enjoy the verve of the verse and may wish to
try out a few, especially the jump-rope rhymes, on their own. Stylized cut-paper
collages, using simple figures in deep summery hues against white space or vibrant
contrasting colors, occasionally recall Ed Young in Bitter Bananas (BCCB 10/94)
and occasionally Synthia Saint James. No source notes beyond the island or terri-
tory name are provided. DS
COCHRANE, PATRICIA 
Purely Rosie Pearl. Delacorte, 1996 
135p
ISBN 0-385-32193-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
While much of the country in 1936 suffers from unemployment, the Bush family
feels fortunate to have steady work as migrant fruit pickers on the West Coast farm
circuit. Returning for another season at a California strawberry farm, twelve-year-
old Rosie is looking forward to renewing old acquaintances in a setting where her
entire family is valued by the owners for their reliability and speedy, careful work.
Instead, she finds a new friend in Maggie Campbell, a girl whose well-educated
parents have been forced into migrant farm work by economic hard times. Cochrane
acknowledges the hardships faced by the migrant labor force: alone in her section
of the fields, Rosie is intimidated by the advances of the hiring boss Jake Porter,
and Rosie's sister Lily Opal loses her firstborn child because local hospitals won't
admit migrants without cash payment up front. Still, hard work and family soli-
darity are simplistically presented as the panacea for all that ails the system, and
Rosie's father, a pillar of the migrant community, unconvincingly (if happily) lands
nasty Jake Porter's job and, with it, a promising new life for his kin. In an after-
word, Cochrane offers background on the Dust Bowl and some personal observa-
tions on life during the Depression. EB
COONEY, CAROLINE B. 
Out of Time. 
Delacorte, 1996 
210p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-385-32226-7 
$10.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
In the closing of Both Sides of Time (BCCB 10/95), Annie Lockwood made the
agonizing decision to leave her beloved Strat and return to the twentieth century;
now she finds she can't leave well enough alone and, while on a school field trip to
New York City, finds her way back to the 1890s once again. To her dismay, she
discovers that Strat, due to his talking about his time-traveling friend (and due to
the machinations of the evil Walker Walkley) has been locked up in an insane
asylum. His sister Devonny insists that Annie is the only one who can rescue
him-and that after doing so, she must bring him to the tuberculosis sanatorium
where his fiancee Harriett lies a different sort of prisoner. While maintaining the
feminist stance she held in the first book, Cooney goes easy on the theory here, and
the result is a suspenseful, focused melodrama along the lines of Philip Pullman's
The Ruby in the Smoke (BCCB 5/87) but faster-moving and more romantic. The
asylum where Strat is captive is a deliciously horrible Victorian nightmare, and his
rescue involves a thrilling chase up the Hudson River, a chloroform-soaked scarf,
MAY 1996 
* 297
and a wild sleigh ride through the snowy Adirondacks. His reunion with Harriett
is bittersweet-she dies in his arms, leaving him both his integrity and the girl he
truly loves, Annie. Our heroine comes back to the present anyway (although not
before some serious interference), but a third installment is promised, so maybe
she'll get another chance. RS
COOPER, HELEN 
Little Monster DidIt!; written and illus. by Helen Cooper. 
Dial,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-1993-0 
$12.99 
R 4-6 yrs
Mom and Dad evidently realize there will be sibling jealousy when the new baby
arrives, so they try to head trouble off at the pass by buying their toddler daughter
a stuffed monster doll to take care of: "I loved him right away, and he loved me
too. But he didn't love what Mom brought home from the hospital." According
to the sulky narrator, the splattered baby lotion, leaking hot water bottles, and
teething biscuits in the VCR are all the fault of Little Monster, and for the first half
of the book it's pretty clear that big sister is acting out her own hostilities. Our
heroine eventually reconciles herself to the baby, but the mayhem continues: has
Little Monster taken on a life of his own? When Dad threatens to throw him out,
the little girl stows him in the "only one safe place," baby brother's crib, and in that
sanctuary Little Monster is last seen teaching the baby to draw with crayons on the
furniture. Will your audience be confused? Maybe a little-but they'll be enter-
tained as well. And the darkish, densely textured watercolors of the petulant tod-
dler, cheerfully passive baby, and exhausted, befuddled parents have a cozy credibility
that makes all this lunacy plausible as well as enjoyable. EB
CREWS, 
NINA I'll Catch the Moon; written and illus. by Nina
Crews. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14135-8 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14134-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
A little girl looks out her window at the night cityscape and imagines herself climbing
a ladder to the moon, dancing among the stars until finally she returns home to
bed. It's a simple story, but what makes it particularly intriguing here are Crews'
(author-illustrator of One Hot Summer Day, BCCB 6/95) photocollage illustra-
tions. The sweep of the stars and the glitter of the nocturnal city are forcefully yet
dreamily presented, with the colors largely muted to a monochromatic blue and
white; against this color scheme the girl is full-color, standing out as warm life in
the midst of the chilly star-spangled sky. The literal representation of the imagina-
tive concept is a bit disconcerting, however, and the mundaneness of the photo-
graphed images makes the art seem more carefully crafted than otherworldly. As
nighttime journeys go, however, this is an unusual one, and kids may enjoy the
tantalizingly realistic bedtime fantasy. DS
DUEY, KATHLEEN 
Sarah Anne Hartford: American Diaries #1. 
Aladdin,
1996 
[14 4p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-80384-2 
$3.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Merriment on the Sabbath is strictly forbidden in 1650 Massachusetts, and not
only has thirteen-year-old Sarah been playing in the snow with her free-thinking
298 
* 
THE BULLETIN
friend Elizabeth, she has been mistaken for Elizabeth's brother Roger (Sarah was
wearing his heavy coat). Now Elizabeth and Roger face severe public punishment,
and Sarah must gather the courage to confess. Although promotional copy de-
scribes this first title in a new series as "framed by diary entries [that show] how 24
hours can change a person's life forever," the three entries, which technically span
two days, are brief and dispensable. The story itself occasionally bogs down in
historical detail-in particular, an overlong dinner preparation scene laboriously
catalogs everything from dried fruit to cooking pots; Sarah's thoughts, too, tend to
run on about her widowed father's likely remarriage to the nasty Mistress Goddard.
Still, Duey regards the Puritan community's stoic religious principles with respect,
and Sarah's eventual confession realistically brings no romantic reprieve for Eliza-
beth and Roger, only a share in their humiliation and pain for herself. Girls who
have outgrown, read through, or burned out on the American Girls series may
want to sneak a peek at Sarah's diary. EB
DUNLOP, EILEEN 
Tales ofSt. Patrick. Holiday House, 1996 
125p
ISBN 0-8234-1218-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
A seasoned storyteller takes on the cycle of legends about Saint Patrick, who was
born into the luxury of a Roman villa in western England, sold into slavery by Irish
raiders, matured by six years of isolation as a shepherd, and called by God to de-
vote his life to converting the Irish to Christianity. Dunlop is unabashedly mod-
ern in her narrative tone: "That was fun," says the young Sucat (Patrick's Latin
nickname, short for Patricius) after an afternoon of trout fishing; "No way!" shouts
a captain, refusing to take the renegade Patrick on board a ship bound from Ire-
land to England. The result is both disconcerting and immediate. Outside of his
own writings and a few ancient histories, upon which Dunlop has drawn in blend-
ing the factual and fictional, all we really know about Saint Patrick is that he lived
sometime in the fifth century and became the first bishop of Ireland. What's
interesting is the power these legends still wield in a time when miracles such as
those described here sometimes seem faraway. Patrick himself was evidently dis-
dainful of rumors that he drove the snakes of Ireland into the sea or performed
magic in the mode of druids, and Dunlop instead emphasizes his charismatic faith.
Of particular interest in Catholic communities, this will also appeal to students of
religious legend and Irish lore. BH
EMORY, JERRY 
Dirty, Rotten, Dead?; illus. by T. Taylor Bruce and with
photographs. 
Gulliver Green/Harcourt, 1996 
48p 
(Greenpatch Books)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200695-8 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
This is eco-biology with the gloves off, or perhaps you'd better keep them on,
because there are a lot of things here that repel direct contact: ticks, corpses,
sewage, etc. Each subject gets a huge (the book's trim size is between jumbo and
gargantuan) double spread or two which offers diagrams and illustrations along-
side or amid a discussion of various processes: digestion, processing ofwastewater,
recycling, medical stages of human death, decomposition, and so on. The breadth
here is appealing and the format, which includes activity suggestions and biogra-
phies of kids who have green stories to tell, is alluring, as is the book's forthright
attitude towards gross subjects: "When you blow your nose, you will probably
dislodge several chunks of dried (and dead) nose mucus that are packed with tiny
particles of dust, dirt, and nose hairs." Unfortunately, the book's roaming across
MAY 1996 
* 
299
subjects weakens the focus, some of the explanations are vague or spotty (the im-
precise term "germ" is used without a gloss), and the merit of some of the activities
is left mysterious: how, for instance, does stenciling a storm drain help the envi-
ronment? A flawed but entertaining cornucopia, this may make for a browsing
session that leads to more. A list of resources, a glossary, and an index are in-
cluded, as are instructions on how to join the publisher's ecology club for kids. DS
ENDERLE, JUDITH Ross 
Nell Nugget and the Cow Caper; written by Judith Ross
Enderle and Stephanie Gordon Tessler; illus. by Paul Yalowitz. 
Simon,
1996 
[3 4p]
ISBN 0-689-80502-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
What with Frank Remkiewicz' The Bone Stranger (BCCB 6/94) and Sarah Garland's
Tex the Cowboy (9/95), we seem to be in a flourishing time for spoofy Western
picture books, and here's another one. Nell Nugget lives on the Bar None Ranch
"with her horse, Pay Dirt, and her little dog, Dust," and forty-nine cows. Tragedy
strikes Nell's peaceful existence when her best cow, Goldie, turns up missing, and
Nell discovers she's been rustled by "the baddest bad man anywhere, Nasty Galoot";
in a head-to-head confrontation, Nasty at first seems to have the edge, but finally
Nell triumphs and brings Goldie back to the fold-er, herd. The plot rambles
around a bit, but it's got some entertainingly silly turns (Nell's cows love to be
serenaded and come a-plodding when she tickles the ivories) and some great read-
aloud sounds ("'WOO, WOO, WOO-O-O-O,' Dust howled. 'MOO, MOO,
MOO-O-O-O,' Goldie cried") and phrases (there's a repeated refrain of "And
her little dog, Dust, trailed behind"). The illustrations are visually restrained but
conceptually free-ranging-precise-edged colored pencil in an amusingly Yellow-
Submarine-esque style, they offer smoothly textured expanses of pristine, pale earth-
toned landscape inhabited by dot-eyed, poker-faced humans and beasts in creative
shapes, flying flocks of musical notes casting shadows on the old homestead, and
the bad guy's horse wearing a mask just like his master. The art is entertaining, but
the noise is the thing here: shut your doors and get your audience using their Old
MacDonald skills at the strategic places, and they'll look at the restoration of lost
property in a whole new way. DS
FINE, ANNE 
Step by Wicked Step. 
Little, 1996 
[138p]
ISBN 0-316-28345-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Five students on a school trip beat the rest of the class to the huge old mansion
where they're supposed to spend the night; they elude their minimal supervision
and find a Victorian-era journal that tells of a young resident's sticky relationship
with his stepfather. This prompts them to take turns telling of their own step- and
split families: Claudia tells of her gradual adjustment to her stepmother; Colin
relates his longing for the beloved dad he hasn't seen in years; Ralph gaily chronicles
his ever-increasing list of stepmothers and his crush upon the latest candidate;
Pixie details her frustration with her stepsisters; and Rob recounts his sister's in-
ability to come to grips with their new stepfather. The set-up is contrived, but the
stories are lively, truthful, and touching. The family situations are all different but
all credible, and the book is fair-minded about interpersonal dynamics, with cul-
pability spread around and hope available to all, if sometimes at a cost. Fine is one
300 
* THE BULLETIN
of the best contemporary writers about changes in individual families; while this
substitutes breadth for the depth of Alias Madame Doubtfire (BCCB 4/88) or My
War with Goggle-Eyes (5/89), it's a deftly written and insightful collection that will
appeal to kids with their own similar stories to tell. DS
FLEMING, DENISE 
Where Once There Was a Wood; written and illus. by Denise
Fleming. 
Holt, 1996 34p
ISBN 0-8050-3761-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
With simple rhymes and vibrant pictures, Fleming tackles a difficult subject-the
relentless destruction of wildlife habitats. It's a risky business that could slip into
preachiness, but Fleming starts with an effectively restrained tone, as the oversized
pages are populated by brilliantly-hued, softly mottled images of rabbits, foxes,
woodchucks, snakes, raccoons and all manner of birds-kingfishers, waxwings,
horned owls, pheasants. The abrupt end, however ("Where once there was a wood,
a meadow and a creek,/ sit houses side by side, twenty houses deep"), is both judg-
mental and underexplanatory, and the housing development looks paradoxically
cozy. A four-page appendix, which seems at odds with the more poetic text, pro-
vides practical suggestions of ways to welcome wildlife into our own backyards-
providing food and shelter, attracting butterflies and hummingbirds-as well as a
list of other appropriate books on the theme. Since many primary-school kids will
be able to connect the story to their own experiences, this might be useful for
kicking off a spirited discussion on "progress." SSV
GARZA, HEDDA 
Barred from the Bar: A History of Women and the Legal
Profession. Watts, 1996 
[22 4 p] 
illus. with photographs 
(Women Then-
Women Now)
ISBN 0-531-11265-9 
$22.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Garza, an author practiced in the chronicling of social history (Latinas, BCCB 3/
95), here turns her attention to the stormy history of women lawyers and jurists in
America, starting with the problematic treatment of women under colonial law
and ending with an examination of the contemporary status of the profession. En
route, she covers a great deal of detailed and little-discussed territory, describing
the efforts of various "firsts": first woman admitted to the bar, first woman to
practice before the Supreme Court, first African-American woman lawyer, etc.,
and the only gradually yielding resistance to all of them. She is particularly good at
linking these individual examples to larger movements and forces, noting, for in-
stance, the tendency of women lawyers to work-or to have to work-in low- or
non-paying sectors of law. While her account is enlivened by her passion, it is
marred by inaccuracies (she wrongly describes Lydia Maria Child as black, and
implies that Rosa Parks' civil disobedience was a spontaneous act), confusingly
shifting chronologies, and her tendency to overemphasize and to make sweeping
and misleading statements in the name of her cause (in discussing Marcia Clark,
for instance, she makes the unlikely claim about the television audience that "few
realized that until recently, women lawyers and judges were very rarely seen in
courtrooms"). It's still one of the more effective books at depicting the difficult
and continuing fight against unfairness in one of our most significant fields. Black-
and-white photographs appear throughout; endnotes, a list of suggested reading,
and an index are included. DS
MAY 1996 
* 
301
GELLMAN, MARc 
God's Mailbox: More Stories about Stories in the Bible; illus. by
Debbie Tilley. 
Morrow, 1996 
[96p]
ISBN 0-688-13169-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
In his second collection of modern midrash (following Does God Have a Big Toe?),
Rabbi Gellman offers some new takes on Scripture nearly everyone knows-Moses'
abridgement of Yahweh's verbose Ten Commandments-and on Scripture nearly
no one knows-why, for example, you don't muzzle an ox when it treads the
grain. A cumulative definition of holiness is effectively employed in a commen-
tary on Genesis. In "The Pharaoh and the Frog," a comic twist on the ten plagues
of Egypt, wisdom sneaks up from behind the wisecracking: "You can't stand against
freedom, and you can't stand against God." At his best, Gellman can craft a witty
and readable tale, but too often he slips a heavy sermon into the mouth of a char-
acter rather than allowing his story to lead naturally to an inescapable moral. While
undeniably offering food for thought and nourishment for the soul, the collection
is somewhat sugary and is best consumed one morsel at a time. EB
GIBBONS, GAIL 
Dogs; written and illustrated by Gail Gibbons. 
Holiday House,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1226-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
In this straightforward picture book, Gibbons introduces the younger set to the
basics of life as a dog. A brief mention of their common wolf ancestry leads to a
rundown of the main types of canines: purebreds, crossbreeds, and mongrels.
Gibbons pictures several of the most popular breeds from Chihuahuas to Saint
Bernards but is careful to sing the praises of the common mutt. We are treated to
a capsule summary of canine communication (minus the sniffing, tactfully) and
behavior ("an angry dog can growl and bark") and a brief mention of familiar facts,
such as the extraordinary canine powers of smell (kids will be delighted to learn
that Fido can smell that buried bone two feet under) and hearing (four times
better than humans). There's a brief set of operating instructions-feeding, wa-
tering, and walking your puppy or dog-but no mention of the harsh reality of
pooper scooper laws that many kids find revolting. Throughout, the line-and-
watercolor illustrations are rollicking and informative, if awkwardly proportioned,
and doggedly make the point (although the breed names are occasionally termino-
logically or orthographically inaccurate-for instance, "Golden Labrador Retriever"
and "Dalmation"). Her focus getting a little hazy at the end, Gibbons gives the
nod to working dogs just before closing with a gallery of famous dogs from the
past (Sater in ancient Greece) to the present (Beethoven, the film star). SSV
GILLILAND, HAP 
Flint's Rock; written by Hap Gilliland with William
Walters. 
Roberts Rinehart/Council for Indian Education, 1996 
85p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-879373-82-3 
$8.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Flint Red Coyote doesn't want to leave the Cheyenne reservation and his beloved
grandfather to go live in Butte, three hundred miles to the west, but his older
sister's husband has left her and she needs her family to come and help out. In his
new school, Flint meets two boys who, like him, are having trouble fitting in: Jose,
a quiet boy whose family has just come to Montana from Mexico; and David,
nicknamed Tarzan, a troubled bully from Detroit. While the main story is Flint's,
the other boys' points-of-view are regularly interpolated, making the focus too
302 
* THE BULLETIN
wide for the rather thin story. The unlikely alliance is believable, though, and
contrasts of cultural norms are worked in smoothly, as when Jose draws suspicion
because he won't, out of deference, look his teacher in the eye. The author conve-
niently has Grandfather die while Flint and Jose are visiting the reservation, allow-
ing for a too-neat thematic wrap-up; more realistically, Tarzan's problems are left
unresolved. The book is in a series designed for American Indian children, but its
concerns and appeal will speak more broadly; proofreading should have been more
careful. RS
GIOVANNI, NIIuK 
The Genie in the Jar; illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Holt, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-4118-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Famed poet Giovanni provides the text for this picture book, which exhorts young
listeners to create and celebrate: "Take the air/ and weave the sky/ around the
Black loom/ around the Black loom/ make the sky sing a Black song/ sing a blue
song." Over the text, a young African-American girl dances joyously by herself,
with her mother, and with a large hand-holding gathering; Chris Raschka's depic-
tion of the celebration is strong-lined, fluid, and affectionate on rich tan paper.
Giovanni's lyric is strong and singing, gentled by the periodic refrain of "careful
baby/ don't prick your finger"; the poem certainly has more life than most picture
book encouragements of self- and cultural esteem. It's all frustratingly abstract,
though, and beyond the attractive pictures and the warm if vague ideas, there's not
much point-most youngsters will miss the meaning of the verse and will wait
impatiently for something concrete to happen, and at the end will wonder if any-
thing did. Perhaps this would be most effective if read as part of a larger poetry
selection or as a counterpoint to more literal prose. DS
HECKMAN, PHILIP 
Waking Upside Down; illus. by Dwight Been. 
Atheneum,
1996 
[34p]
ISBN 0-689-31930-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
We've all had topsy-turvy days, but Morton has an upside-down night. Angry that
he's lost his spacious bedroom to his twin sisters and he has to take their warren of
a room complete with bunnies on the wallpaper, Morton goes to bed scowling,
only to wake up when he feels himself flying up to the ceiling. Heckman and Been
succeed in showing how the ordinary can quickly become extraordinary--all it
takes is a new way of looking at things. Upside down, a twirling kitchen stool is a
perfect base for handstands, a ceiling fan fabulous for Cossack-style dancing, and
an inverted fireplace chimney superlative for rock climbing-well, you get the
idea. Finally, when he tires of walking on other ceilings, Morton returns to his
own, curling up on the shimmering stars with a happy grin. Been's eerie colored-
pencil illustrations offer a spooky glow-in-the-dark ominousness while helping to
orient us to Morton's gravity-defying exploits. Kids will enjoy the wackiness of
the story even as they're ambushed with a stealth lesson in point of view. SSV
HUBBARD, PATRICIA 
My Crayons Talk; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Martin/Holt,
1996 27p
ISBN 0-8050-3529-X 
$14.95 
R 3-6 yrs
In snappy couplets, an infectious reprise ("Talk. Talk./ My crayons talk./ Yackity.
Clackity./ Talk. Talk. Talk"), and big, scribbly drawings in which she is the center
MAY 1996 * 303
of attention, a red-headed moppet conducts a rollicking show-and-tell of colors
and their associations. "Silver toots, 'Grand,/ Marching band'" while the girl strides
across a musical staff and blows into an enormous crayon flute, until "Red roars,
'No,/ Do not go'" and she screeches to a crimson halt before a roaring lion with a
STOP sign. A twelve-pack's worth of pictures and rhymes vigorous enough for pre-
school story time will have the audience eyeing their stubby Binney and Smiths
with new respect. Who knows ... they may even discover the secret life of burnt
umber. EB
IGUS, TOYOMI 
Two Mrs. Gibsons; illus. by Daryl Wells. 
Children's Book Press,
1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-89239-135-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
"I once knew two Mrs. Gibsons," begins the narrator, depicted as a child playing
ball with her African-American grandmother and her Japanese mother. The fol-
lowing pages describe the differences between the two women: one is big, dark,
and loud; the other is small, light-skinned, and quiet. One lets the narrator try on
Sunday hats and helps her catch fireflies; the other lets her try on kimonos and
helps her make paper cranes. One cooks greens for a long time, the other stir-fries
quick meals. One fixes the narrator's hair in a thick braid hanging over her fore-
head, the other brushes the narrator's hair straight again. "They were different,
but they both had a lot in common. They both loved my Daddy and they both
loved me." An author's note verifies this as autobiographical, which alleviates
some bits of racial stereotyping that seem to glaze the portraits of these two women.
The paintings are rich in earth-toned patterns but awkwardly drafted, with the
figures often appearing stiffly posed. The text, too, is more patterned than plot-
ted; in other words, there's more situation than story, but listeners will enjoy the
rhythm of contrast and the goodhearted if message-laden multicultural motif. BH
IPPISCH, HANNEKE 
Sky: A True Story ofResistance During World War II. 
Simon,
1996 
[128p]
ISBN 0-689-80508-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7 up
See this month's Big Picture, p. 289, for review.
JICAI, FENG 
Let One Hundred Flowers Bloom; tr. by Christopher Smith. 
Viking,
1996 
106p
ISBN 0-670-85805-6 
$13.99 
SpR 
Gr. 5-9
In what could have been an opening in a Somerset Maugham short story, a Chi-
nese writer, while traveling on a train, hears a terrible tale from his compartment-
mate, a disheveled artist who is carrying a mysterious package, and who agrees to
let the writer take down his story. Artist Hia Xiayu had thought he had a bright
future when he graduated from the Beijing Academy of Fine Arts in the early
1960s; instead, he is sent to a provincial pottery factory as punishment for political
crimes. Perplexed at the accusation ("Had I ever privately said anything bad in
front of someone else? Who can remember everything one's ever said?"), Hia
Xiayu nonetheless attempts to settle in and to learn from the master potters about
their art. Marriage, though, to a woman who is loved by the head of the factory's
painting section, brings a cycle of harassment, torture, and betrayal, and Hia Xiayu
304 
* 
THE BULLETIN
is sent to hard labor in a quarry (and his wife, convinced he is a counterrevolution-
ary, aborts their child). Although the writing and/or translation is a little stiff, this
is a compelling story of Mao's Cultural Revolution, containing as well some subtle
discussion of creativity and artistic response. Why it has been published as a
children's book, though, is puzzling: all of the characters are adults, save for a dog,
Jet, that befriends and protects the beleaguered artist even while he makes things
worse, as when Jet rips down posters denouncing Hia Xiayu. There is some heart-
tugging drama in the scenes between man and dog, and this may be enough to
draw young readers into the adult story. RS
KAMEN, GLORIA 
Hidden Music: The Life ofFanny Mendelssohn; written and illus.
by Gloria Kamen. 
Atheneum, 1996 
82p
ISBN 0-689-31714-X 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Writing to Fanny when she was sixteen, her father cautioned her of a future that
would be different from that of her famous brother Felix: "Music will perhaps
become his profession, whilst for you it can and must only be an ornament."
Kamen's feminist theme can be clearly heard throughout this biography, but she
wisely does not lean on it too heavily and avoids turning her early-nineteenth-
century subject into a twentieth-century heroine. It is true that Fanny Mendelssohn
wanted a larger stage for her compositions than the family home and relished the
single chance she had to conduct an orchestra (again, in her own home). But she
did not have the ambitions of a Clara Schumann, who played hundreds of public
performances, and Fanny's commitment to her brother's career seems total, even
after he presented her compositions as his own. While Kamen limits her discus-
sion of Fanny's music to stating that it was "romantic," her portrayal of Fanny's
family and society is fuller, and she does not shrink from some of the darker as-
pects, such as Fanny and Felix's father's decision to change the family's name and
religion in order to avoid anti-Semitism. An epilogue sums up some more recent
women composers and a musical glossary, index, and bibliography are included;
given the renewed interest in recording Fanny Mendelssohn's compositions, a dis-
cography would have been welcome. RS
KRUPP, ROBIN RECTOR 
Let's Go Traveling in Mexico; written and illus. by Robin
Rector Krupp. 
Morrow, 1996 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12368-6 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12367-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
NR 
Gr. 2-4
In this old-school travelogue, readers are taken on a frantic tour of Mexico, guided
by the Aztec divinity Quetzalc6atl: "My name slithers along your tongue. Let me
guide you through my land. We'll celebrate each season as we travel through a
year. Let's go to Mexico!" The plumed serpent and the book careen from coast to
coast and north to south with no discernible order, but many famous monuments,
moments in history, and festivals are visited; there's even a stop for souvenirs. The
mixed-media and collage art is busy as well: the coloring is loud, and double-
spread paintings have to compete for attention with inset details, maps, and speech
balloons ("Wow! It's the plumed serpent, Quetzalc6atl"). Relentless and relent-
lessly cheery (the only problems mentioned are bumpy mountain roads and the
fact that Mexican kids have to do homework too), the book is packed with tidbits
and fun facts that get lost in the rush. Pass the Dramamine. RS
MAY 1996 
* 
305
LESTER,JIM 
Fallout. Delacorte, 1996 
212p
ISBN 0-385-32168-6 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 6-9
Ever since Dickie Francis died in Vietnam sixteen years ago, his three war buddies
have been keeping an eye on his son Kenny, who, now entering his junior year in
high school, has a belligerent attitude and has been involved in some minor scrapes.
At the advice of his "uncles," Mom packs Kenny off to Bedford Academy, a prep
school where, according to family lore, Dickie had been a star athlete and all-
around big man on campus. Kenny is off to a bad start when he inadvertently
becomes responsible for the star football player falling out a window, but still he is
determined to make the best of his stay at Bedford. When a tornado devastates the
town, Kenny gets his chance to be a hero like his father, but he flinches when
looters beat up his best friend, the dweeby Mickey Holland, and Kenny is too
scared to come to Mickey's aid. It will come as no surprise to the reader to learn
(after all sorts of emotional baggage have been conveniently unloaded by the "uncles"
in the final chapters) that Dickie was no hero; in fact, Dickie had killed himself,
unable to take the pressures of battle or the teasing of his buddies. Lester fashions
a thoroughly unconvincing voice for narrator Kenny. Overuse of teeny-bopper
constructions-"heart attack city," "prep school city," "pukesville," "nutsville"-
and vapid phrases such as "It was a pretty cool scene," and "Fun is the name of
Uncle John's game" will have the audience wondering if anyone ever talks like this.
Kenny's sophomoric tone even trivializes his father's tragedy: "I mean, I felt sorry
for my real dad. Killing himself and everything." 
Kids looking for tales on the
legacy of the Vietnam War might consider Katherine Paterson's Park's Quest (BCCB
4/88) instead. EB
LIVINGSTON, MYRA COHN 
Festivals; illus. by Leonard Everett Fisher. 
Holiday
House, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1217-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
This companion piece to Celebrations (BCCB 4/85) takes its audience around the
calendar once again, this time celebrating holidays from different countries and
religious traditions. Livingston offers a medley of poetic forms, rhyme patterns,
and metric variations ranging from the graceful haiku of "Cherry Blossom Festi-
val" to the rhymed dialogue of "Las Posadas (The Inns)" which, Livingston sug-
gests, can be presented as a play. Much of the subject matter here will not be as
familiar as that in the previous title, and listeners are likelier to learn about the
festivities than to join empathetically in the celebration. The poetry isn't among
Livingston's most memorable, and an aura of pedagogy hovers around some en-
tries ("Each night/ we break/ our daily fast,/ but Id-Ul-Fitr/ comes at last"), but
even these lessons-in-verse are painless and pleasant. Fisher's bold-hued and rock-
solid images, which are ideal for classroom viewing, provide visual continuity with
the earlier collaboration. EB
LUGER, HARRIETT 
Bye, Bye, Bali Kai. Browndeer/Harcourt, 1996 
[192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200862-4 
$11.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200863-2 
$5.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Not only can Suzie not come up with her twenty-dollar share in the Halloween
costume she and best friend Meredith are supposed to be putting together, she
can't tell Meredith why. Suzie's father is out of work, her mother has only just
306 
* THE BULLETIN
started a job, the family is due to be evicted from the Bali Kai apartments, and
"Suzie had to lie about why their phone was cut off, why she couldn't go places
with her friends, why she couldn't buy clothes and treats like everybody else."
Suzie, who is in fifth grade, fights with her older sister and with her parents, but
sudden affection flares as quickly as do tempers. The shifting alliances of friend-
ship (Meredith dumps Suzie for another student who has basically bought her way
into Meredith's affection) are just as realistically handled ("Twice she caught
Meredith looking at her, but they both slid their eyes away. She's probably wonder-
ing why I'm so dirty'). Aside from an out-of-the-blue happy ending, this is a spare,
often funny, and unsentimental picture of a family's slide into homelessness. RS
LYON, GEORGE ELA 
A Day at Damp Camp; illus. by Peter Catalanotto. 
Jackson/
Orchard, 1996 26p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08854-5 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09504-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
And a busy day it is, here chronicled in computeresque "windows" and what Bruce
M4cMillan called, in his volumes of similar rhymes (Play Day, BCCB 2/92, One
Sun, 5/90), terse verse. The campers apparently start with a nature walk ("Frog
log. Bug tug. Snake shake"), then proceed to arts and crafts ("Seed bead. Craft
taft. Float boat"), then go for a swim, a long hike, and a cookout followed by an
overnight campout. The depiction of energetic girls clad in traditional shorts and
t-shirts performing traditional summer-camp activities is familiar and engaging
(the before-and-after endpapers, with the front showing Megan's togs neatly laid
out and labeled and the back showing them stained, worn, and rubbing hems with
a few neighbors' belongings, are amusingly accurate), and the unusual format-
each spread's three scenes appear as a trio of concentric layered rectangles-is in-
triguing. The text, however, is sometimes forced and often confusing, with the
rhyme taking precedence over clarity: What does "bug tug" actually mean, since
no pulling by or of bugs is evident? The interjection of two differently formatted
rhymes ("Dive in. Live skin") seems an inexplicable pattern change rather than an
interesting variant. Time is also mysterious: if this book starts in the morning,
why is the girl lying on the "hot cot" dressed, and what happened to breakfast and
lunchtime? Or is it onlypart of a day at damp camp? Nonetheless, Catalanotto's
sturdy but inventive watercolors and the book's understanding of outdoor-life de-
lights will make this book appealing to little campers despite its patches of rocky
ground. DS
MCCAFFREY, ANNE 
Black Horses for the King. 
Harcourt, 1996 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-15-227322-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Galwyn resents his tyrannical uncle and employer and relishes his assignment to
assist Lord Artos (better known to us as King Arthur) in obtaining war horses and
bringing them to Britain. Once in Britain, he casts his lot with Artos, who retains
him to translate the local dialects and to look after the horses. Galwyn finds that
his talent with horses earns him friends and enemies; he also joins with old Canyd,
esteemed horseman, in developing an effective and necessary horseshoe, learning
to shape and shoe, and convincing leaders and allies of the shoes' benefit. Devel-
oped from a previously published short story, this is an unusual slant both on
Arthurian legend/history and on military strategy. McCaffrey keeps to the histori-
MAY 1996 
* 307
cal Arthur and depicts only this early pre-marriage period but ladles the charisma
on-this is clearly a leader who is going places, whether on horseback or not. The
military importance of the horses and the significance of the small strategic advan-
tage inherent in the use of horseshoes is well-depicted without becoming dryly
factual; these horses whinny and prance and thunder across the field of battle as
well as playing a crucial part in defense and conquest. Galwyn himself is a familiar
kind of narrator, the young person whose gifts and inherent merit raise him above
others and bring him close to the great; his hero-worship and his modesty stale a
bit but his enthusiasm will be shared by the readers. Arthur fans, historical fiction-
ites, and military buffs can all find satisfying material here, and they'll all think
more seriously on the old adage that begins "For want of a nail, the shoe was
lost. .... " DS
MACDONALD, AMY 
The Spider Who Created the World; illus. by G. Brian
Karas. 
Kroupa/Orchard, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08855-3 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09505-3 
$15.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
A lone spider named Nobb searches for someplace to set her egg; the Air is willing
but insufficient, and the Moon, Sun, and Cloud all shoo Nobb away. The clever
spider then catches the three unhelpful elements in her web and takes a piece of
each of them before letting them go. With these pieces Nobb creates the Earth
and the Water, and her newly laid egg hatches out to produce all the creatures that
live there. Original pourquoi tales are hard to pull off, but this is an elegant and
well-structured one that spins its story thread with a gentle formality, careful pro-
gression, and pleasing rhythm. Karas' illustrations are a departure from his usual
style: acrylic and gouache paintings show a few thickly bordered stylized figures
on each page against a coolly toned, pigment-washed background, which some-
times contains its own subtle pattern and sometimes is crisscrossed by delicate
white strands of cobweb; the whole spread erupts into color and action when Nobb's
egg finally hatches. There's a dreamy overlay to the enterprise that would make
this an suitable bedtime story-perhaps one particularly welcome where a young
sleepyhead needs to be reconciled to a resident arachnid. DS
MAESTRO, BETSY 
The Voice ofthe People: American Democracy in Action; illus. by
Giulio Maestro. 
Lothrop, 1996 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10679-X 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10678-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Well-timed to find its way into schools and libraries before November 5th, this is
a steady illustrated overview of the election process, with a particularly close eye on
the race for president. As with their previous volumes, such as A More Perfect
Union (BCCB 10/87) and The Discovery oftheAmericas (4/91), the Maestros here
don't provide any more information than does a well-organized encyclopedia ar-
ticle; it's the large format and even tone that win the ticket. Some of the material
is too cursorily treated, such as the difference between a direct democracy and a
representative one and the limitations the Bill of Rights places on majority rule
(plus there's some confusion between majority and plurality), but overall this is a
smooth synthesis. Watercolor-and-colored-pencil illustrations are airy and ap-
pealing on the whole, yet manage to make all of our various elected officials-
from George Washington to Bill Clinton-look distinctly unattractive. Appended
308 
* THE BULLETIN
material includes a summary of the Constitution and its Amendments, a list of
presidents, and other tidy facts including an explanation of that pesky old Elec-
toral College. RS
MAIZLISH, LISA 
The Ring; illus. with photographs by Lisa Maizlish. 
Greenwillow,
1996 
[26p]
ISBN 0-688-14217-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-6 yrs
In this wordless picture book, a series of photographs depicts a boy's adventure on
a cold day in the park. Into his dismal black-and-white world comes a bright
yellow ring; through the ring, he can see color, and when he puts it on, his world
turns to bright-hued summer and he gains the ability to fly. Which he does,
soaring through the skies of Manhattan, whizzing past a startled young visitor to a
skyscraper's observation deck, hurtling past the face of the Statue of Liberty, and
finally returning to the park to leave the ring for another child in need of a literal
pick-me-up. The fantasy photography is more convincing here than in Nina Crews'
I'll Catch the Moon, reviewed above: the images blend the impossible and the
possible effectively, and the concepts (except in one double spread, where an at-
tempt to show the boy's airborne progression may result in youngsters' thinking
he's got company) will be clear to young viewers. The plot is actually rather slight-
kid flies, kid touches down-but the execution of the idea and the verisimilitude
of the images lift this off the ground. DS
MARRIN, 
ALBERT 
Plains Warrior: 
Chief Quanah Parker and the
Comanches. Atheneum, 1996 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-80081-9 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Marrin has roamed the Old West before, literarily speaking (Cowboys, Indians, and
Gunfighters, BCCB 9/93); here he focuses on the Comanche and their losing nine-
teenth-century battle for their traditional life and lands on the Great Plains. The
book starts with a prologue about the Comanche kidnapping of Cynthia Ann
Parker, Quanah's mother; it then describes Comanche history and culture, the
increasing hostilities between Indians and Europeans, and Quanah Parker's lead-
ership during the bitterest last years of the struggle. While noting that "much of
the history of the American West is, and must forever remain, one-sided," the
author makes an impressive attempt to be even-handed about the behavior and
attitudes of both sides, clearly depicting cultural differences and political wranglings
and painting neither side as totally virtuous. His inclusion of detail and his reli-
ance on first-hand sources helps bring the period to life, and his careful analyses
keep the images from becoming Western-movie simplistic. Kids may come for the
adventure, but they'll leave with a deeper understanding ofwhat it all meant. Black-
and-white photographs appear throughout; endnotes, a reading list, and an index
are appended. DS
MARTIN, TRUDE 
Obee &Mungedeech. 
Simon, 1996 
[112p]
ISBN 0-689-80644-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
A cute and quirky prologue introduces Obee and Mungedeech, babies who meet-
and talk-in the hospital nursery. It turns out all babies can talk but soon learn
MAY 1996 
* 309
that revealing this talent to their parents can provoke alarm, so, a la the twins in
Mary Poppins, they forget. The main story begins "4,015 sunsets later" (we did the
math-about eleven years) when Obee, renamed Kate by her parents (the babies
called them "landlords"), is trying to survive the trials of school and family, neither
of which seem to be going too well. A new boy, Edgar, takes an interest in her, and
guess who he turns out to be? There isn't really enough connection between the
prologue and the realistic story to justify the former's existence: Kate doesn't re-
member the nursery until it comes back in a dream at the end of the book, which
is when her previous friendship with Edgar is also revealed. The story, too, is
disjointed, uninvolving, and vague, particularly in long stretches of unattributed
dialogue where it's easy to lose track of who is speaking. In her first novel Martin
does demonstrate a fresh, aphoristic style and a pot of interesting ideas about Edu-
cation and Life, but she doesn't quite cohere them into a convincing fiction. RS
MEYER, CAROLYN 
Gideon's People. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1996 
[32 0p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200303-7 
$12.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200304-5 
$6.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
It's 1911, and things couldn't be going better for Isaac Litsky; this is the first time
his father, Peddlar Jakob, has allowed him to come along on his route through
Amish territory, and the trip is a good one until their wagon overturns at the
Stolzfus' gate and Isaac is injured. Jakob must return home to his pregnant wife,
and he leaves Isaac temporarily in the Amish family's care; here, Isaac observes that
a deep animosity between Datt and Gideon (father and son) seethes beneath the
apparent calm and order of the devout household. When it's time for Isaac to
return home, he and his orthodox Jewish family prove sympathetic to Gideon's
desire to join his uncle's less strict household, and they provide him the moral
support and financial means to make his getaway. The Stolzfus family dynamics
and the cautious friendship that develops between the two adolescent boys are
credibly drawn. However, contrasts between the families' religious practices are
laid on thick, and several dialogues concerning ritual taboos seem to have been
included to instruct the reader rather than to develop the plot. A series of letters
exchanged among Isaac, Gideon, and Gideon's sister Annie provides an awkward
and strained wrap-up, but it reassures the audience that Gideon has made the right
move and has not burned his last bridge to his family. EB
MORPURGO, MICHAEL 
The Ghost ofGrania O'Malley. Viking, 1996 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-670-86861-2 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Jessie loves her life on the small Irish island of Clare, but she resents the way other
people treat her as different because of her "lousy palsy," which makes it difficult
for her to keep up physically. She finds allies in her American cousin Jack, over in
Ireland for the summer, and in the ghost of pirate Grania O'Malley (biographized
in Emily Arnold McCully's The Pirate Queen, BCCB 10/95), who headquartered
for a time on the island. Soon the trio faces not only Jessie's private problems but
the threat of ecological devastation as the Big Hill, the island's spiritual heart and
the home of Grania's castle, is slated for destruction in order to hunt for gold
within. There are some appealing ideas here and a romantic setting, and Jessie's
growing camaraderie with Jack is warmly depicted. Unfortunately, between Jack,
his family problems, Jessie, her physical and social difficulties, Jessie's parents fighting
310 
* 
THE BULLETIN
over the fate of the Big Hill, and Grania O'Malley, the book's many plot elements
cause it to sprawl; more unfortunately, the great pirate queen is disappointingly
mundane, stripped of most of her glamorous danger despite her flashy appearance.
Still, fans of Dunlop's Finn's Island (BCCB 8/92) and other readers who enjoy a
good island drama will appreciate Jessie's fight for her home. DS
MURPHY, STUARTJ. 
The Best Bug Parade; illus. by Holly Keller.
1996 
[33p] 
(MathStart)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025872-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025871-3 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-446700-7 
$4.95
Reviewed from galleys
MURPHY, STUART J. 
Give Me Half.; illus. by G. Brian Karas.
1996 
[34p] 
(MathStart)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025874-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025873-X 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-446701-5 
$4.95
Reviewed from galleys
MURPHY, STUART J. 
Ready, Set, Hop!; illus. by Jon Buller.
1996 
[33p] 
(MathStart)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025878-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025877-2 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-446702-3 
$4.95
Reviewed from galleys
HarperCollins,
Ad 
Gr. K-2
HarperCollins,
Ad 
Gr. K-2
HarperCollins,
M 
Gr. K-2
Like the Hello Math Reader series (see review under Holtzman, BCCB 2/96),
MathStart attempts to demonstrate spatial and arithmetical concepts to a very
young audience. Each of the three levels features a read-alone text, well-matched
to the age at which the math concept is likely to be introduced, along with sug-
gested activities and a three-entry list for further picture-book reading. The Best
Bug Parade tackles size comparisons, with a red ladybug parade marshall as a con-
stant referent in ever-changing trios. The critter that announces "I am the shortest
bug of this sort" is taller, albeit less lengthy, than the other bugs on the page, and
he is only one in a pair of the same sort of bug, meriting a comparative rather than
a superlative. Give Me Half, in which a sibling squabble over pizza equity culmi-
nates in a food fight, loses mathematical credibility with its ending "We'd better
each clean half/ There's so much work to do./ We'll be done in half the time ... /
If Buddy [the dog] helps us too." In Ready, Set, Hop!, two frogs' preliminary
debate on their relative size and predicted hop length turn out to have no bearing
whatsoever on the outcome of their hopping contest. When all the addition and
subtraction smoke has cleared, readers are left to sort out a confusing result, which
then reverts to a tie, and an even more confusing joke. Wasn't two plus two easier
before math was supposed to be fun? EB
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Smiff Blue: Ace Crime Detective: The Case ofthe Missing
Ruby and Other Stories; illus. by David J. A. Sims. 
Scholastic, 1996 
74 p
ISBN 0-590-67665-2 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 2-4
Smiffy Blue and his sidekick/straight man Jeremy Joe (and Smiffy Blue's dog named
Dog) have a busy time of it in this early chapter book, solving four mysteries in
MAY 1996 
* 311
seventy-four pages. These aren't mysteries in any conventional sense: each time,
Smiffy makes dumb conclusions from dumb clues, but he always gets his man in
the end. In the title story, for example, Smiffy deduces from an empty notebook
and an old newspaper that the missing ruby was stolen by a stranger using a gold-
painted lobster riding a poodle; the culprit was actually the museum guard Girard
the Guard using none of the above, but Smiffy nabs him nonetheless. It's as
fatuous as it sounds, and the lack of logic in the stories makes them both confusing
and pointless, not exactly the qualities you're looking for in a book for newly
independent readers. Even while they don't add up to anything, some of the jokes
in and of themselves are funny in an absurd way (when Jeremy Joe wonders how
they put the holes in donuts, Smiffy Blue loftily replies that "they do not put the
holes in donuts. They wrap the donuts around the holes") and yuck-yuck charac-
ter names (Nick Nasty, Doc Terdoom) indicate that the book knows just how silly
it's being. Blue-accented ink cartoons, as broad as the text, depict an African-
American cast. RS
NESS, CAROLINE, ad. 
The Ocean ofStory: Fairy Tales from India; illus. byJacqueline
Mair. 
Lothrop, 1996 
[123p]
ISBN 0-688-13584-6 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Although this doesn't have the easy informality of oral tradition captured by Madhur
Jaffrey in Seasons ofSplendour (BCCB 1/86), it's a vivid collection with variety of
tone and pace. Some tales will seem familiar: "The Magic Lamp," for instance, is
a variant of Aladdin; "Three Fussy Men," of "The Princess and the Pea"; and "A
Likely Story," of the contest motif in which each of two storytellers tries to trick
the other into doubting a tall tale. Other stories introduce patterns unusual in
western folklore, or they end, as does "The Man Who Went to Seek his Fate," on
a somber note more common to fables than to fairy tales. Long selections are often
separated by brief parables, and Neil Philip, who chose the stories that have been
retold by Ness, is meticulous about providing source and background notes. Mair's
densely patterned, full-page illustrations depend on an intense contrast of hues to
shape the compositions; while some of the graphic motifs draw on India's tradi-
tional art, the overall effect is distinctively modern. In addition to enriching a
folklore collection generally, the book will have special appeal in communities
with a large Indian population. BH
NYE, NAOMI SHIHAB, comp. 
I Feel a Little Jumpy Around You: A Book of Her
Poems & His Poems Collected in Pairs; comp. by Naomi Shihab Nye and Paul B.
Janeczko. 
Simon, 1996 
[25 6p]
ISBN 0-689-80518-7 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Nye and Janeczko have each independently produced worthy poetry anthologies
(This Same Sky, 12/92, Wherever Home Begins, 11/95); here they join forces for a
collection with a twist. The poems come in pairs, the male-authored entry always
leading and the female-authored one always getting the last word. The coupled
poems sometimes share a subject, sometimes a setting, sometimes a theme or an
image (Agha Shahid Ali's "Snowman" and Robin Boody Galguera's "Alloy" both
address questions of culture, E. Ethelbert Miller's "Dressed Up" and Naomi Stroud
Simmons' "With Reservation" offer quirky takes on fancy dress) that directs read-
312 
* THE BULLETIN
ers to a specific way into each poem. The poems themselves, almost all contempo-
rary free verse and from poets ranging from famous (Rita Dove, W. S. Merwin) to
less known, are of a high standard. Though the gender counterpoint really plays
little part in the juxtaposition, the pairings are piquant and provide a manageable
way to start talking about a very large collection of poetry. An engaging marginal
dialogue, taken from Nye's and Janeczko's collaborative fax correspondence, ap-
pears alongside the appendix and permits a revealing peek behind the scenes. Highly
readable notes from contributors are included, as is an index of poems and a gen-
der-segregated index of poets. DS
OSTROW, VIIAN 
My Brother is from Outer Space (The Book of Proof); illus. by
Eric Brace. 
Whitman, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-5325-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Young Alex and his family have a picture-book-perfect life until younger brother
William is born. It's not the real William who's the problem, exactly, he's just a
normal human baby, but during a noisy storm aliens kidnap William and substi-
tute one of their own in the nursery. At least, this is Alex's fervent conviction, one
that will ring true to lots of kids, although Mom and Dad laugh uproariously at
the idea. Stung, Alex begins "The Book of Proof," documenting Weird William's
habits: talking non-stop (frequently on the phone, perhaps to his home planet of
Dinkville), excelling in school (even though he cuts up and exhausts his teachers
into early retirement), sleeping like an alien (falling out of bed and onto the floor),
and playing sports (his basketball game suggests supernatural powers). Alex puts
aside this incriminating document until the world is ready to hear and believe;
finally, just when he's leaving for college, William discovers it and confesses that-
you guessed it-he always thought Alex was the alien. This is awfully neat, overly
cute, and rather patronizingly unbelievable--even young readers will see through
a college-age kid who believes his little brother is an alien. Brace's mixed-media
illustrations, with their PoMo cartoon edginess, contrast entertainingly with the
scrawled text on blue-lined notebook paper and add a kid-appealing dimension of
hipness to an otherwise predictable tale. SSV
PAUL, ANN WHITFORD 
The Seasons Sewn: A Year in Patchwork; illus. by Michael
McCurdy. 
Browndeer/Harcourt, 1996 
40p
ISBN 0-15-276918-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Organized by the four seasons and, within each season, six typical activities of early
American pioneers, these twenty-four traditional quilt patterns each receive a page
with descriptive text, design closeups, and an illustration depicting the activity
represented. Beginning with Spring, for instance, the pattern "Album" describes
prenuptial gatherings during which a young woman's friends make a quilt with
blocks featuring their names to remind her, wherever she goes, of her childhood
community. "Crossed Canoes" describes the various Native American canoes that
criss-crossed lakes, rivers, and ocean shorelines, often in front of white men's ships.
After the first several patterns, which seem firmly rooted in fact, the descriptions
slip into conjecture: "Maybe a young girl worked this pattern to thank the First
Lady for the wonderful time she had one Easter Monday" ("Dolly Madison Star");
"Perhaps someone, grateful to the jack-in-the-pulpit plant for curing her children,
sewed this patchwork" ("Jack-in-the-Pulpit"); "It's possible a courageous African
American woman sewed this patchwork, remembering the North Star and her
MAY 1996 
* 
313
escape to freedom" ("Rising Star"). Some of the origins seem natural, others
stretched to fit the framework of the book. What's consistently excellent are the
meticulous scratchboard illustrations, with their fine lines, plain earth tones, and
homespun style. Raymond Bial's With Needle and Thread (BCCB 2/96) has more
historical continuity for older readers, but this is nevertheless a handsome book for
browsing and absorbing useful details. The author's introduction and afterword
are helpful; the selective bibliography comprises adult books about quilting and/or
frontier life. BH
PENNER, LUCILLE RECHT 
Monster Bugs; illus. by Pamela Johnson. 
Random
House, 1996 
4 8p 
(Step into Reading)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-96974-8 
$9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-86974-3 
$3.99 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Exclamation points abound in this true science thriller for the beginning-to-read
set: "In Africa some horseflies even suck the blood of crocodiles!" Enough said-
while the information here is accurate enough, it's the grossout appeal of insects
doing dastardly and disgusting things that provides this book with its raison d'etre.
New readers will learn about the bombardier beetle (which "fires boiling-hot gas
from its rear end"), the black widow spider ("Sometimes the female spider kills
and eats her mate!"), and the assassin bug ("Suddenly it plunges its sharp beak into
the caterpillar's furry body. Then it squirts in poison. The caterpillar's insides
turn to mush"), among others. The hook is gruesome but undeniable. Water-
color illustrations are well-drawn and often dramatic, and, compared to the text,
remarkably restrained. RS
ROSENBERG, Liz 
Heart & Soul. Harcourt, 1996 
[224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200942-6 
$11.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-201270-2 
$5.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
"I had just dropped out of school in the middle of my senior year in Philadelphia
and came back to Richmond jumpy and underweight, with what I called a bad
cold, and a face in the mirror that looked like an advertisement on poor mental
health," says Willie Steinberg. Her poor mental health seems to come from inner
conflicts about her gifts as a composer and cellist and about her father, whose job
forces-or allows-him to travel so extensively that he is never home, leaving
parents divorced in all but law and acknowledgment. Her aimless existence gets a
complication when Katherine, an acquaintance from music school, also a
Richmondite, asks for Willie's help with a problem: Malachi Gelb, the music-
school student in love with Katherine, is attending her coming-out party, and
Katherine needs Willie to come as his date so that she, Katherine, is not escorted
by a Jew. Despite her resentment, Willie does attend Katherine's party with Malachi,
which results in an evening of disaster and drunkenness but also, ultimately, a
certain understanding and a new strength. Rosenberg writes with lyricism and
delicacy, and Willie's fog of gloom and fear is convincingly depicted. The fog
turns to murk, however, when it comes to emotional undercurrents and interper-
sonal dynamics: Willie's changing relationship with eccentric Malachi is confus-
ing and the bond between them unconvincing, and it's never clear what exactly
her creative blockage has to do with her father or even how talented she was in the
first place. Readers may be unsure as to just how Willie gets to the hope she
314 
* 
THE BULLETIN
achieves, but the book offers a compelling portrayal of depression's stultifying ef-
fects and a young woman's gradual release from its grip. DS
Ross, STEWART 
Fact or Fiction: Witches; illus. by McRae Books and with
photographs. 
Copper Beech, 1996 
48p 
(Fact or Fiction)
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-0452-5 
$16.90
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7613-0467-3 
$ 6.95 
M 
Gr. 4-7
Witches' scattered format is a melange of history, trivia, and pop culture: on each
double-page spread images and small blocks of text tenuously connected by a gen-
eral theme such as "Popes and Pagans" or "Shamans and Spirits" stand out against
a background that simulates worn parchment. The attempt to place witchcraft
within a historical context largely fails since history is so broadly generalized: "As
Christianity was spreading through Europe, missionaries tried not to upset people
of other beliefs." While anecdotes and trivia featured on a page may fall under the
same broad topic, often they aren't sufficiently well-related to one another to pro-
vide a sense of continuity. Vague or unsupported statements mar the text, as in
the bald assertion that The Witches' Hammer was "one of the worst books ever
written" or that "In some ways, Eve was the first witch, tempting Adam to take a
bite from the apple." 
Some anecdotes are so sparsely detailed that they provide
neither satisfying information nor entertainment. "Part of an ancient tradition of
magic, in 1909 three psychics helped the Indian police track down the murderer of
a French official," Ross tells us in a manner so parsimonious as to make the in-
triguing dull. Pictures include stills from movies and TV shows, original illustra-
tions featuring bland figures in poorly realized settings, and a few paintings, the
provenance of which are left a mystery. A glossary and timeline at the back of the
book are more coherent and useful than the main body; an index provides quick
access to terms scattered through the text. Reluctant readers with a taste for the
morbid or those with a new or superficial interest in the subject may find the book
intriguing; others are more likely to deem it frustrating. LM
SCHROEDER, ALAN 
Minty: A Story of Young Harriet Tubman; illus. by Jerry
Pinkney. 
Dial, 1996 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1889-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1888-8 
$16.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Young Araminta, or "Minty," who will later in life be known as Harriet Tubman,
proves too clumsy and defiant to be a house slave and is sent by Mistress Brodas to
work in the fields. Despite the counsel of parents and fellow field hands to avoid
confrontation with owners and overseers ("Pat the lion, Minty. It ain't gonna kill
you"), the child purposely frees the muskrats from the traps she has been ordered
to empty and is cruelly whipped and threatened to be sold "downriver." Certain
that his headstrong daughter will one day attempt to run away, Minty's father
begins to instruct her in outdoor survival and navigation, skills the audience knows
(or learns in the appended Author's Note) will serve her later as conductor on the
Underground Railroad. Schroeder introduces his account with the explanation
that "some scenes have been invented for narrative purposes," but he fails to define
specifically the boundary between fact and imagination in each fictionalized epi-
sode. Nor does he provide source notes for adult readers using this material with
young children. Still, if the text takes literary liberties with Tubman's life story,
Pinkney's signature watercolors offer an accurately and lavishly detailed portrayal
MAY 1996 
* 315
of Maryland plantation life. If not precisely Tubman's tale, this is a well-told'and
plausible look at the often brutal experiences of a child field slave. EB
SNEVE, VIRGINIA DRIVING HAWK 
The Cherokees; written and illus. by Virginia
Driving Hawk Sneve. 
Holiday House, 1996 
32p 
(First Americans)
ISBN 0-8234-1214-8 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Like other books in this series, which has covered the Sioux, Navajos, Seminoles,
Nez Perce, Iroquois, and Hopis, this brief description of the Cherokee nation
begins with a creation myth and includes some traditions, history, and contempo-
rary socio-cultural information. 
Although the facts are sometimes tantalizingly
compressed (what is "the black drink" that adults sipped during the Green Corn
Ceremony to "make them vomit to get rid of the bad things inside the body"?), the
clean format and consistent assessment of whites' impact on Indian life make this
a first-class introduction for students researching reports or browsing on their own
(an index and source notes assist further). Himler's illustrations dignify the sub-
ject with well-composed, knowledgeable paintings that vary the page design, sup-
ply maps where needed, capture something of the majestic woodland setting from
which the Cherokee were driven, and portray a few of the powerful leaders who
helped them survive physically and spiritually-including John Ross, Sequoya,
Tsali, and, more recently, the first woman to lead all of the Western Cherokees,
Wilma Mankiller. BH
SPINELLI, JERRY 
Crash. Knopf, 1996 
162p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-97957-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-87957-9 
$16.00 
R Gr. 5-7
Crash is a seventh-grade football hero, macho to the bone, who revels in his
buddyhood with his neighbor Mike, the companionship of his beloved grandfa-
ther, and the fresh possibilities suggested by a pretty new girl in his class. He also
enjoys teaming up with Mike to torment Penn Webb, the weird (vegetarian, Quaker,
and not well-off) kid on the block, whose parents offer their son the kind of time
and attention that Crash desires from his own parents. When Crash's grandfather
suffers a stroke, Crash finds the world and the way he looks at it changing, and he
discovers that it's necessary to reexamine his loyalties. Spinelli manages to make
Crash both a credible junior-high jock-jerk with bullying tendencies (his attempts
at coercing the girl he likes into a dance are particularly chilling) and a sympathetic
narrator, and the book strongly implies that the groundwork for many of Crash's
unpleasant tendencies was laid by his busy and sometimes offhand family. The
story isn't particularly surprising or subtle (the last chapter, summing up changes
over an intervening year, makes some particularly big leaps), but the milieu is
believable and the writing lively (Crash's younger sister, Abby, is an energetic fig-
ure). Crash's character has a raw edge that often doesn't get acknowledged in pre-
YA fiction; kids not ready for Chris Lynch but looking for that kind of grit will
appreciate Crash's story. DS
STEVENS, JANET, ad. 
Old Bag of Bones: A Coyote Tale; ad. and illus. by Janet
Stevens. 
Holiday House, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1215-6 
$15.95 
R 
5-7yrs
An extravagantly scruffy Coyote lies down to die, complaining about old age all
the way through Buzzard's countdown: "'I need food, but I can't see it, and if I
316 
* THE BULLETIN
can't see it, I can't catch it. Even if I did catch it, I couldn't chew it.' . . . 'Ten,
nine, eight, seven, six, five ... You're almost dead,' screeched Buzzard." But then
Coyote cooks up one of his infamous plans: to borrow strength, youth, and power
from Buffalo. Of course, once he's strong and young again he defies Buffalo's
conditions for helping him and tries to assume the power to change other oldsters
(Rabbit, Lizard, Kangaroo Rat), which proves his downfall. Literally. But Coyote
doesn't give up. Ever. Stevens' deep blue skies, purple mountains, and dusty
green flora form textured landscapes against which the heavily furred brown buf-
falo stands out in large scale. One of the funniest touches, in fact, is the scraggly
Coyote tail attached so incongruously to the buffalo that is Coyote's transformed
self. (And don't miss the back cover, which features a conclusive detail.) There's
lots of action in the art, which balances nicely between smudgy backgrounds and
loose-lined but accurately drafted animals. A note on the double-spread title page
cites the printed source for this Shoshoni tale, freely adapted into a picture book
that's relaxed in tone but fast in pace-a satisfying companion to Stevens' Coyote
Steals the Blanket (BCCB 5/93). BH
STURGES, PHILEMON 
What's That Sound, Woolly Bear?; illus. by Joan Paley. 
Little,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-316-82021-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Woolly Bear, which listeners will learn is the term for a tiger-moth caterpillar,
"huffle-shuffles along" looking for a place to sleep, while all around her other bugs
make their own kind of racket: "Some bugs whine. Some bugs zoom round and
round your head." Woolly Bear continues along, oblivious to her neighbors, until
she find "a quiet place to spin her bed and dream"-a cocoon from which she
finally emerges as a tiger moth. Sturges fudges a bit on the sound theme, some-
times citing a bug's movement instead of its noise ("Some bugs chirp. Some bugs
skate"), and listeners may argue with his onomatopoetic choices, for while mos-
quitoes "mmmmmmm" and bees "buzz," grasshoppers are not known to "zik zik
zikkerrr." Big, stylized creatures of cut and painted paper flit across a mixed-media
background, while oversized lettering of the bug noises darts and winds among
them, resulting in a cramped collage. A concluding spread, possibly more enter-
taining than the main text, features thumbnail sketches of each bug's habits ("[June
bugs] feed at night, are attracted to light, and are loud and clumsy fliers. They
don't stop easily-they crash!"). Although this title won't offer The Very Hungry
Caterpillar much competition, it just may have its audience swatting, scratching,
and digging imaginary no-see-ums out of their ears. EB
SWEENEY, JOYCE 
Free Fall. Delacorte, 1996 
[240p]
ISBN 0-385-32211-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Lost while exploring an obscure cave in Ocala National Forest, brothers Neil and
David and two of their friends, Randy and Terry, seek escape not only from the
cave, but from the anger and guilt still festering from a tragic fire that killed Neil
and David's younger sister. Although the characters initially threaten to fall into
stereotyped patterns (Randy the hothead who rips sinks out of bathroom walls,
Terry the frightened peacemaker), Sweeney reveals each as a complex person strug-
gling to cope with problems that range from abusive parents to claustrophobia to
romantic crushes. Both dialogue and narration portray emotions and relation-
MAY 1996 
* 317
ships with sensitivity; Sweeney accurately captures the insulting and earthy banter
of teenage boys, then successfully switches gears as Neil reveals to the others his
secret passion for Baudelaire's poetry or Terry tells how his father hits him. A few
false notes jar the story, such as when Neil survives a sixty or seventy-foot fall to a
hard cave floor with, apparently, no more injury than one badly damaged leg.
Otherwise, the story drives along at a fast pace which seldom bogs down, not even
when characters grapple with the emotional difficulties that are intensified by-
but are not an intrinsic part of-the effort to escape the cave. Sweeney's descrip-
tions of the physical environment are sharp: "The walls all around at his eye level
seemed alive, stalactites dripping water, mica glittering in the limestone ledges.
The watery sounds were richer up here, more melodious." Her depictions of emo-
tion are just as effective; when Neil first realizes they are lost, Sweeney notes that
"his body felt like a stone falling through water." In the midst of exciting physical
action, Sweeney keeps the focus primarily on the characters' equally gripping emo-
tional struggles. Readers who enjoyed the adventure of Alden Carter's Between a
Rock and a Hard Place (BCCB 12/95) will appreciate this involving tale of guys
against the odds. LM
THOMAS, ROB 
Rats Saw God. Simon, 1996 
[22 4p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-689-80207-2 
$17.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-80777-5 
$3.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
An ambitious school counselor sets Steven York a task: if Steve can explain, in a
hundred-page writing assignment, what life experience made his grades plummet
from stellar to terrible beginning midway through his junior year, the counselor
will count the assignment as Steve's missing English credit and he will graduate
with his high-school class in the spring. It's a long but not complicated story,
involving first love gone wrong (Steve's passionate involvement with a young Dadaist
ends with the discovery of her infidelity with their English teacher) and family
stresses (Steve, distant from his demanding father and blaming him for his parents'
divorce, finally goes to live with his mother). Intercut with the writing assignment
about the past is Steve's narration of coming to grips with it in the present as he
finds a new romantic possibility, begins to understand his parents, and prepares to
enter into college and adulthood. The story tends to sprawl, with its emotional
impact marred by pacing problems, and Steve's doomed romance, though touch-
ing in its awkward sexuality and genuine affection, never quite rises above writerly
contrivance. What will appeal here are the tone and the atmosphere: wisecracking
Steven tells his story with an authentically adolescent shallow glibness, his camara-
derie with his self-consciously offbeat friends is both warm and fragile, and his
present-tense attraction to his overachieving classmate is engaging. This isn't up
there with the best YA-turning-a-man novels, such as Shoup's Wish You Were Here
(BCCB 11/94), but readers who enjoy the company of Chris Crutcher's or Julian
Thompson's smartass yet thoughtful teens will appreciate Steven's story. DS
URE, JEAN 
The Children Next Door. Scholastic, 1996 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-590-22293-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
A brief hint as to what the heroine's been reading ("'I'm reading a book,' she said,
eagerly, 'about a girl who was born in the reign of Queen Victoria'") acknowledges
318 
* THE BULLETIN
this book's debt to Philippa Pearce's Tom's Midnight Garden. Like Tom, Laura is
lonely in a new house; she likes the brash girl next door, Zilla, but is more in-
trigued by the children whom she thinks are Zilla's brother and sisters playing in
Zilla's garden. Meanwhile, a dying old woman, Zilla's grandmother, sleeps and
dreams of her childhood ... 
Ure's book hasn't the ambitious technical precision
of Pearce's time-fantasy, nor does it have the pathos: Laura lacks Tom's neediness
and sense of wonder, and the revelation that the children next door are actually
ghosts is clear to readers long before it becomes apparent to Laura. It's an easier
book than Pearce's, though, and Laura and Zilla are briskly contrasted against the
ghostly goings-on to make a story that will be accessible to those not ready for the
more complex entries in the English time-fantasy canon. RS
VAN LAAN, NANCY 
La Boda: A Mexican Wedding Celebration; illus. by Andrea
Arroyo. 
Little, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-89626-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 4-7 yrs
A versified dialogue between Abuela and her granddaughter Maria guides listeners
through the nuptial festivities for Alfonso and Luisa, a Mexican couple whose
Zapotec wedding is, as Van Laan notes in her introduction, "a mixture of ancient
customs and Catholic tradition." Abuela makes an observation-"And here come
los tios"; Maria repeats it- "The uncles, Abuela?"; and Abuela explains further-
"Yes, the uncles, Maria./ These three uncles announce la boda." This kind of
repartee, which is printed in two colors and italicized to highlight English transla-
tions of Spanish terms, may have instructional value, but the repetitive device
makes Maria sound like a slow-witted tourist ("Here come los mtisicos." "The who?").
Still, the topic is enticing, and the details-from the vows to the vittles-will hold
an audience's attention. Watercolor and ink pictures, with curvy, crayon-colored
figures celebrating amid their slightly tipsy surroundings, balance the solemnity
and jubilance of the occasion. A glossary of Spanish words and pronunciations is
included. EB
WALLNER, ALEXANDRA 
The FirstAir Voyage in the United States: The Story ofJean-
Pierre Blanchard; written and illus. by Alexandra Wallner. 
Holiday House,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1224-5 
$15.95 
R 5-8 yrs
The prosaic title belies an engaging account of the eighteenth-century French
aerialist's passion for ballooning and, particularly, his triumphant flight from
Woodbury, New Jersey to Philadelphia. Blanchard speaks candidly about his child-
hood mania for flight, his early failures at ballooning, and his mild jealousy of
rivals' accomplishments. After a string of successes in Germany and a flight across
the English Channel (for which he is probably most noted), "Americans' free spirit"
lures him in 1793 to attempt a flight in the young country. After conducting
several scientific experiments aloft and nearly losing his mascot dog over the side of
the basket, Blanchard lands safely, only to be mistaken for the devil by a nearby
farmer. Primary students generally delight in foreign words, and they'll get a kick
out of the dialogue-bubble comments in French and German, translated at the
end of the book. Wallner's solid, naive figures move through their flat surround-
ings with dignity and grace, but the abundance of dark frock coats against tan
backgrounds becomes a bit monotonous. Although this story can go solo, see how
it flies with Provensen's The Glorious Flight (BCCB 1/83). EB
MAY 1996 
* 319
WALTER, MILDRED PITTS 
Second Daughter: The Story ofa Slave Girl. Scholastic,
1996 
214p
ISBN 0-590-48282-3 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Elizabeth, or Bett, Freeman, a colonial slave who in 1781 successfully sued for her
freedom under Massachusetts law, is provided here with a fictional younger sister
Aissa who recounts her own and her famous sister's life in two successive house-
holds. Readers gain a tantalizing glimpse of a slave community still closely bound
to African cultures; however, this mingling of cultures and the community's ma-
nipulation by white masters is suggested rather than developed. Walter frequently
employs stilted dialogues to provide historical background ("When [Bett's father]
was not readily sold, the slave merchant used him to translate the languages of the
slaves to determine from where the slaves had come," Bett explains to her sister).
Likewise, Aissa's melodramatic musings tend to supply more drama than sub-
stance ("[They] say I took my time coming and when I finally arrived I screamed
loud and long. Did I know that I was being born a slave?"). History and chronol-
ogy are confusingly handled: it's difficult to fix the ages of the two sisters, and
historical characters whom Walter concedes probably never met one another in-
teract here. Readers with an interest in the subject would be better served by Joyce
Hansen's The Captive (BCCB 3/94). EB
WREDE, PATRICIA C. 
Book ofEnchantments. Yolen/Harcourt, 1996 
[240p]
ISBN 0-15-201255-9 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
This collection of ten stories, evenly split between new and previously published,
offers a road map to enchantment-this way to the egotistical unicorn, turn right
at the giant feathered snake, careful or you'll end up in the Frying Pan of Doom.
Wrede enhances enchantment with novel effects (in "Roses by Moonlight" the
heroine is shown differing futures according to which rose she sniffs) and gives
traditional folklore a few twists (in "Stronger Than Time" Sleeping Beauty prom-
ises her deceased lover's ghost to join him shortly, "The Lorelei" attempts to lure a
contemporary high-schooler to his doom, and "Cruel Sisters" takes a second look
at an old Child ballad). Wrede leapfrogs from princesses to werewolves and from
the past to the present, but, hey, that's life in the Enchanted Forest. The stories
also range in tone from dryly amusing ("Utensile Strength") to mystical ("The
Earthwitch"); the short-story format occasionally shortchanges the more serious
tales, which could have used more room to flower. The concepts, however, are
clever and inventive and the writing involving, encouraging younger readers trying
to work their way up to full-length fantasies to begin with this collection. Wrede
concludes with the winning recipe ("Quick After-Battle Triple Chocolate Cake")
from a medieval bake-off in which knights had to prove their versatility; she also
attaches "Notes from the Author" in which she provides the sources of inspiration
for each story. SSV
320 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Cech, John. Angels and Wild Things: The Archetypal Poetics ofMaurice Sendak.
Penn State, 1996. illus. with photographs. 28 4p. ISBN 0-271-0949-7. $32.50.
This attractive, oversized book offers, as did Selma Lanes' TheArt ofMaurice Sendak,
an appealing blend of the academic and the coffee-table traditions. Cech goes
deeper than Lanes did into scholarship, showing a particular interest in psycho-
analytic interpretation of Sendak's work, but also examining pertinent issues of
national identity, artistic influences, and cultural impact. The focus is clearly on
Sendak's individual contribution rather than on his place in and influence on
children's literature generally; Cech concentrates on careful close-reading and analy-
sis of patterns within Sendak's oeuvre. The author's evident enthusiasm for Sendak's
work adds warmth, albeit a certain sense of partisanship, to the project. A sheaf of
color plates and a plethora of black-and-white images (both preliminary and com-
pleted work) keep the discussion rooted in the concrete; notes, a generous bibliog-
raphy, and an index are included. DS
Lehr, Susan, ed. Battling Dragons: Issues and Controversy in Children s Literature.
Heinemann, 1995. 288p. Paper ed. ISBN 0-435-08828-9. $22.50.
This multivocal anthology offers an overview of contemporary issues in children's
literature from an education point of view: sections address censorship; questions
of gender and culture; historical and realistic fiction; fantasy; and practical and
professional experiences. Voices range from authors (Allan Baillie's account of his
travels in Cambodia is one of the most involving entries) to scholars (Barbara
Kiefer, Carl Tomlinson, and Joel Taxel are all represented) to teachers and book-
sellers (team-teachers John Milne and Sharon Scavone and bookstore proprietor
Sally Oddi offer front-line perspectives). While the articles are thought-provok-
ing, the quality of the writing varies and the effect is sometimes more collagic than
cohesive, with the editorial commentary rarely addressing contradictions between
entries. The book deserves special credit, though, for the inclusion of Violet Har-
ris' unflinchingly challenging afterword, which avoids the easy assumption of agree-
ment upon which many such anthologies depend. It's a usefully broad introduction
to some significant contemporary concerns in the field; each entry has a bibliogra-
phy, and notes on contributors are appended. DS
MAY 1996 
* 
321
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African Americans-fiction: Myers;
Walter
African Americans-poetry:
Giovanni
African Americans-stories: Igus;
Schroeder
Amish-fiction: Meyer
Arithmetic: Murphy
Asian Americans-stories: Igus
Babies-fiction: Martin
Babies-stories: Cooper
Ballooning: Wallner
BEDTIME STORIES: Crews;
Heckman; MacDonald
BIOGRAPHIES: Blos; Dunlop;
Ippisch; Kamen; Marrin
Boarding school-fiction: Lester
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Burgess
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Cooper
Brothers-fiction: Ostrow; Sweeney
Bullies-fiction: Spinelli
Camping-poetry: Lyon
Caribbean Islands-poetry: Charles
China-fiction: Jicai
Colonial life: Duey; Walter
Colors: Hubbard
CONCEPT BOOKS: Charles;
Hubbard; Murphy
COUNTING BOOKS: Charles
Coyotes-stories: Stevens
Crime and criminals: Bode
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Burgess
Crime and criminals-stories:
Enderle
Current events: Ashabranner
Death-fiction: Lester
Depression era-fiction: Cochrane
Disabilities-fiction: Morpurgo
Divorce-fiction: Fine
Dogs: Gibbons
Dogs-fiction: Jicai
Ecology: Emory; Fleming
Ethics and values: Gellman
FANTASY: Cavanagh; Cooney;
Martin; Ure; Wrede
Fathers and sons-fiction: Lester;
Thomas
Flying-stories: Maizlish
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Ness; Stevens
Football-fiction: Spinelli
Friends-fiction: Blegvad;
Gilliland; Luger; Martin
FUNNY STORIES: Myers;
Ostrow
Ghosts-fiction: Cavanagh;
Morpurgo; Ure
Government: Maestro
Grandfathers-fiction: Gilliland;
Spinelli
Grandmothers-stories: Igus
Growing up-fiction: Thomas
Guidance: Bode
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Charbonneau; Cochrane; Duey;
Jicai; McCaffrey; Meyer
322 
* THE BULLETIN
History, U.S.: Duey; Garza;
Maestro; Marrin; Schroeder;
Sneve; Walter
Holidays-poetry: Livingston
Homelessness-fiction: Luger
Horses-fiction: McCaffrey
Immigration: Ashabranner
Indians, American: Marrin; Sneve
Indians, American-fiction:
Gilliland
India-folklore: Ness
Insects: Penner
Insects-stories: Sturges
Ireland-folklore: Dunlop
Ireland-stories: Bunting
Jews-fiction: Meyer; Rosenberg
Language arts: Lyon
Law: Garza
London-fiction: Burgess
LOVE STORIES: Charbonneau;
Cooney; Thomas
Mental illness-fiction: Rosenberg
Mexico: Krupp
Mexico-stories: Van Laan
Migrant workers-fiction:
Cochrane
Mothers-stories: Igus
Music and musicians-fiction:
Rosenberg
Music: Kamen
MYSTERIES: Adler; Myers
Nature study. Emory
Pioneer life: Paul
Pirates-fiction: Morpurgo
POETRY: Charles; Giovanni;
Livingston; Lyon; Nye
Pool-fiction: Bauer
Quilts: Paul
Reading aloud: Livingston
Reading, beginning: Adler; Penner
Reading, easy: Blegvad; Myers; Ostrow
Reading, family: Cooper; Igus
Reading, reluctant: Bode; Cooney; Ross
Religious education: Dunlop; Gellman;
Meyer
SCIENCE FICTION: Burgess
Scotland-fiction: Cavanagh
SHORT STORIES: Wrede
Slavery-fiction: Walter
Slavery-stories: Schroeder
Spiders-stories: MacDonald
Stepfamilies-fiction: Fine
Story hour: Heckman; Hubbard;
MacDonald; Maizlish; Schroeder;
Stevens; Sturges; Wallner
Summer-fiction: Blegvad
Survival-fiction: Sweeney
Time travel-fiction: Cooney
Toys-stories: Cooper
Transportation: Wallner
Voyages and travels: Blos; Krupp
War-fiction: McCaffrey
Weddings-stories: Van Laan
West, the: Marrin
West, the-stories: Enderle
Witches: Ross
Women's studies: Garza; Kamen
WORDLESS BOOKS: Maizlish
World War II: Ippisch
4,
"A breezy, humorous, and insightful
look at contemporary adolescence."
-School Library Journal
BUDDY LOVE
:-,R~A
ILENE COOPEF
"When given a school assig
to find out about his past a
family's history, Buddy do
with [his dad's] newly acqi
video camera, beginning
a chain of discoveries that
help him to see what's
really important in life....
Like the view through
Buddy's camera, this
novel makes the everyday
interesting; Cooper's ear
for the dialogue of early
adolescents and her under
standing of their problems
keeps things entertaining.'
-Kirkus Reviews
"Cooper's intuition of middle school reality is up-beat
but sheared of didacticism; her sense of humor has a rueful
edge that brings us even closer to the characters."
-The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
Ages 10 up. $13.95TR (0-06-024663-4); $13.89LB (0-06-024664-2)
2 HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
0 
1 
East 
53rd 
Street, 
New 
York 
10022
/-------------·
Read All
About It!
* '1f.
...what makes this volume special is its inclusion of less frequently
anthologized stories of the Aztecs, Haitians, Africans, andJapanese....Unique
features of the book are the small, full-color photographs and drawings of
related geography, flora, fauna, and artifacts.... -School Library ournal
SA 1996 NCSS-CBC 
Notable Children's Trade Book in the Field of Social Studies
Diagrams, photographs, reproductions. Index.
Grades 5-8 * ISBN: 
0-7894-0202-5 * $19.95
^MYTHS 
;
"With a broad theme of classical music and a specific focus on one
performance that can be heard on the accompanying compact disc, this
book offers music students a range of options....A rich resource for young
people who want to understand orchestral music." -Booklist
SA 1996 NCSS-CBC 
Notable Children's Trade Book in the Field of Social Studies
CD, photographs. Index.
Grades 5 and up * ISBN: 
0-7894-0313-7 * $2495
"A delightful, attractive look at children from around the world...features
pictures of each child's food, eating utensils, housing, school, friends,
and family...This book is factual, respectful, and insightful. It provides
just the right balance of information and visual interest....
-School Library Journal
*A 1996 ALA Notable Children's Book
*A 1996 NCSS-CBC 
Notable Children's
Trade Book in the Field of Social Studies
Diagrams, maps, photographs, Index.
Grades 3-6 * ISBN: 0-7894-0201-7 * $16.95
;isi RI Nj
i t
"Orr's colorful paintings show cutaway views of ecosystems...the
oversize format of the book makes possible a wealth of detail in
the pictures....will intrigue browsers." -Booklist
* A 1996 NSTA-CBC 
Outstanding Science Trade Book for Children
Grades 5-8 * ISBN: 
0-7894-0147-9 * $17.95
DK Publishing, Inc.
95 Madison Avenue 
* New York, NY 10016 Available 
from your regular supplier or call 1-800-225-3362
BY 
FULL-COLOR PICTURES BY
EVE BUNTING 
HOLLY BERRY
"Thursdays are market day in this small Irish village, and the
excitement begins when Father gives the braided young narrator
her Market Day penny. She'll meet her friend Wee Boy; and
together they will go to the sweetie stall, watch the goat steal
Mrs. McAfee's petticoat, and admire the sword swallower....
Bunting draws from her own childhood in Ireland, and [her]
writing is pure and totally evocative. [It is matched by] Berry's
enthusiastic, jam-packed pictures. There's so much to see, so much
life swirling around, that kids will hardly know where to look first.
A delightful read-aloud, brimming with life."-Booklist
Ages 4-8. $14.95TR 0-06-025364-9; $14.89 LB 0-06-025368-1
Joanna Cotler Books
Among Eve Bunting's HarperCollins books
THE IN-BETWEEN DAYS 
NASTY, STINKY SNEAKERS
Pictures by Alexander Pertzoff 
Ages 8-12. $14.95TR 0-06-024236-1
Ages 8-12. $14.00TR 0-06-23609-4 
$14.89 LB 0-06-024237-X
$13.89 LB 0-06-023612-4 
$3.95PB 0-06-440507-9
$3.95PB 0-06-440563-X
ST1 
eC- 
, -ll'. 
Ci, l; 
1 
4Ll- 
,1P
re 
1 
o 
r 
ns New 
1002 ooG 
sa
10 East 53rd Street, New York, 10022
r-^BB 
7 
UL
A 1996 ALA NOTABLE CHILDREN'S BOOK
'1Vhisttir
'Dixie
BY
Marcia
Vaughan
FULL-COLOR PICTURES BY
Barry Moser
~----------.------
"This book features an appealing and feisty young girl, a text
filled with homespun imagery which begs to be read aloud,
and luminous paintings. Dixie Lee finds three unusual creatures,
all of which she wants to keep as pets: a small alligator, a
slithery snake, and a young hoot owl. Countering her mother's
objections with arguments rich in folkloric allusions... Dixie Lee
gets to keep her pets [who] turn out to be useful guardians
against malevolent night visitors. This handsome production
is distinguished by Moser's inimitable illustrations executed in
perfect harmony with the vibrant text."-The Horn Book
"A good read in any season, this is one to keep in mind for a
Halloween treat."-The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
Ages 4-8. $15.00TR (0-06-021030-3) $14.89 LB (0-06-021029-X)
Also by Marcia Vaughan
THE SEA-BREEZE HOTEL
Full-color pictures by Patricia Mullins
Ages 4-8. $14.95TR (0-06-020488-5)
4.89 LB (0-06-020504-0) $4.95 PB (0-06-4434060-0)
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, New York 10022
r
--------------------------
/
N ***" 
™^ ^ 
^ 
^ 
^ 
--- ""»" 
"^ 
^ 
^ 
^ 
^ 
^ 
^™-«-»«««« M ^ 
^ 
^^ 
^ 
^ 
---
«»-» 
™ ^
i
Illinos History of Sports series
Illus. Cloth, $25.95
THE WORLD'S GAME
BIIl MlilR
Known as much for the emotional outbursts and violence of its
fans as for its own stars, soccer (or football, as it is known outside
the United States) is a global game. Its international controlling
body, FIFA, boasts more members than the United Nations.
Bill Murray traces the growth of what during pre-industrial times
was called "the simplest game" through its codification in the nine-
teenth century to the 1994 World Cup, held for the first time in the
United States. Murray weaves the sport's growth into the culture
and politics of the countries where it has been taken up, analyzing
its reputation as a game that has seen more riots and onfield brawls
than all other types of football combined.
"Bill Murray has accomplished the seemingly impossible. He has
masterfully rendered the complexities of soccer's history into
a single vividly written story." -
Benjamin G. Rader, author of
Rnaahrall A H ictnnr nf Amnaria' famrn
^~~ 
^yy~n 
80/545-4703
N
University of Ilinois Press 
SECOND CLASS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.SA 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RruaN POSTGE GUARANTEED
ESCAPE FROM
SOBIBOR
Richard Rashke
4 "Breathtakingly suspenseful and horri-
fying at the same time." -
Publishers
Weekly
* "A sensitive, thoughtful, and well-re-
searched account of the 'biggest prisoner
escape of World War II.'" -
Samuel Gold,
Jewish Chicago
* "Gives us a very good idea of how the
will to survive can lead quite ordinary people
to surmount the most extraordinary ob-
stacles." -
Meir Ronnen, Jerusalem Post
* "This moving and angry book deserves to
be read." -
Susan Osnos, Washington Post
Paper, $16.95 
8001545-4703
0008-9036(199605)49:9*;1-G
^3" 
a"y"
' J a*""^ 
'v
------- 
-- 
-- 
---- 
-- 
--
-- 
--
I
I 
o
·
1
