T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
April 2008
Vol. 61   No. 8
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
April 2008
Vol. 61 No. 8
321  the BIg PICture
 
 Audrey, Wait!  by Robin Benway
322  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
336  • Pretty Face by Mary Hogan
342  • The Willoughbys written and illus. by Lois Lowry
345  • Forever Rose by Hilary McKay
346  • The Fold by An Na
347  • We Are the Ship:  The Story of Negro League Baseball  written and illus. by 
 
 Kadir Nelson
363  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
364  suBjeCt And use Index
320 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Katrina Bromann, Reviewer (KB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $85.00; combined print & electronic $119.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $53.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $14.30 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.90. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2008 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image ©2008. Used by permission of Razorbill/Penguin Young Readers Group.
April 2008 • 321
The Big PicTure
Audrey, Wait!
written by Robin Benway
“I broke up with Evan, and eight hours later, he had a song in his head and a guitar 
in his hand and it snowballed from there.” That is, if anything, an understatement: 
“Audrey, wait” are the last words Audrey hears from Evan as she walks away after 
dumping him, and his hastily penned song about the breakup premieres with his 
band that night in front of not only Audrey and her peers but also an interested 
record executive. Suddenly “Audrey, Wait!” is the hot new single, and Audrey’s initial 
reaction is mortification at having her breakup literally broadcast to all and sundry. 
She’s even more nonplussed, though, when her strange reflected fame becomes a 
viral outbreak in its own right, with other musicians wanting to have face time—and 
sucking-face time—with her for good luck, her fashion choices launching trends, 
and pro- and anti-Audrey factions launching into a fever of blogging and chatting 
all over the internet (“Your 15 minutes are up, Audrey. kthxbye”). Worst of all, the 
teeming paparazzi and microscopic focus make it hard for her to embark on a new 
relationship with her sweet co-worker at the mall, James. 
It’s a clever conceit, and Benway’s craftsmanship lifts it well above the 
merely original. Audrey’s narration is swift, self-aware, and contemporary in its touch 
of ironic distance as well as in its style. She’s surrounded by characters of character, 
ranging from her inseparable BFF Victoria, who’s Audrey’s sounding board, constant 
support (“The way I see it, if crazy people hate you, you’re ahead of the game,” she 
reassures Audrey about her online bashing), and partner in banter, through Victoria’s 
loyal and tolerant boyfriend, Jonah, and to Audrey’s solidly loving parents, baffled 
about the dilemma their daughter’s found herself in but determined to defend her 
as she sorts it out. The book is also refreshingly current in its sensibilities as well as 
its references (each chapter, in fact, opens with an epigraph from a contemporary 
band). Not only are the waves of the phenomenon driven by the instantaneous 
sharing made possible by the infinitely networked world of cellphones and internet, 
Audrey herself is absolutely a part of this world, filling in her own memory blanks 
about her experience from web postings and directly addressing the reader (“I know 
you saw the video”) to underscore the audience membership in the same world. It’s 
therefore a book that manages to explore the changed nature of the relationship 
between subject and viewer, making it clear that those roles can shift in an instant 
and that the power can go in both directions.
What really makes the book sing, though, is Audrey herself, who’s neither 
a deer caught in the headlights nor a brassy famehound riding on the surface of 
the changes to her life. Instead, she’s a realistically cool urbane girl, up to the min-
ute on the music scene and psyched at the chance to make out with her favorite 
322 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
up-and-coming singer while capable of subsequently dismissing him, when he 
turns out to be a jerk, with “It’s the biggest no you’ve ever heard in your life, you 
fucking parasite”; at the same time, she adores her “land mass of a cat” and earns 
her spending money slinging ice cream at the Scooper Dooper, dancing along to 
the Muzak. Her relationship with Victoria is endearing and enduring, despite the 
occasional bump, and her romance with James (initially just an awkward and shy 
co-worker, he turns out to be a truly nice guy) is adorably promising despite the 
adverse circumstances. Current, fresh, and funny, this will rocket up the charts 
with fans of Cohn and Levithan’s Nick and Norah’s Infinite Playlist (BCCB 6/06). 
(See p. 326 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Adoff, JAime The Death of Jayson Porter. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 
2008 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-0691-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
At sixteen, Jayson is ashamed and bitter about his life: his father’s a crackhead, 
his alcoholic mother alternately ignores him and beats the hell out of him, and to 
his peers, the biracial Jayson is either too dark and ghetto (for his schoolmates at 
the private school where he has a scholarship) or too light and not ghetto enough 
(“Out here, in the hood, they don’t know biracial exists. All they know is that I’m 
a little too light to be black”). After Jayson suffers two terrible blows—he discovers 
that the woman who torments him daily is not even his real mother, and his one 
real friend is fatally injured in the explosion of a meth lab—he decides it’s time to 
take his own life. Adoff writes Jayson’s narration in compact vignettes titled with 
their first sentences and comprising several brief, often one-sentence paragraphs 
separated by double spaces, making this a visually undaunting read. The book sets 
up the tension effectively, limning with clear and anxious detail Jayson’s stress in 
constantly negotiating between the dangerous race and class divides, and the picture 
of a kid who’s old enough and large enough to physically beat down his abuser but 
who can’t bring himself to go against years of training is convincing and haunting. 
The story spins out of control and into maudlin and unconvincing soap opera, 
however, with Jayson’s discovery of his birth mother, and the contrivance merely 
expands after Jayson survives—barely—his leap from the seventh floor only to 
be finally rescued from his torment by his birth mother, a better-late-than-never 
intervention that’s apparently going to make everything immediately wonderful. 
Nonetheless, readers will hope for better things for Jayson, and they may find the 
fairy-tale solution no more than his due.  DS
April 2008 • 323
AlAlou, elizAbeth The Butter Man; written by Elizabeth and Ali Alalou; illus. 
by Julie Klear Essakalli. Charlesbridge, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-1-58089-127-1 $14.95   
R 7-10 yrs
Every Saturday night, young Nora’s baba (father) cooks up a big pot of couscous 
using a special pot he brought with him from his native Morocco. One Saturday, 
Nora protests Baba’s “no snacks before dinner” rule, saying she’s “staaarving,” which 
prompts Baba to tell her the story of a time in his youth when he was truly hungry. 
As his daily portion of bread shrank and the family’s supply of butter disappeared, 
young Baba grew hungrier and hungrier, and his father left to seek work and food. 
To distract Baba from his hunger, his clever mother suggested each day that he go 
out by the road to wait for “the butter man.” Though the butter man never actually 
appeared, there was plenty to watch by the roadside, and eventually Baba’s father 
returned home with food. As the tale is finished and Nora’s family sits down to eat, 
their experience is quite different (“We eat and eat until we are full, and there is 
always some left to save for our lunch tomorrow”), but there’s a nicely subtle parallel 
between the two generations of parents trying to distract their hungry offspring. 
Descriptive language and avoidance of didacticism give Nora’s and Baba’s contrast-
ing stories genuine emotional impact. The gradually shrinking amount of bread 
makes Baba’s hunger palpable: “One day the piece of bread my mother had given 
me was so small I could close my fingers all the way around it, and it was so hard 
that when bread was plenty, I would have tossed it to the cow to eat.” Essakalli’s 
blocky folk art gouache paintings are delicately accented with patterns of dots and 
dashes, with warm tones of browns, golds, reds, and turquoises predominating. Nora 
and the adult Baba are situated in contemporary times by their modern clothing 
(Baba sports attractive red tennies) and hairstyles, which contrasts with the more 
distanced depictions of the Morocco landscape and people of Baba’s childhood. 
Though Baba’s depiction of hunger will, one hopes, be unfamiliar to most kids 
who will see this book, it obviously still exists in many places, and this might be a 
fine way to introduce that problem to youngsters who, like Nora, frequently claim 
to be “staaarving.” An author’s note explains more about Morocco and the Berber 
people, and a glossary is included. JH
Aston, diAnnA hutts Not So Tall for Six; illus. by Frank W. Dormer. Charles-
bridge, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-1-57091-705-9 $14.95  
R 5-8 yrs
Diminutive first-grader Kylie Bell “comes from a long line of not-so-tall people,” 
and though her size makes some activities difficult (getting a drink from the water 
fountain, for example) it mostly doesn’t stop her from living up to the Bell family 
motto, “Brave and smart and big at heart.” This credo is put to the test, however, 
with the arrival of name-calling bully Rusty Jacks. No picture-book veteran will 
be surprised to learn that Rusty is really just in need of a friend, and when Kylie 
reluctantly calls upon her Bell family courage to include an ostracized Rusty, her 
kind act pays off as a smiling Rusty subsequently gives Kylie a needed boost at 
the water fountain. Though the “bully reformed by kindness” storyline is neither 
new nor entirely believable, Aston’s version manages to charm thanks to quirkily 
descriptive language with a southwest slant (“even though her legs feel like Aunt 
Cherokee’s cactus jelly, she skitter-dee-doos over to Rusty Jacks”) and Kylie’s genuine 
spunk and integrity. Equally winning are Dormer’s line-and-watercolor illustrations, 
324  •  The BulleTin
washed in a desert-hued palette of rusts and golds. Tiny Kylie’s highly expressive 
red pigtails fervently register her emotions, being by turns jaunty, frightened, and 
droopy, and when Rusty’s formidable ten-gallon hat is removed at book’s end, he 
rather comfortingly resembles Shannon’s David in his stubble-headed vulnerability. 
This isn’t going to solve a serious bullying problem, but its light and entertaining 
tone will hold kids’ attention, and audiences will appreciate its saccharine-free 
sincerity.  JH
Avi The Seer of Shadows. HarperCollins, 2008 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-000016-5 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-000015-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Horace Carpetine, fourteen-year-old apprentice to unsuccessful society photogra-
pher Enoch Middleditch, has been anxious to move his studies along from cleaning 
up and setting up to actually operating a camera. His opportunity arises when new 
client Mrs. Von Macht, in mourning for her deceased daughter, appears at the 
studio with a request that Middleditch take her photograph, which will be placed 
on Eleanora’s grave so that the child’s spirit will be comforted by her mother’s pres-
ence. Pegg, the Von Machts’ African-American servant, quietly signals to Horace 
that her mistress’ story is not on the up-and-up, but Middleditch is undeterred by 
Horace’s misgivings; he sees a windfall in riding the spiritualism wave of Gilded Age 
New York society, and he plans to make a double-exposure print that will convince 
Mrs. Von Macht that Eleanora still hovers near. Too true, in fact. As Horace slowly 
ekes out the scandalous Von Macht family saga from Pegg, his own photographs 
act as a channel to bring the dead girl back from the grave—and she has a score 
to settle that threatens all their now irrevocably intertwined lives. Eleanora is just 
the spirit middle-grade ghost fanciers adore, with a sympathetic background but a 
seriously malevolent agenda, and the double-dealing between the nasty Von Machts 
and the deceitful Middleditch adds extra spice. Although Horace’s friendship with 
and eventual marriage to Pegg would have raised eyebrows, or even Cain, in the 
real late nineteenth century, Avi treats the relationship here with anachronistic 
casualness, easily explained away by Horace’s liberal upbringing. Racial concerns, 
however, take a back seat to the arsonist apparition, and the scary-stories set isn’t 
likely to quibble. EB
BArAtz-Logsted, LAuren Me, In Between. Aladdin Mix, 2008 [208p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-5068-4 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
When your birth certificate puts your age at twelve, your IQ lands you in eighth 
grade, and your bra size screams something between sixteen and all grown up, it’s 
easy to get confused, and Lacey’s confused indeed. Nana Anna, Lacey’s grandmother 
and guardian since her parents died when she was a baby, is dismissive of Lacey’s 
plight, referring to her trials with her bodacious bosom as luxe problemen—the kind 
of problems every woman wishes she had. When Lacey gets picked up at the video 
arcade by a much older guy, she decides for the first time that maybe Nana Anna 
is right, and she needs to work this body she’s been handed. On the other hand, 
when her best boy friend from infancy returns to her neighborhood after being 
away during her growth spurt, she feels the need to hide her new features. The 
compact plotline and matter-of-fact narration prevent this story of quick changes 
April 2008  •  325
and deception from going overboard into zany-comedy land; instead Lacey emerges 
as a very real, very resourceful heroine whose heartsmarts have to play a fast catch-
up game with her headsmarts. The perspective she gains, with the help of a really 
superior boy (let’s only hope there are real ones like him out there), keeps step with 
a contemporary twelve-year-old’s grasp of her situation; readers will learn along 
with Lacey that while size does matter, it isn’t the only thing that counts when it 
comes to loving and living in your body.  KC
BeAty, AndreA Doctor Ted; illus. by Pascal Lemaitre. McElderry, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-1-4169-2820-1 $14.99  
R 4-7 yrs
When little bear Ted bumps his knee, he decides he needs a doctor, and when no doc-
tor is forthcoming, he decides to embark on a medical career of his own. He begins 
his public service with his mother, diagnosing her with measles and recommending 
surgery (“Those are my freckles,” his mom points out. “Eat your breakfast”). At 
school, Doctor Ted is a lifesaver to his drippy-nosed animal classmates, dispensing 
“fine medical advice” until his teacher and principal cut short his career as in-class 
GP. Fortunately, it’s hard to keep a good wannabe-doctor-bear-kid down, and when 
a plummeting playgrounder lands on the teacher’s ankle, Doctor Ted is the first 
responder. Careful, deliberate pacing and poker-faced, unobtrusively structured 
style make this story into an endearing comic gem, with Doctor Ted angelic in his 
purposeful, lunatic healing (“You have gingivitis,” he tells the principal solemnly. 
“You need a full-body cast”) and humorous in his blithe indifference to social nicety 
(“You have mumps,” he announces to his teacher, who tells him sternly “Those are 
my cheeks”). Visuals meet the text more than halfway, turning Principal Badham 
into an authoritative tusked boar and allowing Doctor Ted to produce all matter of 
medical apparatus out of nowhere. Thickly brushed ink lines are sturdy but liquid, 
with digital color suggesting the opacity of acrylic and the lightness of gouache 
in its even planes of springy tones. Offer this as a tonic cure for the unwell or as a 
loopy partner to Wells’ Felix Feels Better (BCCB 6/01).  DS
BeLton, sAndrA The Tallest Tree. Amistad/Greenwillow, 2008 154p illus. 
with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-052750-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-052749-5 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 4-7
Little Catfish lives in a dying urban neighborhood, where a robust theater, dress 
shop, shoe store, and grocer once thrived but have now gone out of business. The 
theater, now a rather unsatisfactory community center run by Mr. Odell, is Little 
Catfish’s refuge and Mr. Odell his personal hero, as he tells stories about legend-
ary black Americans who used to grace stage and screen. In particular, Mr. Odell 
and Little Catfish worship Paul Robeson, the “tallest tree” in their forest of heroes. 
Lamar, an angry boy living in a foster home, is irritated by the close relationship 
between the boy and the older man, and he responds by vandalizing the community 
center inside and out. Lamar’s act galvanizes the neighborhood, prompting a series 
in a local newspaper and getting the local historical society involved in restoring 
the old theater, and the residents and former residents interested in reviving the 
neighborhood. With its clear metaphors and seamless story arc, Little Catfish’s story 
crosses over from realistic fiction to an uplifting fable of what could be, suggesting 
that recovering your history and your heroes can lead to a prosperous and happy 
future. Ultimately, though, the text is message-driven and purposive and the events 
326 • The BulleTin
and characters too often contrived, with the slow-moving story focusing more on 
viewpoint than action. Still, the prose is thoughtful and lyrical, and readers may 
well respond to the hopeful view of the future that draws on the strength of the 
past. Pictures of Robeson in his various roles as athlete, actor, and scholar, as well 
as a repeating portrait, are scattered throughout the text. An author’s note and 
resource list on Paul Robeson is followed by source information for the other black 
celebrities mentioned in the book.  KC
benwAy, robin Audrey, Wait! Razorbill, 2008 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-191-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 321, for review.
bermAn, steve, ed. Magic in the Mirrorstone: Tales of Fantasy. Mirrorstone, 
2008 295p
ISBN 978-0-7869-4732-4 $14.95   
R Gr. 7-10
In this collection of fifteen magic-themed tales, contemporary YA authors and 
fantasy stars offer stories on everything from talking toads to dragons to prophetic 
dreams offering riches. In “Virgin,” Holly Black presents a complex, melancholy, 
and ultimately ambiguous account of a lonely teen’s obsession with a unicorn and 
the efforts of his friend (who only sees a horse), who attempts to draw him out of 
his isolation. On a different note, the snappy and humorous “School Spirit” by Jim 
C. Hines features a self-deprecating goblin, an overconfident demon, and board-
ing-school pranks. One recurring theme, the potential dangers of getting what one 
wants (whether in the form of a ring that triggers insane jealousy in “The Jewel of 
Abandon,” by Nina Kiriki Hoffman, or as the devastating choice presented to a 
young girl who learns of a cure to her fatal illness but cannot accept the cost in E. 
Sedia’s “Out of Her Element”), will resound with even non-fantasy readers, who 
will sympathize with the often painful and likely quite familiar stepping stones 
of maturation these protagonists face. For the most part, however, the stories are 
steeped in fantasy motifs and character types, and this collection will find its likeli-
est audience with those already fond of the genre or these particular contributors. 
Brief author sketches, accompanied by humorous one-line asides from the editor, 
are offered at the end of the volume.  AS
blume, lesley m. m. Tennyson. Knopf, 2008 228p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94703-2 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84703-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 6-9
The woes of the Depression don’t seem to touch the remote shack in the woods 
shared by eleven-year-old Tennyson, her younger sister, Hattie, their failed writer 
mother, Sadie, and their romantic father, Emery—not until Sadie takes off one day 
and doesn’t come back. Emery then takes the girls to his family home, Aigredoux, 
once one of the grand old plantation homes of Louisiana, now a tottering ruin kept 
standing only by the will of Emery’s sister, who thinks the Old South still matters 
and that her family deserves restitution for the devastation left in the wake of the 
Civil War. She cooks up the idea that the girls will save Aigredoux by marrying into 
one of the old families with some money left, but Tennyson just wants her mother 
back. Literally haunted by dreams of the Aigredoux of days past, she takes up her 
April 2008 • 327
mother’s pen and writes the good, the bad, and the ugly of her family history, and 
sends it to the magazine where her mother attempted to publish her work, know-
ing that if her mother saw her stories, she would know that Tennyson was calling 
her home. With characters and settings that evoke the faded grandeur of a people 
who feel cheated rather than defeated, and who are indignant over the theft of a 
lifestyle they never regretted no matter how bloodstained and exploitive, Blume 
creates Southern Gothic that would make Eudora Welty and Flannery O’Connor 
proud (though the book’s tendency to render black Southerners’ but not white 
Southerners’ dialogue in dialect is somewhat jarring). Tennyson’s dream sequences 
are eerie and effective, as is the house’s strange complicity in getting its story told. 
Emery reared his girls in protest of his childhood world, and Tennyson becomes 
the unapologetic chronicler of the story as it finds her, not quite understanding 
that telling the truth amounts to a kind of betrayal of her family’s misplaced pride 
but knowing that the house itself is on her side—eager to shed its ghostly burdens 
and move into a less grand but more honest and livable present.  KC 
Cheng, AndreA Where the Steps Were; written and illus. by Andrea Cheng. 
Wordsong/Boyds Mills, 2008 143p
ISBN 978-1-932425-88-8 $16.95   
M Gr. 5-8
Five urban third-graders speak in free-verse poems of the events of their last school 
year in a building scheduled for subsequent demolition. Details about their home 
lives weave into their reflections on what goes on at school—Jonathan, for in-
stance, is temporarily living in a shelter, Kayla has a brother in jail, teacher Miss 
D. is having trouble with her son, and Carmen’s mother goes into the hospital for 
breathing difficulties. These life moments form a kind of melancholy context for 
this already serious group of children; while most of the poems focus on personal 
and social problems, friendship troubles, and insights gleaned from what seems 
like an exclusively African-American-themed curriculum (students learn about the 
Civil War, Jim Crow, George Washington Carver, Rosa Parks, Martin Luther King, 
Jr., Langston Hughes, etc.), only Anthony expresses any real joy or contentment, 
and even his joy is furtive, as he secretly enjoys school and helping out Miss D. 
The writing is fluid and careful, but there is no plot arc here, and the only event 
to speak of is an episode where the children are falsely accused of spitting from the 
balcony of a theater and asked to leave. As a result, the poems don’t seem to add up 
to any cohesive meaning or purpose other than regret for an urban school closing 
(the kids’ reasons for dreading the closing of the school aren’t particularly clear, 
either, since the only thing they like there is their teacher, whom they’d be leaving 
behind in any case); they emerge more as character sketches of rather indistinct, 
unidimensional children whose depths or potentialities are barely hinted at. The 
illustrations, black-and-white relief prints, are quite beautiful, however, and succeed 
in expressing the range of emotions that the poetry misses.  KC
ClAre, CAssAndrA City of Ashes. McElderry, 2008 [480p] (Mortal Instru-
ments)
ISBN 978-1-4169-1429-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
In this sequel to City of Bones (BCCB 6/07), sixteen-year-old Clary is still coming 
to terms with her abilities as a demon killer, with her mother’s comatose state, and 
with her horror over the discovery that her father, Valentine, is a power-hungry 
328 • The BulleTin
and evil exile in Downworld, a realm that exists outside of New York City. Indeed, 
Valentine, long assumed dead, is determined to collect magic artifacts that will al-
low for his nefarious plans of destruction to come to fruition. With the adults too 
tied to bureaucracy to take immediate action, it falls to the teens (Clary, the sexy 
and haunted Jace, siblings Alex and Isabella, and mortal Simon) to try to at least 
slow Valentine’s quest, even if stopping him completely seems impossible. The 
passionate Clary remains a compelling protagonist, and she is surrounded by such 
an intriguing blend of good and evil otherworldly beings and two captivating set-
tings (both New York City and Downworld are elegantly and richly described) that 
even readers initially drawn by the now commonplace tough-girl fantasy narrative 
will find themselves engrossed by the whole package. This is the second novel in a 
planned trilogy, and there are a few too many decisions made by characters requiring 
knowledge of the first novel to understand, and several key plot points that are left 
unresolved (presumably gearing up for the final installment) for this book to be a 
successful stand-alone work. However, Clare provides ample romantic intrigue (the 
ongoing electric tension between Jace and Clary, presumed taboo because they have 
been told they are siblings, is coyly explored with hints that the relationship could 
somehow still happen), flashy fight scenes, and an impeccably paced narrative that 
will easily lure fantasy fans to commit to the whole series.  AS
Colfer, eoin Airman. Hyperion, 2008 412p
ISBN 978-1-4231-0750-7 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Conor was destined for flight from his birth, which took place unexpectedly, in 
the summer of 1878, in a hot-air balloon. Years later, he has found his bliss: he is 
studying aeronautics, supported by his parents and the king of the Saltee Islands 
(off of Ireland) in his unusual intellectual pursuits. Unfortunately, all plans are 
abruptly destroyed when the king and his closest advisor are brutally murdered 
by the power-hungry marshall. Conor, who saw the assassinations, is thrown into 
prison, and his parents and the princess are told he is dead. He uses his knowledge 
of flight and a few years worth of scavenged and bartered materials to make a daring 
escape, but he must choose between returning home to face the marshall, or letting 
everyone continue to assume he is dead and heading to America to continue his 
studies. Colfer meticulously develops rich and multifaceted characters, not only in 
the protagonist but also in many of the villains and allies around him. Although 
there are divisions between pure evil and idealized good, the individuals exhibiting 
these traits are all haunted by various pasts and driven by complex motivations. In 
addition, the setting of the nineteenth-century Saltee Islands, where the wildness of 
the seascape constantly threatens to creep back in, emerges as a character in itself, 
challenging Conor as much as his enemies. Although the environment suggests 
historical fiction, the gripping action scenes interspersed throughout will easily 
widen the audience to include adventure lovers as well.  AS
Crow, Kristyn Cool Daddy Rat; illus. by Mike Lester. Putnam, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-24375-2 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Daddy Rat plunks on his black beret, packs his bass, and pats his tiny son Ace 
on the head, and he’s off for a punishing round of dusk ’til dawn gigs. A subway 
ride takes him to his first performance, scatting for a coolly appreciative Fat Cat. 
Before he reaches his next job at the Big Swig, he finds he has a stowaway in his 
bass case—little Ace. It’s too late to take him home (“Real sneaky, son. Now tell 
April 2008 • 329
Mama what you’ve done”), so Ace makes a cell phone call to Mama, and he gets 
his wish to follow Daddy Rat from show to show. There’s a rowdy cruise ship filled 
with smooching sweethearts and party animals, a sidewalk performance in Times 
Square, a rooftop concert for a high-toned cocktail crowd of pooches, and then on 
the way home, an opportunity for little Ace to wow a crowd and delight his father 
with his own vocal pyrotechnics. Crow’s text swings with scat-along possibilities 
(“Cool Daddy Rat/ shooby dooby doo dat/ grabbed his hat in his rat flat/ zowie 
zowie zoo zat”), and Lester laces his agile line-and-watercolor pictures with plenty 
of visual humor (little Ace slumps greenly over the rail of the cruise boat; a mime 
supports himself against thin air to listen to Daddy Rat). This packs more punch 
than many jazz picture books of the earnest or informative variety, and it would 
easily harmonize with any musical storytime, or even Take Your Child to Work 
Day programming.  EB
deKeyser, stACy Jump the Cracks. Flux, 2008 [216p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7387-1274-1 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
“Can they put you in jail when you’re only fifteen?” wonders Victoria, who has 
found herself semi-accidentally kidnapping a toddler on a train at New York’s Penn 
Station. The boy has been attended to only sporadically by his obviously troubled 
teenaged mother, and when she disembarks from the train to see her clearly criminal 
boyfriend she leaves the kid behind in the train bathroom. Victoria is already riled 
about faithless parents, since her divorced father has let her down as usual, failing 
to meet her train as promised; she therefore decides that she needs to keep this 
little boy safe, and they head out together on the departing train. Then Victoria 
discovers that the child’s mother stuffed cash into Victoria’s backpack to keep it from 
her boyfriend, who is calling Victoria threateningly and insisting on the return of 
what is clearly drug money; meanwhile, the police and Victoria’s father are cajoling 
her to come back before the situation escalates. DeKeyser crafts what could be a 
contrived scenario with step-by-step credibility, and the linkage between Victoria’s 
own parental disappointments and her dismay over the boy’s mother’s indiffer-
ence is an effective motivator that’s overtly but not heavy-handedly outlined. The 
book’s acknowledgment that good solutions can be tough to achieve is bracingly 
realistic, with Victoria staying in contact throughout her odyssey with the boy’s 
loving great-aunt (a character with such force that she makes her impact felt on the 
book merely through phone appearances until the very end), who has been unable 
to obtain full custody of her endangered great-nephew. With a combination of 
lively adventure and humane treatment of its characters, this is an absorbing and 
emotionally effective read, suitable for those looking to move up from the oeuvre 
of Willo Davis Roberts.  DS
dole, mAyrA lAzArA Down to the Bone. HarperTeen, 2008 [384p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-084311-3 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-084310-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
If Laura had known that surreptitiously rereading a love letter in class would lead 
to being outed as a lesbian, getting expelled from school, and being kicked out of 
her mother’s home, she likely would have never opened it. However, it is in these 
grim circumstances that Laura truly begins to find herself. Fortunately, her friends 
330 • The BulleTin
come to the rescue, inviting her into their homes and surrounding her with love, 
support, and the warmth of their shared Cuban-American identity. In their care, 
she is able to process her first heartbreak (the author of the letter dumps her soon 
after because of religious pressure), her mother’s rejection, and her own struggle 
to claim a cultural and sexual identity that fits. Laura’s fierce internal battle over 
whether she can find happiness and resolution as a lesbian (as opposed to a girl 
who happened to fall in love once with another girl) is compelling, and her often 
tortured efforts to avoid her own truth will likely inspire deep sympathy. Regrettably, 
most of Dole’s other characters seem little more than caricatures: the murderously 
violent homophobic coworker, the hippie lesbian with flowing hair and good vibes, 
and the myriad straight men who range from untrustworthy to dangerous func-
tion more as background to the protagonist’s quest than individuals in themselves. 
Nevertheless, the fiery and defiant Laura learns two key lessons—that identity is 
mutable and family is where one finds it—that will resound with readers regardless 
of where they find themselves on the GLBTQ spectrum.  AS
dowd, siobhAn The London Eye Mystery. Fickling/Random House, 
2008 323p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94976-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84976-3 $15.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Salim was last seen boarding the London Eye, the Thamesside landmark and 
world’s tallest observation wheel; when his cousins Ted, twelve, and Ted’s older 
sister Kat wait for him to disembark, he never appears. The police are called in, 
Salim’s mother, who was planning to move with her son to New York in a matter of 
days, is absolutely frantic, and Ted and Kat, feeling at fault, are determined to solve 
the mystery of the boy’s disappearance. Narrator Ted has “a funny brain that runs 
on a different operating system from other people’s,” with clear social deficits and 
misunderstandings that suggest Asperger’s; while there’s a little too much marveling 
by other characters at Ted’s wonderful brain, his own viewpoint is believable in its 
atypical pattern and focus while still keeping him a relatable protagonist. Stakes are 
high because readers meet and like Salim, and the agony of his mother and, later, 
his divorced father makes an effective emotional counterpoint to the logic-puzzle 
nature of the siblings’ sleuthing. Dowd puts enough information in to allow readers 
to make reasonable guesses as they go along, so it’s a fairly laid-out and effective 
story (including a dramatic eleventh-hour save), but there’s also a clear change in 
Ted’s relationship with his sister and role in the family as a result of his active and 
effective pursuit of the mystery’s solution, giving the book a human dimension as 
well. Readers not yet ready for The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-time 
will find this a satisfying mystery with an unusual but engaging sleuth.  DS
dunKle, ClAre b. The Sky Inside. Seo/Atheneum, 2008 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-2422-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-8
Thirteen-year-old Martin appears to live in a perfect civilization: a giant dome 
keeps the climate stable, the residents play a key democratic role by voting each 
morning, and genetically modified children arrive by “stork” each year to waiting 
parents. Of course, once Martin begins to see flaws in the system, it doesn’t take 
long to ascertain that most of their lives are quite problematic under a thin veneer 
of idealism. The dome keeps them trapped and entirely ignorant about the rest of 
April 2008 • 331
the world, the democracy is a sham, and the “wonder” children, one of whom is 
Martin’s beloved younger sister, have been determined to be unstable and are being 
recalled. Martin’s quest to save the kids may lead him further out of his comfort 
zone than he imagined, but he quickly learns that once the illusion of perfection 
is broken, there is really no going back anyway. While a quest of a boy and his 
dog (Martin’s only ally is a smart and loyal robot canine) against seemingly insur-
mountable obstacles is a familiar plot, Dunkle surrounds her protagonists with an 
enthralling range of settings, a memorable cast of characters who hide their ennui 
and worry to varying degrees, and Martin himself, who while bold and intelligent, 
is also effectively developed as an authentic thirteen-year-old boy who is attempting 
something a bit out of reach. The setting may be quite different from Dunkle’s recent 
fantasy-based Hollow Kingdom trilogy (The Hollow Kingdom, BCCB 2/04, etc.), 
but fans of the author will still recognize her evocative storytelling and intricate 
plotting, even in this science fiction milieu.  AS
dyer, heAther Ibby’s Magic Weekend; illus. by Peter Bailey. Chicken House, 
2008 [144p]
ISBN 978-0-545-03209-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
In this British import, quiet middle-grader Ibby doesn’t know what she’s in for 
when her parents drop her off at her aunt’s house for a long weekend. It seems 
her cousins, twelve-year-old Alex and seven-year-old Francis, have discovered her 
mysterious uncle Godfrey’s “Magic for Beginners” kit and are eager to try it out. 
When the boys recklessly experiment with the kit, they find that many of the 
tricks have unexpected outcomes (the levitation maneuver results in Alex getting 
stuck on a church steeple, while the “magic disappearing coin” makes magician 
rather than coin disappear, etc.). Cautious Ibby is reluctant to get too involved 
in the magic itself, but she willingly helps the boys when things go awry and also 
loyally keeps their activities secret from their mother. All of this magical activity 
stimulates Ibby’s curiosity about her missing uncle Godfrey, and it is Ibby who 
gradually realizes his whereabouts and manages, by way of magic, to set him free. 
Dyer wisely makes her setup brief, jumping quickly into the magical action (and its 
unintended consequences) and keeping up a brisk pace throughout. The characters 
are simply drawn, but they’re believable in their actions and interactions (the broth-
ers’ frequent bickering is particularly convincing). The magical mix-ups also add 
humorous touches to the text; for example, after getting in trouble for “climbing 
the steeple,” the recently levitated Alex tries to stomp off to his room but suffers 
from residual buoyancy, so “he bounced lightly on each step, giving the impression 
that he was cheerful.” Though the magic occasionally seems too convenient (some 
of the spells seem to wear off at just the right time for no apparent reason), most 
readers will be too caught up in the quick pace and lively story to mind; endearing 
and informal line drawings add visual appeal and help set the light tone. Hand 
this one to middle-graders who don’t want to commit to a “thick” fantasy but still 
want a little something magic.  JH
332  •  The BulleTin
Eaton, Jason CartEr  The Facttracker; illus. by Pascale Constantin.  Harper-
Collins, 2008  260p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-056435-3  $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-056434-6  $16.99     
Ad  Gr. 4-6
The people of Traakerfaxx have always sold facts for their living, but the devastating 
explosion of the facts factory means they all need a new line of work. Luckily, Ersatz, 
a mysterious man with big ideas, appears on the scene, conveniently whisking away 
the life work of the Facttracker (whose job it was to collect all of the facts that the 
residents then sold) by offering the townspeople an even easier way to earn money: 
selling lies. Things quickly get out of control: the Facttracker is locked up, and the 
town is in complete chaos as the gullible residents construct their lives around the 
lies they are selling (catapults are deemed the most reliable transportation mode, 
and the new speedy mail system of tying messages to snails is a disappointment). 
Against this curious backdrop, an unnamed boy must try to save the world from a 
critical mass of lies and find his long-lost parents, all while learning the moral that 
even with an unknown past (his facts were all lost at a young age), he can control his 
future. It’s all a bit much for a trim middle-grades novel: the warm sentimentality of 
the boy’s coming of age is lost under the ridiculous chapter headings, snarky asides 
to the audience, and over-the-top humor throughout. However, those in search of 
unremitting silliness will find this an indulgently entertaining read. Interspersed 
black-and-white drawings match the freewheeling tone of the story, breaking up 
the text nicely and adding further dashes of absurdity to the mix.  AS
FEldman, Jody  The Gollywhopper Games; illus. by Victoria Jamieson.  Green-
willow, 2008  [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-121451-6  $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-121450-9  $16.99
Reviewed from galleys     
Ad  Gr. 4-7
Gil Goodson is determined to win the Gollywhopper Games so that he can have 
the money to move his family out of town and start over. It’s a plan fraught with 
irony, since it is because of the Golly Toy and Game Company that he wants to 
leave; his father used to work for Golly until he was falsely accused of theft. He 
was cleared of all charges, but Gil is still treated like an outcast in a school filled 
with Golly employees’ kids. The games are a multimillion-dollar extravaganza on 
a par with Wonka opening his chocolate factory, but Gil, like Charlie, defeats all 
odds and wins a coveted space in the trials, correctly answering company trivia 
questions to enter the finals. The bulk of the book is a recording of the games 
themselves, with some clever and some gimme word puzzles; the invitation to play 
along keeps readers tuned in to a predictable and somewhat attenuated plotline with 
flat, caricatured allies and enemies and fantastic toy-themed sets. In fact, the very 
predictability takes away some of the sweetness of the payoff (the bully is defeated, 
Gil wins, and his father is fully vindicated), but by the same token it may prove 
a boon for inexperienced readers to flex their inference and predicting muscles. 
Black-and-white art will also help struggling readers test their text-to-inner-eye 
transfer skills—this has “independent reading book report for reluctant readers” 
written all over it.  KC
April 2008 • 333
friedmAn, Aimee The Year My Sister Got Lucky. Point/Scholastic, 
2008 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-439-92227-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Sisters Katie and Michaela share their consecration to ballet and love of their urban 
Manhattan lifestyle—or so Katie has always thought. When the family moves up-
state to a small college town, Katie is devastated, but she’s hurt even more by the 
fact that Michaela isn’t; in fact, high-school senior Michaela quickly finds a niche 
in the popular crowd and a relationship with the quarterback, slacks up on her 
ballet practice, and leaves fourteen-year-old Katie the solitary protester against the 
family’s new life in the country. Friedman manages to make the sisters believably 
complex without turning her story gimmicky, and the various strands—Michaela’s 
dance stardom, Katie’s perennial second-banana status, the trade of city for coun-
try—braid together in an effective tale. The book’s length allows the story neces-
sary time and scope, upping the tension and the emotional issues surrounding the 
multiple shifts in family dynamics. Katie’s narration is realistic in its blinkered view, 
and there’s enough palpable hurt and yearning in her loneliness for her former life 
that she remains sympathetic even when she’s sulkily self-sabotaging her current 
one; Michaela is also well crafted, a dutiful, loving girl who’s seizing her chance 
at an existence she didn’t dare to admit she wanted. Unwanted change is familiar 
territory to many kids, and they’ll sympathize with Katie’s plight and appreciate 
her growth.  DS
gonzAles, Julie Imaginary Enemy. Delacorte, 2008 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90530-5 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73552-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Jane loathes the ordinariness of her name, and she’s just weirded out by the eccentric 
aunt for whom she was named and who sends her strange presents like hummingbird 
nests and sets of Gothosaurs (toy dinosaurs pierced, pinned and painted in full-on 
Goth regalia). She does, however, manage to cultivate a sufficiently entertaining life 
for herself (and her parents, who are harried by the effects of Jane’s bad behavior 
and commitment to slackerdom), aided and abetted by the crew of right-brained 
neighbor children whose eccentricities can be turned to pretty effective pranks. As 
she grows older, however, she and her closest partner in crime, Sharp, drift apart, 
as he opts for first homeschooling and then a school for the arts, while she actively 
pursues a lifestyle as ordinary as her name. On the outside, at any rate. Inwardly, 
Jane remains as bratty as ever, her key trait being her aversion to responsibility of 
any kind. Instead, she blames the trials and consequences of her life on Bubba, 
short for Beelzebub, her imaginary enemy who takes delight in catching her out 
and making her pay for her mischief. Since readers are getting Jane’s story from 
her perspective, it requires a lot of reading between the lines to take the full mea-
sure of Jane’s misdeeds; she’s wry, witty, and sardonic while maintaining her pose 
of aggrieved indignation, but she is undeniably, even refreshingly, mean, selfish, 
and rude—in short, an unrepentant brat. Though Jane is clearly the center of (her 
own) attention here, this is a richly textured family and friends narrative where 
everyone’s participation makes a difference, and Jane’s character development reflects 
her embeddedness in a community that accepts and values her less admirable traits 
and is willing to wait for her to outgrow them.  KC   
334 • The BulleTin
hArmon, miChAel The Last Exit to Normal. Knopf, 2008 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94098-9 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84098-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Even three years after his parents’ divorce, Ben still has not fully adjusted to the fact 
that his dad is gay (and now happily partnered) and his mother left Ben with his 
father abruptly after she found out. Ben, now seventeen, has tried every rebellion 
trick in the book, until finally, in an act of desperation, his father and stepdad, 
Edward, decide to move the family out to Montana, where Edward was raised. 
They hope that in this rural environment, away from bad influences and under 
the strict tutelage of Miss Mae (Edward’s mom, not averse to physical punish-
ment) that Ben will finally find some peace. What Ben finds is that complications 
and troubled lives exist everywhere, and that his problems are minor compared to 
those of his eleven-year-old neighbor, who is being severely abused by his father, 
or his new girlfriend’s uncle, who is recovering from serious physical injuries after 
a farming accident. Harmon adeptly avoids making this a message novel about 
gratitude and acceptance by letting Ben, sardonic, bitter, and slow to admit his 
mistakes, do the narrating. In this way, the perspective is firmly trained on a jaded 
teen, who may allow virtuous lessons to sink in but doesn’t necessarily spend much 
time acknowledging them or exploring their impact. Readers may find intriguing 
overlaps between Ben and the male protagonist in Peters’ Between Mom and Jo 
(BCCB 7/06), who faces a similar struggle in coping with his parent’s sexuality 
while also seeking his own identity.  AS
hAseley, dennis Twenty Heartbeats; illus. by Ed Young. Porter/Roaring Brook, 
2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-238-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-9 yrs
A wealthy man yearning for a portrait of his favorite horse approaches the artist 
Homan and commissions him to paint a picture. As the years go by, no painting is 
forthcoming, though the artist assures his patron that the picture is progressing nicely. 
Finally, the enraged customer confronts the artist in his studio, and he’s shocked 
when Homan sits down and produces his painting in an instant. Too angry to look 
at the picture, the horse owner follows Homan into his studio to berate him and 
there finds an era’s worth of sketches of his horse, a room filled with preparation for 
what seemed to be a moment’s work; when he finally looks at Homan’s painting, 
he realizes that it is indeed a masterpiece. The story (based, according to a note on 
the copyright page, on an anecdote in a collection of artistic lore) is somewhat con-
trived, with a few loopholes in its message (how did the painter achieve his fame if 
he can only produce a painting after decades, and what if the customer still didn’t 
think the painting was worth the wait?); nonetheless, there’s beauty in the spare, 
lyrical text, and kids will want to consider the implications of the lesson. Texture and 
shape are emphasized over intricacy in Young’s collage art; pattern appears only in 
the men’s robes and a touch on the caparisoned horse; the palette relies on a range 
of earthtones, with the paper fibers providing near-tactile interest. Ironically, the 
myriad sketches of horses in Homan’s studio are more lifelike and appealing than 
the final portrait, which might better have been implied or creatively interpreted to 
preclude disappointment after the huge buildup. The value of work and preparation 
is a tough concept for youngsters to understand, though, and they may find this 
folkloric approach to the concept an eye-opening journey.  DS
April 2008 • 335
hAys, AnnA Portia’s Ultra Mysterious Double Life. Aladdin Mix, 
2008 [224p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-4893-3 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
An early morning earthquake shakes up Portia’s life in more ways than one, as 
she unearths from the rubble a photograph of the father she’s never met. In her 
elaborate fantasies of him, he’s a world-famous detective, so she decides to follow in 
his fantasized footsteps, making it her goal to track down clues to his whereabouts 
while she helps clean up after the earthquake. Portia’s attempts to press her mother 
for details backfire, instead leading to her blurting out revelations—for instance, 
that she really doesn’t like all of the super-healthy, super-bland, sugarfree, organic, 
whole-grain concoctions her mother is constantly dreaming up. Her mother re-
sponds to Portia’s assertions of her own preferences by making some heartening 
compromises, and eventually promises that she will try to find Portia’s elusive father 
herself. Portia’s breathless tweeny energy fizzes on every page of this light-hearted 
alternative-family sketch; despite her obsessively single-minded commitment to her 
fantasy of her father’s return, she switches her attention from one observation to 
another so fast that readers without similar short attention spans will suffer from 
thought whiplash, which is another way of saying that Hays knows her preadoles-
cent girls. The plot is thin on backstory (readers have no idea why Portia thinks 
her father is a detective who travels the world, for instance), and the resolution 
is wispy as well (her mother’s promise to try to find her father takes pressure off 
rather than adding anticipation), but the fact that Portia’s feel-good list of what 
she does have in her life outweighs what she’s missing will be affirming for girls 
without fathers in the house.  KC   
heAdley, JustinA Chen Girl Overboard. Little, 2008 339p
ISBN 978-0-316-01130-3 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
The daughter of a billionaire entrepreneur and his apparent trophy wife, Syrah 
Cheng is intensely focused on what she doesn’t have rather than what she does. 
Her parents’ attention, a really good friend, the snowboarding confidence she had 
before she was almost killed in an avalanche, the love of her half-siblings from 
Baba’s first marriage, the boy of her heart—the lack of these things matters more 
to her than her father’s billions, which in fact stand as obstacles to several of them. 
Syrah offers a heartfelt and intimate perspective on her situation that mitigates the 
poor-little-rich-girl cynicism through which she might otherwise be viewed. The 
utter normality of the gaps in her heart makes her seem ordinary despite her vast 
wealth and results in a focus on the cultural nuances of her situation (her mother 
wants her to be a slender Hong Kong–style girl, and she alone in her family speaks 
English, Mandarin, and Cantonese, making her a bridge across the pain and sepa-
ration the family endured as a result of the Cultural Revolution) more than the 
class ones. Unfortunately, an attenuated set-up features a jaded Syrah overworking 
her snowboarding metaphors as she teases out every gradation of action, reaction, 
and motivation of the hangers-on and socialites in her father’s über-wealthy circle, 
and the plot gets leggy and sprawling, with new characters being introduced more 
than halfway through the book that prove pivotal to the resolution. However, once 
the players are all on the stage, things in the final third gather speed to a satisfying 
and genuinely moving conclusion that celebrates the really good things you can 
do with a loving, generous family behind you. Oh, and of course a couple million 
dollars doesn’t hurt either.  KC
336 • The BulleTin
hills, tAd What’s Up, Duck?: A Book of Opposites; written and illus. by Tad 
Hills. Schwartz & Wade, 2008 22p
ISBN 978-0-375-84738-7 $6.99   
R 2-3 yrs
Hills’ Duck and Goose, with two birdie friends in brief hop-on roles, offer nine 
terse but grandly effective studies in contrast for this board-book concept treatment. 
From “front/back,” through “near/far” and “slow/fast,” to the appropriate finale 
“awake/asleep,” each lower-case word pair is accompanied by an avian demonstra-
tion. “Front” has four friends lined up on a patch of grass, fixing the viewer with 
a deadpan stare, while “back” on the facing page simply turns them around for a 
tail-feathered rear view. “Slow” features Duck ambling upright behind a very “fast” 
buddy, tipped almost to horizontal, webbed feet splayed in midair, and trailed by 
speed lines. Minimalist backgrounds befit a board book for the very young: plain 
white with an oval of sod, or an unadorned expanse of green grass and blue sky. 
Expressions and body language are particularly beguiling, with round eyes, stubby 
wings, oversized beaks, and big ol’ floppy feet adept at conveying the featured con-
cepts. This is a fine selection for fledgling lapsitters not quite ready to take flight 
with Dunrea’s Gossie and Gertie (BCCB 12/02).  EB
hogAn, mAry Pretty Face. HarperTeen, 2008 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-084112-6 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-084111-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
In a Santa Monica high school filled with slender blonde beauties, Hayley is a 
pudgy brunette (“woefully short on highlights of any kind”) prone to binge eat-
ing when stressed, often made so by her healthy-eating mother’s attempts to get 
Hayley to slim down. Summer brings a reprieve from the talking scale, however, 
with a summer trip to Italy, where she’ll stay with the family of her mother’s old 
friend. Though she’s initially floored by the absence of internet and phone contact 
with her best friend back home, Hayley soon falls in love with the relaxed pace of 
the Umbrian countryside, the simple pleasures of Italian family life—and Enzo, 
a handsome young local. This is basically Enchanted April for YAs, and a fine ro-
mantic version it is too, expertly walking its heroine through the dreamy pleasures 
of a foreign idyll while keeping enough touch with reality to make the interlude 
seem achievable. Depth accrues from implications about Hayley’s mother’s own 
youthful experiences and the way both positive and negative approaches to life 
can be transmitted down the generations, and it’s also clear that Hayley’s changes 
are more attitudinal than physical, so that the pudgy Santa Monican can indeed 
have the same body as the sexy visiting Americana in Italy. A bolstering blend of 
empowering and wish-fulfilling, this will be a splendid escape for those who can’t 
quite swing the real Italian thing.  DS
Jonsberg, bArry Dreamrider. Knopf, 2008 239p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94457-4 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84457-7 $15.99   
R Gr. 8-10
In this Australian import, a teen bullied for years learns that he may have a secret 
talent that will protect him. Overweight Michael is driven by his well-meaning 
but fractious father and he’s an easy target at school, but he has long felt that he 
can control everything that happens in his sleep through lucid dreaming. Recently, 
April 2008 • 337
however, the boundaries of what he believes he has power over have blurred, and 
Michael is now convinced he can actually implement his dream fantasies in his 
waking life (everything from flying with a new friend to healing cancer to violently 
murdering his persecutors). The evening of the school dance, the night he has 
chosen to reveal his new powers, will change everything for Michael and the worst 
bully. Though the lesson about the devastating effects of bullying edges toward 
heavy-handedness, the intriguing mystery behind Michael’s uncovered abilities 
more than compensates. The brilliance of this layered story lies in the unwavering 
focus on Michael’s perspective only: readers must assume that what he is saying is 
truth, and they are only granted glimpses of external interpretations at the very end 
of the novel that suggest alternative explanations. Readers who love the shocking 
twists of Fight Club or The Sixth Sense will revel in the movie-ready bizarre turns 
this novel takes, and they will likely find themselves flipping back to reread key 
passages.  AS
Kandel, Charlotte The Scarlet Stockings: The Enchanted Riddle. Dutton, 
2008 367p
ISBN 978-0-525-47824-9 $16.99   
M Gr. 4-7
Despite living in an orphanage in London’s East End, thirteen-year-old Daphne 
yearns to be a ballerina, a dream that seems impossible until she receives a mysterious 
package containing a guide to teaching oneself ballet and a pair of red silk stock-
ings. An enigmatic rhyme inscribed in the book suggests that Daphne may have 
received the keys to her destiny, and so she has: the stockings are magic, and her life 
undergoes a rapid transformation. First she’s adopted by a family of greengrocers, 
then she gets a job as personal assistant/maid at the Mayfair home of a dazzling 
actress; this leads to training with a London balletmaster, and then she reaches 
her dream—a berth with Paris’ Ballet Splendide. There she becomes a rising star 
in the corps de ballet, but will the jealousy of the prima ballerina—and her own 
ego—sabotage her achieving her life’s dream? That’s a bookload of plot indeed, 
especially considering that it all happens in less than a year, and it’s constructed less 
like a novel than a ten-year-old’s extended daydream, with every seeming tragedy 
turning immediately to triumph, and every triumph quickly set aside for the next 
step (it seems that Daphne’s only in her adoptive home a few weeks before she leaves 
for her live-in staff job in Mayfair). Though it gets a little tiresome how quickly 
everyone is won over by the relatively personality-free Daphne, the total absence 
of credibility is less a problem than the piecemeal construction that precludes 
readers from getting invested enough in a situation to find emotional reward, and 
those interested in the supernatural side of the story will be disappointed when it’s 
buried for long periods of time and unearthed only for muddled and inconsistent 
impact. The 1920s setting is thoroughly Hollywoodized, with characters types rather 
than individuals (the names, in fact, mount up dizzyingly) and their interactions 
cheerfully anachronistic. Ultimately, this just collapses under the weight of its own 
wishful contrivances, and balletomanes will be better off with Carolyn Meyer’s 
Marie, Dancing (BCCB 1/06).  DS
338 • The BulleTin
Kibuishi, KAzu The Stonekeeper; written and illus. by Kazu Kibuishi. Graphix/
Scholastic, 2008 [208p] (Amulet)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-439-84680-6 $21.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-439-84681-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Emily, her younger brother, and her mother are trying to start over in a different 
house after a family tragedy. Their new home, which has been in the family for 
generations, holds many mysteries, the most pressing of which is an amulet that 
Emily finds that seems the only aid in saving her mother after Mom is swallowed 
by a giant, many-tentacled creature in the basement. The amulet leads Emily and 
her brother to Alledia (a parallel but quite different version of Earth), where she 
meets her great-grandfather and learns of her potential as a leader of this world 
just before he dies. Left with vague clues, a team of robot helpers, and a perhaps 
digested mother, Emily is overwhelmed but determined to save the day. In this first 
volume of a graphic-novel series, Kibuishi ably balances gripping, sparsely worded 
adventure scenes with an emotionally taut storyline (the first chapter, when Emily’s 
father dies, is not only heartbreakingly rendered but adds further depth to Emily’s 
determination to save her other parent). The full-color illustrations are presented 
with varying degrees of detail: while the faces of the characters are relatively simple 
and show little expression change, the simultaneously lush and harsh creatures and 
objects in Alledia are intricately drawn. Although hardcore GN fans may find the 
omnipresent sound effects a bit distracting (szraaks, hweees, and fwooms abound), 
comic-book fans will recognize this as a familiar method of conveying action and 
drama. The ending is far from conclusive, but the absurdly cool final spreads of a 
house transforming into a robotic form of transportation for Emily as she contin-
ues her quest will certainly be enough to make readers forgive the cliffhanger and 
anticipate the sequel.  AS
Kimmel, elizAbeth Cody Spin the Bottle. Dial, 2008 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3191-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Seventh grade is a daunting prospect for Phoebe, but she’s excited that she can 
finally sign up for the Drama Club and act in a real play, Guys and Dolls, rather 
than the educational stage productions of grade school. She’s thrown, however, 
when she discovers that there’s a traditional game of Spin the Bottle on opening 
night, and that’s just the start of Phoebe’s flailing attempts to get a grip on the 
experience of middle school: she develops her first real crush (on Tucker, a nice if 
disorganized castmate), pukes spectacularly at her audition (in front of Tucker and 
the rest of her castmates), gets sucked into hero worship of glamorous upper-class 
girls, gets caught in bitchy politicking between same, and suffers a major rift with 
her erstwhile stalwart best friend, Harper. Kimmel perfectly catches the voice of a 
girl who’s moved from the baby pool to the open surf: Phoebe is constantly veer-
ing from ecstatic to panic-stricken, frantically trying (and failing) to sort out each 
daunting novelty before another one smacks her in the face even as she’s thrilled at 
the possibilities. It’s also believable that she is, at least initially, desperate to distin-
guish herself from the standard Drama Club eager-beaver seventh-grader (“I didn’t 
need amateur seventh-grade friends”) that is exactly her state. Though the rift with 
Harper is fairly standard-issue, brainy, self-contained Harper is a cool and tough-
April 2008 • 339
minded character, an intriguing contrast to Phoebe, so that the separation feels 
like a genuine loss. Top that with the jammy goodness of a theatrical story and the 
rich sprinklings of sweet, rueful humor (Phoebe’s kissing practice with an orange 
is endearingly awful), and you’ve got a tasty concoction for both those dreading 
and those anticipating the broad horizons of middle school.  DS 
Kimmel, hAven Kaline Klattermaster’s Tree House; illus. by Peter Brown. Ath-
eneum, 2008 152p
ISBN 978-0-689-87402-4 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Third-grader Kaline Klattermaster marches to his own drummer, which, he has 
already realized, is what people say “when they mean You Are Weird.” Adults’ 
responses to him consist mainly of wearied admonitions to refrain from such un-
usual activities as randomly tooting an imaginary bugle, while the only peers that 
seem to pay attention to him are the three oversized classmates who regularly take 
his school supplies. Luckily, he possesses a thick skin and an abundantly fertile 
imagination, in which he creates a detailed treehouse refuge staffed by two cool 
older brothers and their one hundred puppies. Between his imaginary treehouse 
pals and his conversations with a kind and understanding older neighbor, Kaline 
is gradually able to cope with the recent departure of his extremely orderly father 
(Kaline’s mother resembles Kaline in her casualness and eccentricity) as well as 
with the bully situation at school.  Kaline has an original voice, and his meander-
ing narrative, accentuated with BURSTS OF CAPITALIZED WORDS, suits his 
exuberant personality. His longing for his absent father and his worry that he is 
responsible for his father’s leaving are particularly poignant; he constantly strives 
to straighten all the little “DO NOT WALK ON GRASS” signs that his dad has 
posted in the yard and checks on his dad’s precisely aligned tools in the garage. 
Brown’s occasional illustrations (in what the copyright page describes as “pencil and 
digital”) smoothly provide some needed respite from the intensity of Kaline’s narra-
tive, and they helpfully identify the imaginary scenes with a cloud-shaped border. 
The Kalines of the world need all the help they can get, and this will reassure his 
like and encourage sympathy in others as well as making a useful and entertaining 
classroom readaloud choice.  JH
Kinney, Jeff Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Rodrick Rules; written and illus. by Jeff 
Kinney. Amulet, 2008 217p
ISBN 978-0-8109-9473-7 $12.95   
R Gr. 6-8
The sardonic, social misfit that is middle-schooler Greg, so ably sketched out in 
Diary of a Wimpy Kid (BCCB 6/07), returns in this second diary-format novel. As 
in the previous volume, Greg’s journal entries offer an obviously skewed but often 
witty perspective on his various woes: his bossy parents, a selfish older brother 
and tattling younger one, and an immature best friend whom Greg has decided is 
unworthy of his time. Of course, this leaves Greg, who seems to lack empathy or 
much warmth, with few things about which to be cheerful, though he does find 
supreme joy in the perceived failings of those around him, particularly his older 
brother, Rodrick, who knows a secret about Greg. It is this secret, which Rodrick 
threatens to out, that is the connective thread throughout this novel, though as 
in the first title, the stream-of-consciousness riffs on everything Greg sees seem 
ultimately more the point than the dramatic tension of the plot. Frequent comic 
strip–style illustrations are inserted into the diary entries: these deceptively simple 
340 • The BulleTin
drawings (there is little changing of expressions, and heavy reliance on speech 
bubbles) pair effectively with the authentic middle-school guy perspective. Greg 
is refreshingly not perfect, and, indeed, he is often rather unlikable (his cruelty to 
his best friend is particularly alarming in spots). However, he is clearly a boy driven 
by his insecurities and trapped in his longing to be someone worth noticing, and 
by subtly highlighting these weaknesses through Greg’s own narration, Kinney 
has created a character that inspires strong empathy and connection even though 
few readers might admit to being like him. The format of brief diary entries with 
interspersed illustrations will certainly attract reluctant readers; it could also serve 
as an inspiration in creative writing courses or as a model for journaling.  AS
KlAm, Cheryl The Pretty One. Delacorte, 2008 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90388-2 $12.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73373-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Megan is only eleven months younger than her sister, Lucy, but Lucy casts a long 
shadow: she’s a beautiful blonde, the popular star of their school for performing 
arts, while Megan passes unnoticed in her wake, working as a stage technician. 
This familiar pattern changes when Megan is hit by a car, suffering severe injuries 
that require multiple reconstructive operations to give her back a face; ironically, 
skillful cosmetic surgery then gives her cover-girl looks and the months-long ordeal 
of healing and multiple surgeries slims her down, so she’s suddenly a beauty at the 
school where she’s previously been invisible. She’s taken aback by the different 
treatment from people ranging from her longterm platonic male friend, Simon, 
to her longterm crush, Drew, but she’s most troubled by Lucy’s unprecedented 
antagonism. Taking a very different approach from Burgess’ Sara’s Face (BCCB 
6/07), this novel presents as plausible realism, with Megan’s surgery leaving her 
with some authentically unpleasant deficits as well as a new face; yet in addition, 
the story functions as an effective metaphor for all the sudden transformations of 
the teen years. Klam avoids simplistic “inner you” platitudes in her examination 
of the effects of appearance, and it’s clear that Megan is as affected by visuals as 
everybody else (Drew is definitely easy on the eye), but her suspicion of other 
people’s responses is sympathetically explored. The sisterly relationship is also 
believably complex—and believably misunderstood by Megan. Readers will relish 
the “if only” possibilities offered here even as they contemplate the protean nature 
of status and relationships.  DS
KormAn, gordon Swindle. Scholastic, 2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-439-90344-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Griffin Bing’s family is sorely in need of a cash infusion, and Griffin briefly holds in 
his hand the key to their financial salvation—a 1920 Babe Ruth baseball card that 
he found in an abandoned house scheduled for demolition. Unscrupulous antique 
dealer S. Wendell (now dubbed “Swindle” by Griffin and associates) Palomino 
cheats the naïve youngster out of a fortune, however, offering him $120 for a card 
that will fetch nearly a million at auction. So now Griffin is out for revenge, and 
he assembles a crack team of fellow sixth-graders to help him break into Palomino’s 
heavily protected residence and retrieve the card before the auction date. This is 
a genial study in predictability, with Griffin fuming steadily away, loyal pal Ben 
April 2008 • 341
overcoming his scruples to aid in the heist, and the supporting kids filling in the 
needed roles: a computer whiz to crack the electronic alarms, an actor to divert 
the neighbors, a dog whisperer to soothe the Doberman, a rock climber to scale 
the roof and access the skylight, and a class bully to contribute an extra bit of ten-
sion. Korman keeps a few surprises up his sleeve for the ending, though, and most 
readers won’t anticipate just how Mr. Bing’s prototype fruit-picker will fit into 
the action, or exactly who will end up with the cash. Here’s a ready answer to the 
perennial reluctant reader/book report dilemma: “It’s over 200 pages, but it moves 
really fast. Trust me.”  EB
leCesne, JAmes Absolute Brightness. Geringer/HarperCollins, 2008 [480p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-125628-8 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-125627-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-9
Phoebe has no interest in becoming friends with the gay cousin who has just been 
sent to live with her family; she thinks Leonard is too nosy, overly flamboyant, 
and obnoxious. When Leonard disappears, however, Phoebe realizes not only how 
much he always admired her but also how much she misses him. As the weeks go 
on and it becomes clearer that Leonard has been murdered, Phoebe is tortured by 
questions: who in her beachside town could have perpetrated such a crime, could 
she have prevented his death, and will she ever regain her careful distance from the 
world around her? As the story unfolds from Phoebe’s perspective, readers mostly 
see Leonard through her first annoyed and later haunted viewpoint. Unfortunately, 
this technique means the life of a potentially intriguing character is reduced to two 
sequential clichés as the stereotypically over-the-top flaming gay boy then becomes 
a martyr sent to teach the world about acceptance. In addition, two significant 
subplots, one about parental incest and the other a heavy-handed criticism of U.S. 
foreign policy, will likely deter readers even further from relating to Leonard or 
Phoebe as more than representative figures meant to instruct about tolerance and 
loving thy neighbors. It is actually in the moments when Phoebe focuses on her 
own growth that the story is most successful, elegantly honing in on one ill-prepared 
girl against what seem insurmountable obstacles. Indeed, Phoebe’s crumbling walls 
and her exploration of her new vulnerability is as compelling as the murder mystery 
itself. While Leonard’s death and the ensuing gay-rights messages seem at first to 
be central, those seeking a contemplative coming-of-age story will actually be the 
readers most satisfied with this novel.  AS
love, d. Anne Defying the Diva. McElderry, 2008 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-3481-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
A bland gossip column in the school newspaper leads to serious repercussions for 
sophomore Haley Patterson when an innocuous mention of queen bee Camilla’s 
latest party gets Camilla grounded. Camilla responds by quite effectively turning 
Haley into a social pariah, a process that leads Haley to seriously consider Camilla’s 
emailed suggestion that she might as well commit suicide since her social life is 
over anyway. Haley toughs it out until summer, which she spends with her aunt 
while her parents travel. Working at a local resort, she finds acceptance and even 
romance in a tight-knit group of summer friends who help her find the resolve 
to bounce back, bluff her way through social mistakes, and get her head together 
342 • The BulleTin
about what really matters. Haley is a strikingly ordinary girl, not at all interested 
in latching on to the popular crowd in the first place, so her targeting seems all 
the more chilling. When she makes mistakes and encounters gossip in a different 
context, however, she meets with straight talk and forgiveness, which has the effect 
of placing the blame squarely where it belongs—on an entire group’s complicity 
with one bad bully. The characters here are appealing and credible, so much so that 
readers will immediately recognize the differences between the social nuances that 
develop in school settings and those in intensive temporary work situations; Haley’s 
relationships with her brother, superficial crushes, and bona fide boyfriends are also 
clearly emotionally differentiated. The fully realized world with its believable plot 
arc actually downplays the stand-up-to-bullies message of the book, but it’s there 
too, along with a reminder that just because things heat up slowly doesn’t mean 
that there isn’t a time when the temperature gets too hot and when threats—like 
an encouragement to take one’s own life—become actionable. An author’s note 
providing resources on youth violence is included.  KC 
lowry, lois The Willoughbys; written and illus. by Lois Lowry. Lorraine/
Houghton, 2008 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-618-97974-5 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 4-7
Lois Lowry is not a name one usually associates with parody or dark humor, but 
she proves here that she can chuckle along with the best of ’em. The four Wil-
loughby children consider themselves an old-fashioned sort of family, like you 
might find in a book, so they aren’t surprised, for instance when a baby turns up 
on their doorstep—one expects that sort of thing in a storybook life, after all. 
Tiring quickly of the infant, they drop her off on the porch of a wealthy recluse 
who lives in their neighborhood, hoping for a reward, and continue their quest 
for old-fashioned adventures. They reason, though, that to achieve the ideal they 
have set for themselves, they really ought to be orphans. Of course, this requires 
disposing of their parents; fortunately, their parents are equally anxious to quit 
themselves of their four offspring, so when the children arrange for a brochure 
from the Reprehensible Travel Agency to appear through the mail slot, the couple 
immediately hires a nanny and sets off on a series of dangerous and, in the hopes 
of the children, fatal adventures. The tone of this darkly dry pastiche is consis-
tently witty, and it’s chock-full of accessible parodic references to (and sometimes 
explicit citings of) classic children’s texts as the children chart their future. There’s 
even a sly critique of outdated gender expectations as Tim, the eldest brother, is 
insufferable in his superiority and Jane, the youngest, practices her assertiveness 
in private. Though it never resorts to sweetness and light, Lowry crafts a tidy plot 
out of ludicrous circumstances, managing a bloodless and quite funny demise for 
the parents, and arranging things so that adults who want children and children 
who want parents all get matched up in the end. Tidy line drawings vaguely sug-
gest N. M. Bodecker’s work for Edward Eager’s old-fashioned classics; an extensive 
glossary of storybook words from the text is included, as is an annotated list of 
stories referenced.  KC
April 2008 • 343
Marriott, Zoë  The Swan Kingdom.  Candlewick, 2008  [272p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3481-0  $16.99
Reviewed from galleys     
R  Gr. 6-8
Drawing from elements of Andersen’s “The Wild Swans” in this novel, Marriott 
explores the power and responsibility that rests with one sibling after her family 
is torn apart by an evil force. Alexandra and her siblings have barely begun to 
grieve for their murdered mother when their father brings home a mysterious 
(and deeply evil) woman, who has beguiled him. Within days, a marriage is in 
the works, the brothers disappear, and Alex is banished to her aunt’s home outside 
of the kingdom. Far from acquiescing to her fate, Alex instead seeks guidance on 
how to use her extraordinary magical powers and how to control the destiny of her 
swan siblings, while also learning of the power of true love (a chance encounter 
with a neighboring prince brings about a passionate and enduring romance). Lest 
Alex seem too together, she is effectively developed as a flawed and therefore all 
the more sympathetic protagonist: it takes her eons to discover her own hidden 
talents, and her efforts rarely succeed on the first attempt. The deeply unsettling 
evil, centuries old and heedlessly destructive, that temporarily takes human form 
as her stepmother is more than a worthy foe to challenge the staunch but inex-
perienced Alex, providing for a surprisingly tense climactic battle between good 
and evil in which the outcome is anything but assured. Readers who enjoyed Rafe 
Martin’s Birdwing (BCCB 12/05) may be particularly interested in a new novel-
length interpretation of this Andersen tale, but a much wider audience is available 
in fantasy and romance fans who may not know the fairy tale but will still find this 
an intriguing and well-developed story.  AS
Matas, Carol  The Freak.  Key Porter, 2008  160p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55263-930-6  $6.95     
Ad  Gr. 7-9
      Visions.  Key Porter, 2008  133p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55263-932-0  $6.95     
R  Gr. 7-9
In these first two volumes of an anticipated trilogy (though initially published in 
1997 in Canada, The Freak is, like its brand-new sequel, new to the U.S.), Jade, 
fifteen, cautiously explores her newly acquired psychic powers. In The Freak, Jade 
is slowly healing from a severe illness when she discovers that the auras, visions, 
and prophetic dreams she assumed were temporary anomalies of her recovery are 
permanent. While trying to adjust to her newly precognitive existence, she receives 
visions of a potential disaster that will occur if she cannot harness her powers in 
time to sort out the clues and prevent a racially charged hate crime. In Visions, 
Jade and her powers have now acquired some credibility with her family, her new 
boyfriend, and local law enforcement, all of whose support she will need as she at-
tempts to solve a string of serial murders. Unprepared but earnest and clever, Jade 
is an appealing protagonist to whom fans of Medium or Ghost Whisperer will easily 
relate. Unfortunately, although Matas speeds the action with the dramatic tension 
of a planted bomb in the first plot, there is far too much focus on philosophical 
debates about free will and spirituality for such a trim novel. The second volume 
picks up considerably, with little exposition and plenty of momentum as Jade now 
understands that her powers are better put to action than left languishing as she 
debates her purpose. The focal point of both novels is Jade’s psychic abilities, and this 
straightforward plotting, paired with the short length and small cast of characters, 
make both of these offerings likely possibilities for reluctant readers.  AS 
344 • The BulleTin
mCCArthy, mAureen Rose by Any Other Name. Roaring Brook, 
2008 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-372-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Last year, Rose was crushing on new neighbor Nat Cummins, hanging with her best 
friend, Zoe, and readying to attend university after graduation; now she’s working 
as a waitress and estranged from Zoe, and embarking on a long trans-Australian 
drive to visit her dying grandmother, a trip that suddenly, much to Rose’s dismay, 
includes her mother. The narrative alternates between the story of Rose’s tumultuous 
year and her current journey, gradually unfolding the facts behind her devastation 
and her altered life trajectory as the two women travel to their destination. The 
book puts too many characters and elements into play, and many of them are 
contrived; that’s especially true of Rose’s out-of-the-blue gig as columnist “Ms. 
Angst,” the writing for which is a recurring theme that peppers the narrative with 
whiny rantlets. More successful is the slow revelation and exploration of her affair 
with Zoe’s (unmarried) father, an event occurring against the backdrop of Rose’s 
own father’s announcement that he’s leaving Rose’s mother for another woman. 
Characterization is particularly sharp in its dual portrait of Rose’s mother then (a 
basket case as the result of her husband’s leaving) and now (a strong, optimistic 
woman who loves to get involved in strangers’ lives), a change for the better that 
tacitly offers Rose a model for survival of her own heartbreak. Fans of road-trip 
stories or melodrama may not mind the excesses, and they’ll be curious to see how 
it all turns out.  DS
mCdonAld, megAn Stink and the Great Guinea Pig Express; illus. by Peter H. 
Reynolds. Candlewick, 2008 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-2835-2 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Stink (brother of Judy Moody, first starring appearance in Stink: The Incredible 
Shrinking Kid, BCCB 7/05) and his friends Webster and Sophie of the Elves are 
busy building a replica of the Great Wall of China out of cereal boxes when their 
wall begins to squeak—three guinea pigs have mysteriously appeared in Webster’s 
backyard. The kids go to the local pet shop, where they discover 101 guinea pigs 
wreaking havoc; Mrs. Birdwhistle, the pet shop owner, rescued the laboratory ani-
mals, but she’s having a devil of a time keeping them in their cages until she can 
find homes for them. After an unsuccessful door-to-door giveaway, Stink comes 
up with the idea of transforming Mrs. Birdwhistle’s old camper into a mobile pet 
shop, and between mall parking lot stops and a road trip to Virginia Beach, the 
crew successfully unloads the whole lot, leaving one favorite for Stink. Allusions to 
sister Judy Moody’s escapades and no reminder of contexts for certain plot details 
make this more of a companion novel for readers familiar with all of the others in 
the set rather than a stand-alone or even a Stink-alone read, but the plot is energetic 
enough to propel new readers forward without a knowledge of what they may be 
missing; the friendly nods to Disney’s dalmatians will be more accessible to newbies. 
The notion of a road trip with critters is exciting, the puns and wordplay obvious 
enough for emergent wordsmiths, and the story arc is easy to follow with some 
suspense built in around whether Stink will be able to keep his rodent of choice. 
Faithful Stink fans will surely be entertained as the exuberant Stink gets a furry 
friend of his own.  KC 
April 2008 • 345
mCKAy, hilAry Forever Rose. McElderry, 2008 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-5486-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Rejoice, readers who were unsatisfied with the inconclusive ending of Caddy Ever 
After (BCCB 7/06), the fourth and seemingly final volume about the Casson fam-
ily; there is in fact a much, much more satisfying closing chapter. In this volume, 
McKay returns to Rose, now eleven and generally the heartbeat of the family. At 
the moment, however, Rose has been rather abandoned: sister Caddy’s gone to 
no one knows where, sister Saffy and brother Indigo are involved with important 
teenaged pastimes of tutoring and working, Rose’s father’s still working busily in 
London, and her mother has contracted a persistent cold that has caused her to 
exile herself to the shed in the backyard (in addition, “the guinea pigs have been 
given away. The hamsters all escaped”). Bereft of her usual support, Rose struggles 
to deal with an unpleasant teacher, other people’s repeated insistence that she get 
over her distaste for reading, and the absolute failure of anyone in her family to 
begin the all-important preparations for Christmas; instead, her family seems to 
be falling further apart, as Indigo’s friend David makes himself more of a fixture, 
driving Saffy out of the house, and mother Eve’s illness shows no signs of releasing 
her from the shed. When Rose gets sucked into a friend’s plan to spend the night 
in the zoo, however, her action sets into motion myriad Casson family components, 
bringing and revealing major changes. The fact that Rose’s narration marks her as 
distinctly young for her age, a believable characteristic, adds to her vulnerability here, 
and while the family’s individual priorities aren’t inappropriate, it’s understandable 
that Rose, already the keenest sufferer of separation, takes their distraction so hard. 
Underneath the pragmatic truth, however, is a regretful acknowledgment that the 
Casson family’s system may be splendidly chaotic, but it’s a frail engineering marvel 
that can disintegrate under strain, leaving its members, however beloved, out in the 
cold. Ultimately, however, human attachment and Rose’s inherent strength prevail, 
and on the way readers have gotten better acquainted with Rose’s old friend Kiran 
(wonderfully uncowable) and her new friend Molly (anxiously mousy until she 
confounds expectation by planning the zoo exploit), developed even more sympathy 
for poor old David, and seen the Casson family at its worst and best.  DS
mCmAnn, lisA Wake. Simon Pulse, 2008 210p
ISBN 978-1-4169-5357-9 $15.99   
R Gr. 9-12
As a child, Janie discovered she had a disconcerting tendency to wander into the 
dreams of others. Now that she is seventeen, this always burdensome quirk has 
become unbearable: in school she is incessantly bombarded with the dreams, mostly 
about sex and anxieties, of her constantly dozing peers. The gruesome nightmares 
of a fellow student, Cabel, are especially alarming, however, when she finds herself 
attracted to his waking self and drawn into his life. The romantic connection is a 
relief to the deeply isolated Janie (living alone with her alcoholic mother, she has 
always had to keep distance from friends to preserve her secret), but he has even 
more to offer than simple involvement: Cabel is somehow able to spot Janie in his 
sleeping world, and he is determined to find ways to help her, and himself, out of 
his own horrendous nightmares by using their waking bond as therapy to face his 
past. The potentially overblown romantic attachment between the protagonists 
(they are, after all, apparently destined to be together whether awake or dreaming) 
346 • The BulleTin
is effectively complicated and reined in by a well-developed subplot that supplies 
Cabel with a secretive contemporary life to go with his tortured past. In addition, 
Janie’s patient resilience in the face of unpleasant circumstances makes her a sym-
pathetic character, and readers will likely find themselves as relieved as she when 
some control of her powers is gained. Pair this with Jonsberg’s Dreamrider, reviewed 
above, for two different but overlapping explorations of lucid dreaming.  AS
merCAdo, nAnCy, ed. Baseball Crazy: Ten Short Stories That Cover All the 
Bases. Dial, 2008 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3162-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
On-field action takes a backseat to personal drama in this collection of ten original 
offerings by prominent children’s and young adult authors. The anthology leads off 
with a strong pair of entries: Jerry Spinelli’s “The Great Gus Zernial and Me” is a 
loving tribute to the beauty of the game as seen through the eyes of an orphan on 
his first trip to the ballpark, and Frank Portman’s “Mark Pang and the Impossible 
Square” is a taut, nail-biting study in outfielder ineptitude. Then the tempo slows 
with more predictable selections concerning gender roles (Sue Corbett’s “Fast Ball”) 
and a mouthy parent (Paul Acampora’s “Great Moments in Baseball”). Ron Koertge 
and Maria Testa pitch a couple of change-ups with a performable script (“Riding 
the Pine”) and a free-verse poem (“Smile Like Jeter”), and John Ritter presents a 
memoir (“Baseball Crazy”) of a childhood teammate who inspired one of his fictional 
characters. Despite a couple of uneventful innings, the collection delivers enough 
variety to keep most readers in the stands ’til the final out.  EB 
nA, An The Fold. Putnam, 2008 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24276-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
It’s the summer before senior year, and Joyce is determined it’s going to be the start 
of her relationship with hottie John Ford Kang—until she discovers that he can’t 
even tell her apart from the other Asian girl in their Chem class, and, worse, that 
he’s got an eye for her perfect and beautiful older sister, Helen. Change comes to 
the family, however, when the girls’ bossy aunt, the family benefactor, comes into 
money and gives family members generous yet commanding gifts: for Helen, a 
subscription to a Korean dating service, and for Joyce, plastic surgery to give her 
“the fold,” the eyelid crease common to Caucasian eyelids and unusual in Asians. 
Joyce has never previously considered such a procedure, but as her best friend en-
courages her and she realizes how widespread the alteration is, she begins to think 
it may be the path to beauty, John Ford Kang, and resemblance to Helen. Na here 
goes for accessibility over style and creates a sturdy yet still thoughtful story, which 
addresses the issues of identity and appearance without laying down dictates of right 
and wrong. Even more interesting, however, is the family story: despite their debt 
to Joyce’s aunt and constant compliance with her wishes, her parents are quietly 
willing to defend their kids, and they have in fact been figuring out how to support 
Helen as she comes to terms with being a lesbian. A natural double with Klam’s The 
Pretty One, reviewed above, or Klass’s Rhino (BCCB 11/93), this will strike a chord 
with readers struggling with their own issues of appearance and identity.  DS
April 2008 • 347
nAnJi, shenAAz Child of Dandelions. Front Street, 2008 [216p]
ISBN 978-1-932425-93-2 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Although her grandfather was born in India, Sabine herself, in 1972, is a third-
generation Ugandan, so she agrees with her father that Idi Amin’s proclamation 
that all foreign Indians must leave Uganda does not apply to her. As the ninety-
day countdown continues, however, tensions grow in the country and distinctions 
between black and brown become more important than rights of citizenship. When 
her beloved uncle disappears, Sabine presses her father to find out what’s become of 
him, but his probing doesn’t sit well with the military, and he must then flee. Sabine 
tries to get proof of citizenship for herself and her little brother, who has Down’s 
Syndrome, but the soldier she asks threatens to rape her and tears up her brother’s 
passport, saying that Uganda doesn’t want idiots. Readers will hear strong echoes 
of Hitler’s ideologies and methods in this look at a more recent attempt to establish 
a “pure” national identity. Sabine is hurt and confused when her best friend, who 
is a black Ugandan, rejects her, and she must confront the fact that her family, as 
members of the merchant class, has in fact exploited the labor of native Ugandans 
to build their wealth. Sabine then struggles with understanding the sources of native 
anger and figures out the extent to which economic class and race are intertwined 
and how much she herself has taken for granted as a child of privilege. She also 
becomes resolute and determined in the face of threat, vowing to keep her family 
together and strong as they face their new status as refugees. Though the language 
is at times choppy and abrupt, this is an absorbing story rich with historical detail 
and human dynamics. It’s also a subject not often treated in literature for youth but 
one that resonates with issues closer to home, making this an important addition 
to young readers’ understanding of twentieth-century history. An author’s note 
provides clear, informative background information and context.  KC 
nelson, KAdir We Are the Ship: The Story of Negro League Baseball; written and 
illus. by Kadir Nelson. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 2008 88p
ISBN 978-0-7868-0832-8 $18.99   
R Gr. 4-8
At first glance, this hefty oversized offering may suggest a text-heavy “coffee table” 
showcase for Nelson’s monumental portraiture of these undervalued giants of base-
ball. Riveting as the pictures are, though, Nelson matches them with a readaloud- 
worthy narration delivered in the voice of an imaginary player who’s seen it all, lived 
it all. The history of the segregated sport takes on the tone of an intimate memoir, 
recalling the earliest days of barnstorming and “clowning,” the formation of a true 
league under Rube Foster, the trials and triumphs of life on the road, innovations 
from shin guards to night games, the big-name heroes, the ultimate breakthrough 
into the major leagues which signaled the arrival of civil justice and the bittersweet 
end of Negro League play. Full-page and double-bleed compositions, and even 
a foldout of the First Colored World Series players (cleverly hidden beneath an 
oversized ticket reproduction), visually elevate the players to the status of legend, 
but the conversational style of the text brings them back down to earth: “Man, if 
we had a nickel every time we heard, ‘If you were white, you’d be worth such-an’-
such,’ we’d all be rich men.” With source notes, an index, bibliography, and brief 
filmography, this will be an enticing selection for research paper writers as well as 
an all-’round great read for baseball enthusiasts.  EB 
348  •  The BulleTin
Nye, Naomi Shihab  Honeybee.  Greenwillow, 2008  [176p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-085391-4  $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-085390-7  $16.99
Reviewed from galleys     
R  Gr. 10 up
Honeybees, with their intricate communication system and their vital contribution 
to survival, have long been of interest to noted poet Nye, and they serve here as 
recurrent motif or theme in this collection of eighty-two poems. The entries (some 
of which have been previously published) vary between free verse and chatty prose 
poems, but all are brief (the longest is approximately four pages) and independently 
readable. The mood here is more anxious and yearning than in most of Nye’s previ-
ous anthologies for younger people; many of the poems focus on the Iraq war and its 
effects in this country and that one, a subject upon which Nye occasionally brings 
her Arab ancestry to bear. While some of the poems are fettered by a remonstrative 
tone that lends them a brassy note, many of them evince Nye’s gift for transform-
ing life small and large into personal and emotional imagery. Quite a few entries 
tell stories, either directly or indirectly, with some memorable for sheer anecdotal 
value, but they nonetheless offer implications beyond mere narrative impact (one, 
for instance, describes how a young Nye and a friend mistook a private home for 
an art museum and, to the polite surprise of its inhabitants, studiously viewed its 
“exhibits,” an experience that mirrors the poetic tendency to view the familiar in 
new light). Many of the poems would be effective readalouds for kid or grownup, 
and their current-events slant could make them artistic entries in a broader discus-
sion. No index is included, but there is a table of contents.  DS
PadiaN, maria  Brett McCarthy: Work in Progress.  Knopf, 2008  [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94675-2  $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84675-5  $15.99
Reviewed from galleys     
Ad  Gr. 6-9
Hearkening back to grade-school hijinks, eighth-grader Brett engineers a prank-call 
goof on a classmate’s mother while over at her friend Diane’s house with two more 
girls. Unsurprisingly, Brett is quickly busted, and she’s also in big trouble, since the 
prank embarrassed Diane’s mother with a business client. Things get worse when 
Brett punches the acquaintance who told the grownups, earning herself a suspension 
from school and causing a gulf to grow between Diane and Brett; such mundane 
troubles shrink in contrast, however, when Brett discovers that her beloved grand-
mother is seriously ill with cancer. The plot and subplot elements don’t all meld, 
and Brett’s ostensible taste for polysyllabic words, a device that begins each chapter 
and pops up occasionally within them, is at odds with her fairly plainspoken nar-
ration. Also, her cavalier treatment of people makes her hard to sympathize with, 
and she never really faces up to the problematic nature of some of her behavior. 
She is, however, a character with strength and determination, and her drive and 
competitive spirit make her a believable heroine on the soccer field; off the field, 
she’s credible both in her devotion to her grandmother and her obtuseness about 
Diane’s new direction. In addition, the book offers a vivid depiction of life in a 
small coastal Maine town, with island trips and outsider suspicion part of the daily 
reality. Despite the book’s flaws, readers who like their heroines on the tough side 
but with heart may well relate to Brett.  DS
April 2008 • 349
PArK, lindA sue Keeping Score. Clarion, 2008 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-618-92799-9 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Ten-year-old Maggie Fortini considers herself at least as avid and knowledgeable 
a Brooklyn Dodgers fan as her older brother, even through she has no particular 
desire to play the game. Jim Maine, one of the new hires at her father’s old firehouse, 
shows her how to harness her enthusiasm and impress the big guys by keeping 
score as she listens to the games on the radio. Maggie’s aptitude and patience for 
the painstaking notation system earns her considerable respect, but it becomes 
even more important when Jim is shipped off to be an ambulance driver in Korea, 
and Maggie becomes his most enthusiastic correspondent, keeping him up to date 
on “the Bums” and on his own favorites, Willie Mays and the Giants. Jim’s letters 
come to an abrupt stop, and it’s a long time before Maggie finds out that Jim is in 
fact back in the States, suffering from what we now recognize as post-traumatic 
stress. Determined to be the one who breaks through to the totally withdrawn Jim, 
Maggie launches an all-out effort to revive his interest in baseball and reconnect 
with life. The story, which spans the early 1950s, unwinds at such a leisurely pace 
that it’s difficult to anticipate initially where it might be heading, and Maggie’s les-
sons in baseball scoring and war-zone mapping (though thankfully accompanied 
by illustrative tables and drawings) feel somewhat didactic. It’s unusual, though, 
to find a baseball novel in which the female lead excels as a statistician rather than 
an on-field prodigy, and kids who prefer to flex their muscles crunching numbers 
will meet in Maggie a kid after their own heart.  EB 
PArKer, robert Andrew Piano Starts Here: The Young Art Tatum; written and 
illus. by Robert Andrew Parker. Schwartz & Wade, 2008 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93965-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83965-8 $16.99   
R 6-9 yrs
“Day and night, dark and light, don’t really matter to me. Not the way sounds 
and smells do.” That’s why, as the imagined voice of jazz pianist Tatum explains in 
this picture-book biography, little Art would rather be inside standing on tiptoe to 
plunk the piano keys than be outside playing with other kids. His parents, an ap-
preciative audience, encourage his music making, and soon he’s playing in church, 
entertaining the neighbors, and filling the summer night with tunes that pour out 
his window. Next he’s playing by ear at a local tavern, at a radio station, and, ever 
farther from home, launched on his professional career, but he never forgets his 
origins: “No matter where I am, when the room fills with music, I remember all 
the people who helped me. The people I love.” In an endnote about Tatum’s adult 
life, Parker explains that he has supplied here some imagined details of the artist’s 
early years; these re-creations must be subtle indeed to blend so seamlessly into a 
credible whole. Parker’s signature spidery line-and-watercolor artwork glides easily 
from compositions of children tramping though sun dappled snow to smoky-
blue haze of a late-night club gig. All that’s missing now is the music itself, and 
although Parker mentions plenty of Tatum’s favorite pieces within his text, he does 
not augment his appended bibliography with suggestions of specific recordings. 
Finding the soundtrack to bring this affectionate tribute fully to life will be worth 
the extra effort.  EB  
350  •  The BulleTin
Patricelli, leslie  Baby Happy Baby Sad; ISBN 978-0-7636-3245-8; No No 
Yes Yes; ISBN 978-0-7636-3244-1.  Each book: written and illus. by Leslie 
Patricelli.  Candlewick, 2008  24p  $6.99     
R  1-3 yrs
Patricelli expands her board-book offerings with this appealing duet on the vagaries 
of baby life. No No is a study in toddler etiquette, with dos and don’ts on facing 
pages. Dumping a meal on one’s head rates a “no no,” while eating with a spoon 
gets a “yes yes”; stuffing toys into the toilet is likewise deemed unacceptable, while 
perching patiently on the potty is considered good form. Arming any diaper-clad 
tot with a pair of scissors seems a questionable practice, even if clipping hair is 
discouraged and cutting paper snowflakes (a prodigy, indeed) is recommended, 
but all in all, the mini-lessons hit their mark. Mood swings feature in Baby Happy, 
with a triple-dipper cone (is this really a good idea?) inspiring lip-licking delight 
(“baby happy”), and ice cream landing “splat” on the ground making “baby sad.” 
Likewise, running around buck naked is cause for happiness, while being bundled 
in a snowsuit is no fun at all. Both books star a round-headed, round-bellied little 
tyke with a single springy coil of hair and a mouth wide enough to deliver smiles 
and wails with gusto. Thickly outlined figures sport a hint of texturing, and back-
ground colors are rendered in shades more sophisticated than the usual nursery 
colors. Invite preschool siblings in the fun with these satisfying, limited-vocabulary 
read-alongs.  EB
Pearson, Mary e.  The Adoration of Jenna Fox.  Holt, 2008  [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-7668-4  $16.95
Reviewed from galleys     
R  Gr. 8-10
Seventeen-year-old Jenna has been told that that is her name, and that the people 
who surround her are her family, but she has no memory as proof. Slowly, as she 
recovers lost memories of her life before a terrible car accident, disturbing incon-
sistencies in what she is being told surface. In what is both a blessing and a curse, 
Jenna’s parents, who have access to (illegal) scientific advances unavailable to others, 
could not let her broken body go and took extraordinary measures to keep her alive. 
The result is the new Jenna, who retains only 10% of her former brain: the rest of 
her is remade. Although frequent explorations into what makes a person unique, 
the possibilities and dangers of science, and the weight of ethics in medicine are 
present, Pearson ably keeps the focus on Jenna, thus avoiding an overly message-
driven plot. Jenna, confused, isolated, and both horrified and grateful at her own 
existence, will inspire deep sympathy in readers; that very existence also serves to 
complicate what might otherwise be relatively straightforward debates about the 
limits one should place on science. In addition to offering strong character devel-
opment and an intriguing, almost-possible science fiction plot, the author uses a 
spare, lyrical writing style that fits perfectly with Jenna’s own hesitant journey back 
to herself (both because she is apprehensive as to what she will find and because of 
the limitations on her own memory). Although readers may spot significant overlap 
with Dickinson’s Eva (BCCB 5/89), particularly in the portrayal of parents who 
take unprecedented action rather than let go of their damaged children, this novel 
sidesteps some of the ethics-laden emphasis of the earlier work, and the intricate 
examination of a girl who is no longer who she has always been may draw in real-
istic-fiction fans as well as the targeted SF audience.  AS
April 2008 • 351
rinAldi, Ann The Redheaded Princess. HarperCollins, 2008 214p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-073375-9 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-073374-2 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Having examined Tudor England during one of its times of greatest uncertainty in 
Nine Days a Queen (BCCB 2/05), Rinaldi now returns to explore it from another 
viewpoint, that of the young Elizabeth I. The story officially starts when Elizabeth 
is ten, brought back to court after her father, Henry VIII, marries his sixth wife, 
Katharine Parr. The book then follows Elizabeth’s shifting fortunes as her brother, 
then Lady Jane Grey, and then her sister, Mary, accede to the throne, ending as the 
twenty-five-year-old Elizabeth finally becomes queen. The book’s main emphasis 
along the way is Elizabeth’s view of men, particularly her involvement with two: 
Sir Thomas Seymour, the definitive Tudor hottie player, who played a dangerous 
game by engaging in questionable frolicking with the teenaged Elizabeth under the 
nose of his wife, the Queen Dowager Katharine; and Robert Dudley, her friend 
from childhood and well beyond, the favorite suspect for rumors of illicit affairs 
with the queen. The book walks readers sturdily through the princess’ highly 
eventful life, her narration repeatedly emphasizing her reliance on her loyal staff 
and her wariness of tying herself to any of the opportunistic men eager to use her 
as a pawn in the game of power. However, the emotional portrait is choppy, with 
her failing to mention Dudley for pages and suddenly swooning over him on the 
next, and it’s silent on important matters—she never, for instance, discusses her 
reasons, theological or political, for her determination to stay secretly Protestant 
in the face of Mary’s insistence she worship as a Catholic. The book is also a little 
muddled on accuracy, with chronology, terminology, and title use all suffering from 
clangers. Nonetheless, the romantic slant on her life will appeal to genre fans, and 
princess dreamers may find that this captures their interest as well as gives them a 
window into the period.  DS
rumford, JAmes Silent Music: A Story of Baghdad; written and illus. by James 
Rumford. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-276-5 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 7-10 yrs
Rumford, whose interest in non-European languages has brought young readers 
Sequoyah (BCCB 1/05) and Seeker of Knowledge (BCCB 4/00), offers here a fictional 
tale of a young Iraqi boy whose interests comprise not only soccer and “loud, parent-
rattling music,” but also Arabic calligraphy. Ali’s dedication to developing his skill 
prompts his mother to nickname him Yakut, after a thirteenth-century calligrapher 
who “shut out the horror” of a Mongol invasion by fleeing to a tower where he 
could write in peace. And that, indeed, is just what Ali has done—blocking out 
his fear during the 2003 invasion to “[fill] his mind with peace.” Having remarked 
that many words are easier to form than others, he closes with the weighty observa-
tion that “war” flows easily off the pen, while “peace” is much more challenging 
to master. Clothing and backgrounds are rendered in dense geometric patterns of 
Arabic decorative art, while text boxes, snippets of Ali’s writing, and an assortment 
of jottings in various formats are layered into mixed-media collages in radiant, 
strongly contrasting hues. The view of one boy’s experience in a war-torn country 
is compelling, especially in light of the historical precedent. Having hooked his 
audience on the beauty, elegance, and skill of Ali’s craft, however, Rumford gives 
352 • The BulleTin
no real explanation of how the written language is constructed (apart from its right 
to left direction); the few Western alphabet letters he occasionally lays alongside 
an Arabic word do little to help audiences visualize how or where the component 
strokes are joined. Children inspired to attempt a bit of calligraphy on their own 
will therefore need to look elsewhere for guidance, but this may be an inviting peek 
for Western children into another culture.  EB
runholt, susAn The Mystery of the Third Lucretia. Viking, 2008 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-670-06252-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
“My name is Kari Sundgren. This story is about how my best friend Lucas and I got 
mixed up in a big international art crime, and all the adventures we had doing it.” 
So begins this lively tale of two young teenage girls, who, while traveling with Kari’s 
magazine-writer mother, notice in London’s National Gallery the same artist who 
had snapped rudely at them in their local Minneapolis Art Institute. In both places, 
he paints from a museum Rembrandt, a practice the girls begin to find suspicious 
(especially since he covers his work from prying eyes), so they cunningly spy on 
his actions and copy what they can see of his work. When the news breaks that a 
hitherto unknown Rembrandt has been discovered in the Netherlands, they realize 
what their artist was up to, but in trying to reveal the truth, they find themselves 
in over their heads with a crooked curator willing to kill to keep his secrets. While 
the plot opts for effectiveness over credibility, it’s deftly constructed for the former. 
The classic structure, with a narrator retrospectively telling the story and overtly 
including foreshadowing and necessary explanation, works a treat here, suiting Kari’s 
teenaged voice and setting up some of the more complicated elements for easier 
understanding. The girls’ clever artistry, both literal and figurative, is mesmerizing 
in its own right (since Kari has imitated the artist’s brushstrokes exactly, she rec-
ognizes them in the supposed Rembrandt); the book gains cohesion, even when it 
turns into more straightforward crime and adventure, from the theme of women’s 
historic and contemporary oppression, with that motif informing both the forged 
painting itself and the climactic scenes, which take place in the red-light district of 
Amsterdam. There are enough artistic details for fans of art mysteries and enough 
spying and fleeing for fans of detective adventure, so aficionados of both Balliett’s 
Chasing Vermeer (BCCB 7/04) and teen-sleuthing exploits such as Feinstein’s Last 
Shot (BCCB 3/05) should find satisfaction here.  DS 
sChmidt, gAry d. Trouble. Clarion, 2008 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-618-92766-1 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Henry and his family live the charmed existence of the well-bred, well-heeled New 
England old-money crowd, exemplified by successful, professional parents, a coastal 
home that has been in the family for hundreds of years, and bright, athletic children 
attending posh private academies and always rising to the challenges expected of 
them. That world shatters when Franklin, Henry’s elder brother and role model, is 
hit by a truck belonging to Chay Chouan, the son of a Cambodian refugee, leaving 
Franklin with only one arm and indeterminate brain activity. Flurries of violence 
erupt as Franklin’s fellow lacrosse players vent their rage on the Cambodian com-
munity, and Henry begins to question whether Franklin was such a good role model 
after all, given as he was to racially motivated bullying even before the accident. 
April 2008 • 353
Henry decides that he needs to follow through on a plan that Franklin used to 
taunt him with, climbing a dangerous mountain as a rite of passage into Franklin’s 
kind of macho manhood. Henry’s version of the plan, though, leads to forgiveness 
as he hitches a ride with Chay of all people, and he learns secrets about his brother, 
his sister, and Chay that lead him to question the kind of person he wants to be. 
Schmidt creates a rich and credible world peopled with fully developed characters 
who have a lot of complex reckoning to do, reckoning that involves confronting 
issues of white privilege and responsibility for racial reconciliation and acceptance. In 
the midst of the drama, a hurricane uncovers a burned-out slave ship that belonged 
to Henry’s ancestor; its presence, along with an encounter with some Vietnam vets, 
ups the ante on the white guilt message just in case you weren’t paying attention, 
and thus seems a bit gratuitous. Schmidt’s prose, however, is flawless, and Henry’s 
odyssey of growth and understanding is pitch-perfect and deeply satisfying.  KC
seeger, lAurA vACCAro Dog and Bear: Two’s Company; written and illus. by Laura 
Vaccaro Seeger. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-273-4 $12.95   
R 3-5 yrs
Is the friendship firmly established in Dog and Bear: Two Friends, Three Stories 
(BCCB 6/07) in danger? It would seem so, since the first of these three stories 
involves Dog informing Bear that he’s so angry with his friend that he’s running 
away. Bear patiently supports Dog through his packing labors and then wistfully 
supposes that Dog won’t stay for an ice-cream snack, which, of course, is all the 
convincing to stay that Dog needs. In the second story, Dog makes Bear a birth-
day cake so delicious that he can’t resist testing it out himself; in the third, Dog 
is feeling poorly, but he’s not so unwell that he can’t find plenty of helpful labors 
for kind Bear to perform in assistance. As in the first book, text is simple and it’s 
almost entirely couched in dialogue; even when Dog is alone and nibbling away at 
Bear’s cake, he’s exclaiming aloud over its irresistibleness.  Character is effectively 
delineated through the compact words, though, with volatile Dog the childlike 
partner to Bear’s more adult stability (really, Bear’s getting short shrift if this is an 
actual friendship). Sweeping, textured thick black lines form the outlines of the 
visual elements, enhancing the appearance of simplicity, as does the fact that most 
spreads are dominated by the figures of Dog (a rich wiener-dog brown) and Bear (a 
harlequin confabulation of autumnal tones). Combining some of the relationship 
dynamics and toy-animal charm of Winnie-the-Pooh with a pared-down form and 
style, this will make a cuddly readaloud for young storytimers.  DS
sheA, bob Big Plans; illus. by Lane Smith. Hyperion, 2008 [42p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-1100-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 7-10 yrs
The nameless protagonist may currently be punitively placed in the classroom 
corner, but he won’t be held back for long, because he’s got “big plans.” As he glee-
fully explains, he’ll be shining himself up and announcing this fact; on the way, 
he’ll encounter a mynah bird, who falls in with his plans (“‘What’s it gonna be, 
bird? In or out?’ ‘I’m in!’ says the mynah bird”), and then he’ll take the city, with 
the “big shots, bigwigs, and muckety-mucks” bowing to his obvious momentum. 
After the kid becomes mayor, the president hears of this youthful phenomenon 
and offers the up-and-comer a job, only to find himself deposed (“You’re third 
in charge, reporting directly to the mynah bird!”). After he’s whipped the states 
354 • The BulleTin
into a frenzy of supporting action, he heads off to the moon, where he leaves a 
huge message that the entire world can see: “I got big plans. Big plans, I say!” The 
screwball-comedy patter has a period flavor that may require some adult interpre-
tation, but its bouncy and insistent repetition and theatrically quippy dialogue 
(“‘Look, are you a naysayer?’ I’ll say. ‘Do you say “NAY”?’ I say”) will certainly 
tickle youngsters with its impertinent self-assurance; the shaggy-dog nature of the 
joke is funny in its own right, and kids will rejoice as their agemate rockets—at 
times literally—to the top over the staid adults who have tried to keep him down. 
Smith is the perfect artist for this illogically logical scenario, with retro tones of 
gold and avocado predominating in his carefully disorganized oversized composi-
tions filled with strangely geometrical patterned objects that provide a setting for 
our whacked-out hero and his newmade lackeys. An escapist adventure, a victory 
over important adults, and a new catch-phrase to triumphantly wield—what more 
could an audience want?  DS
singer, niCKy GemX. Holiday House, 2008 311p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2108-4 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Maxo, genetically modified to look and be perfect, is not the only 
teen in the “GemX” generation to discover literal cracks in his face. In fact, the whole 
batch seems to be not only physically breaking but also suffering some emotional 
damage as well. While the grownups (who are more financially than emotionally 
invested in the success of these kids) explore methods of fixing the problem, Maxo 
falls in love at first virtual sight with a Dreggie, one of the destitute outcasts who 
live outside the borders of Polis. Maxo’s attempt to find her actually saves his life, 
as all the other GemX teens are destroyed when they arrive to receive their “cure.” 
Now thousands are dead, the Dreggies are being blamed as a cover-up, and Maxo 
is still physically crumbling but determined to right the world. The use of futuristic 
science in the pursuit of perfection, an SF standard, is effectively employed here, 
and Singer ably pushes the boundaries of current technology to frame a plausible 
and intriguing concept. Unfortunately, the message is heavy-handed and preachy, 
and the metaphor of the idealized façade is forced when played out through the 
otherwise well-developed Maxo, with the poor guy literally having his face crack 
further each time he experiences growth (Maxo cries for the first time and feels a 
snap; he experiences empathy and a whole web of wrinkles appears). While readers 
are meant to respond to his enlightened self, they will likely be so distracted by his 
only face being destroyed that this will seem an unfair trade-off. Although this novel 
doesn’t quite carry the poetic spark of Melanie Gideon’s Pucker (BCCB 6/06), the 
similarities of boys trying to discover their souls apart from their damaged bodies 
invites comparative reading.  AS
snyder, zilPhA KeAtley The Bronze Pen. Atheneum, 2008 200p
ISBN 978-1-4169-4201-6 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Preteen Audrey is an obedient, easygoing girl with one big secret: she is a fiction 
writer. Her aspirations to be a famous author take an interesting detour when a 
magical duck leads Audrey to a mysterious cave containing a peculiar old woman 
who offers her the gift of a pen. Of course, such a chain of events can only lead to 
mystical goings-on with the pen, as Audrey discovers when things she writes begin 
to come true. Although it takes her a bit to catch on, Audrey soon realizes that 
she could use this pen for significant good to help her mother, who is struggling 
April 2008 • 355
with her boss, or her father, who is seriously ill. However, claiming magic for one’s 
own goals is always a slippery exercise, and although the protagonist gets much of 
what she wants, it is not quite clear whether a pen, luck, or hard work has the final 
impact. Snyder has developed an intriguing and nicely balanced cast, surrounding 
Audrey with quirky, complex, and memorable characters. Unfortunately, Audrey 
herself is a bit too well-behaved, gullible, and short-sighted to keep readers strongly 
engaged with her personally. In addition, the underdeveloped and vaguely refer-
enced context of the 1973 Californian landscape in which the novel takes place 
seems an unnecessary distraction in what could otherwise be a story anywhere or 
anytime about a girl who will take intervention wherever it can be found, whether 
in magic or her own talents. Nevertheless, the overall emphasis on the power of 
story to change the world (in small or significant ways) will not be lost on fiction 
readers, most of who certainly wouldn’t mind a pen that could conjure up their 
own fantastic imaginings.  AS
strAhAn, JonAthAn, ed. The Starry Rift: Tales of New Tomorrows: An Original 
Science Fiction Anthology. Viking, 2008 [544p]
ISBN 978-0-670-06059-7 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Veteran compiler Strahan here brings together sixteen stories, all but one original, 
that envision a future world. The stories cover both the genre standards (virtual 
reality, cloning, and post-apocalyptic environs recur throughout) and the unex-
pected (futuristic vampires and end-time prophets). In addition, a dramatic range 
of writing styles is represented, from Neil Gaiman’s short “Orange,” where the 
reader is only presented with a set of answers to an interview about the respondent’s 
bizarre older sister, to “Anda’s Game,” by Cory Doctorow, which is a more in-depth 
exploration of a young girl’s rise to fame in a virtual reality environment. Even in 
their variety, however, these tales are all fairly sophisticated and traditional science 
fiction (in overall story structure, narrative perspective, and topics included); this 
is a collection clearly intended for fans of the genre. The inclusion of adolescent 
protagonists, environments in which teens could imagine themselves (schools, 
virtual reality spaces, or on spaceships as apprentices), and almost universally fast-
paced, snappy narratives will all be particularly appealing to YA readers. In fact, 
SF buffs, long resigned to crossover adult compilations, will likely be thrilled by 
this extensive selection written specifically for this audience. Authors’ notes that 
offer intriguing insights into the inspiration behind each story accompany brief 
contributor biographies.  AS
strAtton, AllAn Chanda’s Wars. HarperTeen, 2008 [400p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-087264-9 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-087262-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Chanda is doing her best to keep her family together after her mother’s and 
stepfather’s deaths from AIDS and her best friend’s rescue from a life of prostitu-
tion (explored in Chanda’s Secrets, BCCB 10/04), but she is haunted by a recur-
ring dream of children being attacked on the road to Tiro, a town in a fictional 
country in sub-Saharan Africa and the home of her mother’s people. Convinced 
that it is a portent, her busybody neighbor contacts her grandmother, who asks 
that Chanda come to Tiro so that she and her brother and sister can receive their 
356 • The BulleTin
grandmother’s blessing before she dies. Chanda, still stung by her grandparents’ 
treatment of her mother, agrees, only to find that her grandparents’ blessing comes 
at the price of Chanda’s marriage to their neighbor. Chanda refuses, but her prob-
lems are eclipsed by the arrival of a rebel general who steals children to serve in 
his ragtag but extremely violent army. As her previous story gave a human face 
to the AIDS epidemic, Chanda’s current adventure highlights the problem of the 
kidnapping of children and their enforced service as soldiers. Chanda represents a 
generation of young people uncowed by the suspicions and fears of their elders as 
she, determined to rescue her siblings, tracks the general. Her plan is resourceful, 
credible, and distinctly African, making clever use of a cell phone and a beehive in 
a hollow baobab tree to spring a trap on the guards and whisk her siblings away. 
In addition, the children’s post-traumatic stress symptoms are a sensitive and real-
istic reminder that the effects of such an experience far outlast its duration. Once 
again, Stratton presents a grim horror with appropriate gravity and yet reason for 
hope, as Chanda emerges as a heroine whose grit and determination are equal to 
the challenges of her times.  KC  
tAnKArd, Jeremy Me Hungry!; written and illus. by Jeremy Tankard. Candle-
wick, 2008 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3360-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Pre-dinner appetite apparently really is an age-old dilemma, since in this case it’s 
plaguing Edwin, a Stone Age kid, whose complaint of “Me hungry!” is received 
by father and mother in turn with a resounding “Me busy!” He comes up with the 
seemingly brilliant idea of hunting, but the animals aren’t as compliant as he might 
hope: “Me hide!” says the rabbit; “Me sharp!” says the porcupine; “Me mean!” says 
the saber-toothed tiger. Fortunately, he encounters a mastodon, whose stature helps 
our hero get himself an apple from high in the tree. Also an age-old phenomenon, 
apparently, is the spoiling of dinner, because when Edwin is called in for the meal, 
it’s his turn to respond with “We busy!” It’s hard to quibble over the likelihood of 
the friendship between a boy and a mammoth in a book that has a caveboy clad 
in what are clearly prehistoric sneakers, so best just to go with the conceptual flow 
here and enjoy the terse-texted humor. Many kids will be able to read along with 
the repetitions the first time, and they’ll relish the neener-neener turnabout of the 
ending even as they sympathize with a kid struggling to find a nosh in a world 
without kitchen cabinets. The illustrations are dominated by linework that varies 
from thick brushstrokes to delicate tracings to angry splats, with digital color in 
strong shades textured with mottling; piles of rocks helpfully indicate the era for 
viewers keen on visual puns, the animals are streamlined yet a little prehistorically 
creepy, and kids who notice that Dad’s apparently clubbing a peanut to death for 
family dinner will fully support Edwin’s decision to hang out in the orchard with 
his four-legged buddy. Audiences happy.  DS
teAgue, mArK LaRue for Mayor: Letters from the Campaign Trail; written and 
illus. by Mark Teague. Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-439-78315-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
It’s election year in Snort City, and law-and-order candidate Hugo Bugwort is 
raising the alarm concerning the unruly state of the local canine population. And 
April 2008 • 357
indeed, he has plenty of evidence to support this platform—the beloved mistress 
of epistolizing terrier Ike LaRue (from Dear Mrs. LaRue) has been injured by a hot-
dog cart overturned by a pack of four-legged rowdies. Ike, riled by the Bugwort’s 
demonizing rhetoric, mounts his own mayoral campaign; when Bugwort collapses 
during an intense rally, LaRue revives him by administering copious amounts of 
rocky road ice cream in the back of a Mr. Ding-a-Ling truck, wins the goodwill 
of the public, and accepts the position of Assistant Mayor proffered by his former 
political rival. Ike, an endearing but less than reliable narrator, spins his side of the 
story in letters to the hospitalized Mrs. LaRue, and his point of view carries over 
into graytone pictures of himself and other upstanding—even noble—canine citi-
zens. Better indicators of the state of affairs (although LaRue’s opening missive on 
the front jacket flap warns readers to mistrust this) are the excerpts from The Snort 
City Register/Gazette and the full-color paintings of lawless doggies and LaRue’s 
own underhand (underpaw?) campaigning. Tongue-in-cheek humor strikes just the 
right note for the upper-end picture-book set, and by November election-followers 
of all ages should be aching for a good laugh.  EB
Trueman, Terry Hurricane. HarperCollins, 2008 [144p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-000019-6 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-000018-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
When Hurricane Mitch hits the tiny Honduran pueblo of thirteen-year-old José 
Cruz, his father, older brother, and older sister are making deliveries in the family’s 
truck. José, his mother, and younger siblings huddle through the storm and power 
outage, trying to reassure themselves that Mr. Cruz will be home shortly and all 
will be well. Soon, though, the family awakens to a thunderous sound and a jolt 
to their house, and they discover to their horror that a mudslide has covered all the 
village homes except their own and a next-door neighbor’s. José is now called upon 
to be more than a comfort to his mother—he helps the surviving neighbors (over 
half the village has been killed) to recover bodies, dig canned goods and bottled 
water out from the wreckage of the local store, track down medical assistance, 
distribute food, and translate for the foreign relief workers who bring temporary 
aid. Trueman limns a convincing picture of a community under dire stress—those 
who put their shoulder to practical tasks, and those who are too numb to respond. 
While José’s contributions to the effort certainly qualify as heroic, the book limits 
his accomplishments to those a young teen could realistically master. There’s a 
joyful reunion for the Cruz family, but it’s clear that the fate of the leveled pueblo 
is in doubt, and the memory of destruction, death, and disease will haunt the 
Cruzes—and readers—for time to come.  EB 
ViVian, Siobhan A Little Friendly Advice. PUSH/Scholastic, 2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-545-00404-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
At ten, Ruby fell apart when her parents broke up, and now at sixteen she is still 
barely able to cope with her circumstances, especially when her father turns up 
unexpectedly on her sixteenth birthday party. Her friends whisk her away for a 
little-girl party in the park, but with booze, and this juxtaposition between child-
ish world and emergent adulthood seems to form a leitmotif for Ruby’s emotional 
state. She attributes her functionality, such as it is, to her steady friend Beth, who 
358 • The BulleTin
has guided her through her experience and is now doing the same thing for a new 
friend named Katherine, a move that leaves Ruby feeling possessive and jealous. 
In the aftermath of her father’s unexpected visit, however, she begins to question 
her reliance on Beth, who seems more interested in controlling the situation than 
helping Ruby deal with it. Scattered hints and veiled allusions to Ruby’s past offer 
more tell than show here, and ultimately not enough of either, making her responses 
and fixations seem overly dramatic; she has only one significant happy memory of 
her father for all of the ten years they spent together, making one wonder where 
all the angst over his absence comes from, since he admits that he was never re-
ally into the father thing anyway. Beth’s Dr. Phil persona likewise lacks context, 
although it does become somewhat clear for perceptive readers that her seeming 
wisdom about dysfunction is more spin control to hide her own guilt over what 
she knows about Ruby’s parents. Nonetheless, Vivian offers an intriguing look at 
the various motivations behind friendship between girls, and her exploration is 
unusually complex and yet emotionally accessible to a teen audience. Readers will 
also find vicarious satisfaction when Ruby finally forces her emotionally immature 
mother to confront the consequences of her actions. Ultimately, if this is a book 
about people who hide the truth about their feelings and their pasts, it might be 
said that it does its work too well, leaving lots of unsatisfying gaps; what it does 
well, however, is reveal its truths about the self-interestedness of friendships, and 
the pull to go on caring even after trust has left the building.  KC 
wAlsh, JoAnnA All Asleep; written and illus. by Joanna Walsh. LB Kids, 
2008 26p
ISBN 978-0-316-11871-2 $6.99   
R 18-36 mos.
It’s every parent’s dream: all the babies everywhere are sound asleep. Nary an open 
eye is to be seen among the multi-hued cast of little ones in this board book as they 
sleep “on mommies’/ and daddies’ tummies./ In onesies with bows/ and stripey 
toes,” in cars, airplanes, trains, “tiny houses with cats,” even, in violation of safety 
rules and common sense, “on kitchen tables.” Though an occasional scanning glitch 
(“Babies in cars./ One baby in a balloon/ under the stars”) or cliché (“Babies rock-
ing gently/ to and fro”) might jar a bit on the ear of the adult reader, Walsh’s gentle 
poetic text is generally smooth enough to lull youngsters to sleep and varied enough 
to keep the grownups awake. Her digital illustrations owe something to Ezra Jack 
Keats with their plentiful use of pattern and texture, their palette of robust pastels 
(touched with red), and their collage-like appearance. The rosy-cheeked babies are 
subtly accented with sketchy pencil-like lines as they cheerfully recline in various 
slumped and sacked-out postures. Though the visual complexity and the textual 
length suit this to a slightly older audience than the featured babies, it’s still a sweet 
bedtime treat; pair it with John Burningham’s Hushabye (BCCB 11/01) for a cozily 
somnolent storytime.  JH
wAlters, eriC Splat! Orca, 2008 [112p] (Currents)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55143-988-4 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55143-986-0 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10
Keegan and Alex are the bad boys of their small Canadian town of Leamington, 
a fact that is particularly embarrassing to their fathers, who are, respectively, the 
town sheriff and the town mayor. When the two sophomores are called on the 
April 2008 • 359
carpet in front of their dads, they’re surprised to be told that they will be entrusted 
with responsibility for a portion of the town’s traditional Tomato Festival; in hopes 
of getting out of the task, they choose the discontinued Tomato Toss, but instead 
they end up reviving the event. And when you combine two troublemaking teens, 
some simmering enmity, a gross of rotten tomatoes, the invitation to throw same, 
and the drunken high spirits surrounding a festival, what on earth could go wrong? 
The relationship between Keegan and narrator Alex, with their relentless and often 
quite funny smartassed exchanges, is the core of this speedy and readable novel; 
troublemakers they may be, but they’ve got the classic snappy patter and cama-
raderie of a buddy movie. The tomatoes make their appearance quite early in the 
novel, and since it’s immediately clear from the book’s mood, style, and title that 
the produce has a destiny to fulfill, it’s just sweet anticipation until the first fruit 
(botanically)/vegetable (culinarily) is lobbed. Walters doesn’t just coast when the 
food fight takes off, either, opening the hostilities with a spectacular in-tuba target-
ing and wrapping up the story with a surprising twist about the consequences of 
the mayhem (it puts the town on the national map and it’s decided to continue the 
tomato-fight tradition in future years). With its hi-lo paperback format and iron-
clad booktalkability, this will be an easy sell, even if you may need to temporarily 
ban tomatoes.  DS
Ward, Nick Gorilla City. Fickling/Random House, 2008 138p illus. (The 
Amazing Adventures of Charlie Small)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94970-8 $11.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84970-1 $5.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
   The Perfumed Pirates of Perfidy; written and illus. by Charlie Small. Fick-
ling/Random House, 2008 187p illus. (The Amazing Adventures of Charlie 
Small)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75138-4 $11.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75137-7 $5.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
In these British imports, carefully constructed faux journals of an eight-year-old 
boy present his encounters with, respectively, gorillas and female pirates. In Gorilla 
City, Charlie’s adventure begins after he recovers from a lightning strike only to 
find himself stuck in a time warp in an entirely foreign environment. Being late 
for tea is the least of Charlie’s worries as he contends with killer hyenas, a bully of 
a gorilla king, and an unforgiving landscape that seems inescapable. The Perfumed 
Pirates of Perfidy focuses on Charlie’s capture by pirates soon after his escape from 
the gorillas’ home. The pirates are cutthroat, malodorous, and—worst of all, to 
Charlie—ladies, and they force him into servitude. While the intrepid protagonist 
has been in desperate scrapes before, being threatened at the end of a cutlass by a 
rum-swilling captain presents quite a challenge. The journal format, replete with 
frequent black-and-white sketches, sardonic asides, entries of varying length, and 
even “taped-in” artifacts, is highly effective, setting this book apart from other 
middle grade adventure stories. Unfortunately, Charlie’s sophistication, foresight, 
and honed sarcasm do not mesh with his age, making the two books seem more 
pretend memoir than diaries from a child’s perspective; readers may find his exploits 
thrilling, but they are less likely to connect with his too-perfect personality and 
abilities. Even so, many adventure lovers will find exploring jungle cities and dwell-
ing with fierce pirates rather irresistible situations, and they will likely anticipate 
the promised future volumes.  AS
360 • The BulleTin
Weatherford, carole BostoN Before John Was a Jazz Giant: A Song of John 
Coltrane; illus. by Sean Qualls. Holt, 2008 [26p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-7994-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
The ambient sounds of everyday life may roll past most of us as so much white 
noise, but young John Coltrane sat up and took notice. In Weatherford’s litany of 
the boy’s experiences, “hambones knocking in Grandma’s pots,” “Bojangles tap-
dancing in the picture show,” “the sobs of kinfolk at family funerals,” and “blue 
notes crooning his name” would later emerge from his saxophone as “a bold new 
song.” This is as much a subtle invitation for children to listen to their own worlds 
as it is a Coltrane biography; indeed, details about the musician’s life are relegated 
to a lengthy concluding note that helps explain bits of the preceding text and offers 
information about his adult career. Although there may be some temptation to 
compare Weatherford’s title with Chris Raschka’s picture-book opus John Coltrane’s 
Giant Steps (BCCB 9/02), it’s clear that the two authors bring very different intents: 
Raschka explores the sound of the music, and Weatherford examines childhood 
influences on Coltrane’s musical development. A more telling comparison might 
be made between Qualls’ illustrations and his previous artwork for Winter’s Dizzy 
(BCCB 11/06); this soulful-eyed child surrounded by bubbles and ribbons of 
music could nearly be mistaken for Gillespie, and the plaster-like brushwork in 
the mixed-media pictures is, if not a recycled approach, at least a stylistic reprise. 
Suggestions for further reading and a brief discography are included.  EB
WeiN, elizaBeth e. The Empty Kingdom: The Mark of Solomon Book Two. Vi-
king, 2008 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-670-06273-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Telemakos has endured trials that would have broken men and women twice his 
age, and yet he emerges ever more worthy of the faith his royal family has placed 
in him. Caught spying on his protector in The Mark of Solomon (BCCB 7/07), he 
now lives under the threat of imminent execution should he give Abreha reason to 
suspect his loyalty. Nonetheless, he strives to send coded messages of Abreha’s plans 
against the emperor of his home kingdom in letters to his family. The problem is 
that his loyalties are conflicted. Clearly, Abreha has broken the emperor’s quarantine 
in the past and is now plotting to attack his fleet, but he has also shown great favor 
to Telemakos, despite the fact that Abreha keeps the boy under guard and holds 
his life in his hands. Indeed, while he treats him harshly, he also honors him as he 
would his own son. Wein pursues an ingenious plotline in this conclusion to the 
Mark of Solomon duology; as she has done throughout the tales of Telemakos, she 
maintains a breathless suspense while developing a character of true weight and 
greatness. On the one hand, Telemakos is an aspiring adolescent, eager to please the 
powerful adults in his life and prove himself worthy of their love; on the other, he is 
a vulnerable victim of past abuse, haunted by dreams and in need of the adoration 
and loyalty of his baby sister to soothe his pain and anchor him. Mostly, though, 
he is a future king in the tradition of T. H. White’s fully human Arthur, a person 
of great strength, wisdom, and daring who is nonetheless flawed, perhaps fatally, 
by an inability to discern whom to trust. Surely readers haven’t heard the last of 
this worthy yet accessible hero.  KC
April 2008 • 361
womACK, PhiliP The Other Book. Bloomsbury, 2008 269p
ISBN 978-1-59990-201-2 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 7-9
Edward lives a fairly quiet life in his British boarding school until he discovers an 
ominous and exciting Arthurian book that almost immediately transports him to 
a strange world. Suddenly, the twelve-year-old is facing life-threatening danger at 
the hands of various homicidal adults, who will stop at nothing to gain the power 
of this magical text that has lain dormant for over 400 years. Although Edward at 
first falls prey to the potentially wicked temptations of the book, his moral com-
pass is righted by a knight who comes from within the volume to help him in his 
quest to keep this powerful talisman out of the hands of those who would use it 
for nefarious works. Together, they find the true destined owner of the book and 
pass along the repository of Merlin’s wisdom to the appropriate descendent. It is a 
surprising and refreshing twist that the protagonist ends up not being the star or 
destined recipient of magic: Edward, capable and brave but ultimately very much 
an ordinary child, serves his role well as a temporary guardian of an object too 
powerful for him. Unfortunately, this complex plot is overburdened by far too many 
present and past characters, many of whom are incorporeal and therefore able to 
appear, disappear, or shapeshift at a confusing rate. In addition, readers unfamiliar 
with the legendary context of the volume (it’s not made clear for some time, and 
it is unlikely that characters such as Vivien would be immediately recognizable to 
non-fans) may find these references only slow what is otherwise a dramatically paced 
adventure plot. In spite of the weaknesses, stories about British boarding-school 
boys who find themselves with extraordinary magical objects will still find a ready 
audience in those mourning the loss of one boy wizard.  AS
yoo, PAulA Good Enough. HarperTeen, 2008 322p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-079089-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-079085-1 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
With her National Merit Scholarship, position as All-State Concertmaster, and 
diligent participation in her Korean church’s youth group, Patti Yoon appears to be 
the Perfect Korean Daughter. Inside, though, she’s conflicted and uncertain, wor-
ried that she won’t be able to get her SATs up over the magic 2300 mark (and thus 
ruin her chances for entrance to “HARVARDYALEPRINCETON,” as her parents 
phrase her prospects), beginning to think that music should be more than just a 
hook to get her into a good college (like “HARVARDYALEPRINCETON”), and, 
most disturbingly of all, allowing her crush on a new boy who plays the trumpet to 
distract her from important things (getting into “HARVARDYALEPRINCETON”). 
Yoo’s quippiness tends toward the strained at times, but this is overall an amusing 
cocktail of themed lists (“How to Make Your Korean Parents Happy, Part I”), 
fake SAT prep questions, and recipes (all of them Korean dishes involving Spam) 
along with Patti’s earnest yet humorous narration. The subplot about her crush on 
Ben the trumpeter, who becomes a partner in crime for Patti’s non-classical music 
explorations, handles her unreciprocated feelings sympathetically, and there’s poi-
gnancy in the touches of racism she and her parents occasionally encounter and 
in her parents’ stories of their own difficult youths. Believably creating a family 
wherein secretly applying to Juilliard constitutes a bold stroke of independence, 
Yoo offers sustenance to those readers realizing they have dreams beyond pleasing 
their parents.  DS
362  •  The BulleTin
Young, E. L.  Storm: The Infinity Code.  Dial, 2008  [336p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3265-0  $16.99
Reviewed from galleys     
R  Gr. 7-10
Fourteen-year-old multimillionaire software guru Andrew Minkel has a vision: 
his money and the brainpower of brilliant teens will set to rights the violence and 
wastefulness their elders have unleashed in the world. His three recruits to STORM 
(Science and Technology to Over-Rule Misery) are hand-picked for their peculiar 
skills—Caspian, the physicist; Gaia, the techie; and Will, the inventor. On their trial 
run, they bring an airplane filled with the rich and powerful to a safe landing during 
a solar flare–induced power and communications outage; their next task is to save 
the world. Will and Caspian have large personal stakes in the mission—Caspian’s 
father has been abducted and Will’s mother lured away by the baddies, who are 
intent on creating a black hole and launching it into space to destroy a secret UN 
space station that will police outer space. Lots of gadgetry, the help and hindrance 
of a supporting cast of adults of indeterminate loyalty, and a bit of residual Cold 
War ambience in the St. Petersburg locale spice what might otherwise be fairly 
pedestrian technologically enhanced adventure, and the monetary interests of 
the bad guys ring truer than your run-of-the-mill mad-scientist villains. Three 
members of the quartet are poised at novel’s end for another sortie, assuring that 
a sequel is in the offing, and as an added treat, Young’s final note comments on 
the world-saving gizmos involved, all of which are in various states of real-world 
testing or deployment.  EB
notE: Random House announces that the Jennifer Barnes’ The Squad, reviewed 
in the March 2008 Bulletin, will be subtitled Perfect Cover.
April 2008 • 363
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
evAns, dilys Show & Tell: Exploring the Fine Art of Children’s Book 
Illustration. Chronicle, 2008 149p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8118-4971-5 $24.99
Noted art expert Evans brings her knowledge to bear in this handsome new volume 
on illustration. The book focuses on twelve illustrators, ranging from classic stars 
such as Hilary Knight and Trina Schart Hyman to new talents such as Bryan Col-
lier and David Shannon; each illustrator-focused chapter talks about the artist’s 
process and life and explores in depth the artistic achievement in particular books, 
with page reproductions included for close viewing and exploration. The style is 
chatty yet informed, and the careful scrutiny of the illustrations will be conceptu-
ally enlightening to many readers seeking to develop their skill in assessing art. 
The specific explorations might, in fact, transfer well to a classroom, and certainly 
art-focused young people of middle-school age or higher would find much to 
contemplate here. It’s odd that there are no source notes whatsoever on the quotes 
from artists here, nor is there a bibliography of their works; there is an index of 
mentioned names and titles.  DS
nieuwenhuizen, Agnes Right Book Right Time: 500 Great Reads for Teenagers. 
Independent Publishers Group/Allen & Unwin, 2008 368p illus. with pho-
tographs
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-74114-883-1 $19.95
This Australian reader’s guide offers detailed annotations of 200 recent young 
adult and adult books divided into twelve thematic sections ranging from “Action, 
Adventure & Crime” to “When You Want to Laugh.” Annotations run about 
a page, and each includes an excerpt from its subject as well as information on 
publication date, country of origin, and intended audience (coded “YA” or “A”). 
Titles from Australia intermingle with books from the UK and the U.S., so U.S. 
readers looking to think outside the fifty states will have their appetites whetted 
for interlibrary-loan or internet-purchase prospects, and it’s intriguing to see an 
international perspective on some well-known homegrown authors. With its open 
format and direct address to the reader, this will be a useful reference for those YAs 
looking to expand their reading horizons, but enterprising YA librarians will also find 
this a useful new dimension for expanding or promoting a collection. Interspersed 
with the annotations are essays championing a variety of literatures ranging from 
graphic novels to chick-lit; a title and author index is appended.  DS
364  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Adoff; DeKeyser
Actors and acting–fiction: Kimmel, 
E.; Klam
ADvEnturE: Colfer; Kibuishi; 
Korman; trueman; Ward; Young
Africa–fiction: nanji; Stratton
African Americans: nelson; Parker; 
Weatherford
African Americans–fiction: Adoff; 
Belton
Animals–fiction: McDonald
Animals–stories: Beaty; Seeger
AnthologiES: Berman; Mer-
cado; Strahan
Appearance–fiction: Baratz-logsted; 
Klam; na
Art and artists–fiction: runholt
Art and artists–stories: haseley
ArthuriAn lEgEnD: Womack
Asian Americans–fiction: headley; 
na; Yoo
Athletes: nelson
Athletes–fiction: Padian
Aviation–fiction: Colfer
Babies–stories: Walsh
Baseball–fiction: Mercado; Park
BEDtiME StoriES: Walsh
BiogrAPhiES: Parker; Weatherford
BoArD BooKS: hills; Patricelli; 
Walsh
Books and reading–fiction: Womack
Brothers–fiction: Schmidt
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Dowd; 
Marriott
Bullies–fiction: Jonsberg; Kimmel, 
h.; love
Bullies–stories: Aston
Central America–fiction: trueman
Cliques–fiction: love
Competitions–fiction: Feldman
ConCEPt BooKS: hills
Cousins–fiction: Dowd; lecesne
Crime and criminals–fiction: Avi; 
DeKeyser; Korman; lecesne; 
runholt; Young
Current events: rumford; Stratton
Dancers and dance–fiction: Kandel
Depression, the–fiction: Blume
Disabilities–fiction: Dowd
Disasters–fiction: trueman
Divorce–fiction: vivian
Dogs–fiction: teague
Dreams–fiction: Jonsberg; McMann
Emotions–stories: Patricelli Baby
EPiStolArY FiCtion: Kinney; 
Ward
ESP–fiction: Matas
Ethics and values: Aston; Dunkle; 
Eaton; Pearson; Schmidt; Singer
Fame–fiction: Benway
Families–fiction: Blume; Dyer; Feld-
man; hays; headley; Kibuishi; 
lowry; McCarthy; McKay; na; 
Stratton; trueman; Yoo
FAntASY: Berman; Eaton; Jons-
berg; Kibuishi; Marriott; Matas; 
McMann; Snyder; Womack
Fathers–fiction: harmon; hays; 
Kimmel, h.
Fathers–stories: Crow
FolKtAlES AnD FAirY tAlES: 
Marriott
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in All-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
April 2008 • 365
Food and eating–fiction: Walters
Food and eating–stories: Alalou
Friends–fiction: Baratz-Logsted; 
Friedman; Gonzales; Kimmel, E.; 
McKay; Padian; Vivian; Walters
Friends–stories: Seeger
Games–fiction: Feldman
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Dole; 
Harmon; Lecesne
GHoSt StoriES: Avi
Grandparents–fiction: Padian
GrAPHic noVELS: Kibuishi
Growing up–fiction: Baratz-Logsted
HiStoricAL Fiction: Avi; 
Blume; Kandel; nanji; Park; 
rinaldi; Snyder; Wein
History, U.S.: nelson
Horses–stories: Haseley
HuMor: Beaty; Benway; Eaton; 
Gonzales; Kimmel, E.; Kinney; 
Lowry; Shea; tankard; teague; 
Walters; Ward; Yoo
Hunger–stories: Alalou
identity–fiction: Klam; na; Pearson; 
Yoo
illness–fiction: Padian
illness–stories: Beaty
imagination–stories: Shea
insects–poetry: nye
Journals–fiction: Kinney
Kidnapping–fiction: DeKeyser
Knights and chivalry–fiction: Womack
Korean War–fiction: Park
Latinos–fiction: Dole
LoVE StoriES: Hogan
Magic–fiction: Dyer; Snyder
Mothers–fiction: Hays
Moving–fiction: Friedman; Harmon
Music and musicians: Parker; Weath-
erford
Music and musicians–fiction: Ben-
way; Yoo
Music and musicians–stories: crow
MYStEriES: Dowd; Lecesne; 
runholt
neighborhoods–fiction: Belton
orphans–fiction: Kandel
Pets–fiction: McDonald
Physical education: nelson
Pirates: Ward Pirates
PoEtrY: cheng; nye
Politics–fiction: teague
Poverty–fiction: cheng
Princesses–fiction: rinaldi
Quests–fiction: Dunkle; Kibuishi
racism–fiction: cheng; nanji; 
Schmidt
Reading aloud: Kimmel, H.; Mc-
Donald; nye
Reading, beginning: tankard
Reading, easy: McDonald; teague
Reading, reluctant: Adoff; Bel-
ton; Feldman; Korman; Matas; 
Walters
relationships–fiction: Benway; Dole; 
Kimmel, E.; Klam; Mccarthy; 
McMann; Yoo
romance–fiction: Hogan
royalty–fiction: rinaldi; Wein
SAtirE: Lowry
ScArY StoriES: Avi
School–fiction: cheng
School–stories: Aston; Beaty
SciEncE Fiction: Dunkle; 
Pearson; Singer; Strahan
Secrets–fiction: McMann; Vivian
SHort StoriES: Berman; Mer-
cado; Strahan
Sisters–fiction: Friedman; Klam; 
McKay; na
South, the–fiction: Blume
SPortS StoriES: Mercado; 
nelson
Storytelling–stories: Alalou
Storytime: Beaty; crow; Seeger; 
tankard; Weatherford
Suicide–fiction: Adoff
Summer–fiction: Hogan; Love
SuPErnAturAL StoriES: 
Dyer; Matas
toDDLEr BooKS: Hills; Patri-
celli; Walsh
Voyages and travel–fiction: colfer; 
DeKeyser; Hogan; Mccarthy; 
runholt
Voyages and travel–stories: Shea
War–fiction: Park; Stratton
War–stories: rumford
Wealth–fiction: Headley
Writers and writing–fiction: Blume; 
Snyder
Writers and writing–stories: rumford
