I LL I N
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
Bulletin Blue Ribbon 2000
· ' 
"Moving from pig to cow to street to city to planet to
universe . . . nimble and imaginative verse describes the
bigness of various items [as it] vividly and amusingly
explores perspective. The [full-color] art lets the fancy take
flight. Kids will enjoy the mind-expansion of this offbeat tale."
- Starred review / The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books
Ages 3-5. $15.95 Tr (0-688-17125-7); $15.89 Lb (0-688-17126-5)
Greenwillow Books An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
March 2001
Vol. 54 No. 7
A LOOK INSIDE
249 THE BIG PICTURE
Soldier X by Don Wulffson
250 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
253 * Countdown to Independence: A Revolution ofldeas in England and Her
American Colonies: 1760-1776 by Natalie S. Bober
263 * Dancing in Cadillac Light by Kimberly Willis Holt
269 * Henry's First-Moon Birthday written by Lenore Look; illus. by Yumi
Heo
270 * Freewill by Chris Lynch
272 * The Three Little Pigs ad. and illus. by Barry Moser
286 
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 2001
288 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
_
_
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Jeannette Hulick
Melanie Kimball
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin
of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. E-mail:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2001 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Lara Tomlin from SoldierX ©2001. Used by permission of Viking Children's
Books.
MARCH 2001 
* 
249
THE BIG PICTURE
Soldier X
by Don Wulffson
As World War II moves into its final months and German defeat is all but inevi-
table, the Wehrmacht launches a desperate effort to hold its eastern line. Narrator
Erik Brandt spends his sixteenth birthday on board a troop train headed to the
Russian front, where he and other teenage German conscripts will ostensibly re-
lieve exhausted veterans-but more probably become cannon fodder in the bloody
barrage.
Erik has no enthusiasm for soldiering, but he believes that he's serving in
defense of family and Heimat and that his facility in Russian language, acquired
from maternal relatives who immigrated illegally to Germany, will assure him a
cushy job as interpreter. Within hours of arrival at Tarnapol, though, Erik crouches
in a front-line trench, facing a major Russian offensive. One boy after another falls
in action, and a gravely wounded Erik finds himself behind enemy lines. His
allegiance to the Wehrmacht is now another casualty of war; he exchanges uni-
forms with the corpse of a Russian soldier and begins a dangerous charade that is
the only hope for saving his skin. During his hospitalization Erik employs every
trick he can muster, feigning amnesia and casting each word and gesture into cred-
ible Russian, to convince patients and staff that he is the Aleksandr Dukhanov
named on his purloined identity papers. Nicknamed "X," he succeeds so well that
he eventually wins the affection of beautiful nursing aide Tamara, but his ruse
collapses when he utters "Ach Scheisse!" in Tamara's hearing. She is horrified to
realize she's put her trust in the enemy, and Erik knows his life now hangs on her
discretion. Before they can begin to repair their sundered trust, they are forced to
evacuate and cast their lots together as refugees. As they negotiate the shifting lines
of another German advance, their survival depends on X/Erik's bilingual skills and
his now well-honed knack for deception.
Wulffson bases his fictionalized tale on "the lives of two very remarkable
people" whose identities he does not disclose, and his graphic descriptions of battles
and perilous escapes are searing and authentic. Just as artillery bombardment
obliterates familiar landscapes, the war ravages certainty and trust and renders hu-
mans unreadable. Erik and fellow recruits hope the emaciated Jews who serve
them in the mess line are truly criminals: "Because if they are not, then we are."
German sergeant Dopelmann, so severely disfigured that he disgusts his young
charges, is actually a philosophy teacher who zealously turns his pedagogical skills
toward keeping boy-soldiers alive. Ethnic heritage does not predict political affili-
ation. Tamara learns Erik is not the Nazi party member she believed all Germans
to be, and Erik learns that Tamara is a staunch anti-Stalinist. Erik himself, the
ironic embodiment of ambiguity, is twice wounded in friendly fire-by a German
officer who mistakes him for a Russian, and by an American soldier who believes
he's accidentally wounded a civilian.
250 
* THE BULLETIN
In concluding his tale, Erik makes it clear that armistice does not bring tidy
peace to war's survivors. He is now a retired history professor living in the United
States, and he maintains his deception, allowing curious students to assume his
war injuries were sustained while fighting the Nazis. His wife, Tamara, convinces
him "to put into writing what happened. With patience, she explained to me the
reasons why she believed it had to be done." Erik declines to name these reasons,
however, and Wulffson tacitly charges the reader to attribute purpose to Erik's
narrative. Is this an urgent anti-war expose, deriving interest from the viewpoint
of "the enemy"? The unburdening of an old man's crushing, perhaps shame-
filled memories? Or is it at last a reclamation of identity-the bold decision to lay
dark lies to rest? (Imprint information appears on p. 284.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALEXANDER, SUE 
Behold the Trees; illus. by Leonid Gore. 
Levine/Scholastic,
2001 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-590-76211-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
7-10yrs
This picture book gamely attempts to cover Middle Eastern history from 5000
BCE to 2000 CE, focusing on arboreal extinction and reforestation. The story
begins, ominously, with no verbs: "Trees, leaves, twigs, branches, bark-covered
trunks, roots going down into dark, damp soil. Shields for the earth against the
searing sun and drying winds." Expressionistic spreads in ghostly shades of green
and brown suggest epic events that will remain elusive to children without an adult
translator (as in a depiction of troops in togas and victory laurels bearing away a
giant seven-branch candlestick from a temple). The section "Siege of wars/ Ro-
man rule" explains that "the Romans called the land Palestine, and, like each of the
armies before them, cut down trees to build fortresses and palaces, shrines to their
gods, cities and towns. And no new trees were planted." Finally, Jewish settlers
arriving after 1918 replant the barren land: "Cypress and pine, eucalyptus and
acacia, orange and olive, lemon and pecan, oak and palm." Although it will be
especially challenging to keep children attentive to this lyrical description without
benefit of specific action, this will be a luminous experience for young listeners
already initiated into the ritual of putting "pence and pounds, centimes and francs,
pfennigs and marks, centavos and pesos, guilders, rands, florins, dimes and dollars
into small blue banks to buy trees for the land." Others may need a landfill of
background to reach the conceptual heights suggested in text and illustration. BH
MARCH 2001 
* 251
ANDRONIK, CATHERINE M. 
Hatshepsut, His Majesty, Herself illus. by Joseph Daniel
Fiedler. 
Atheneum, 2001 
[42p]
ISBN 0-689-82562-5 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Accumulated evidence has led scholars to believe that between the reigns of
Thutmosis II and III, woman regent Hatshepsut ruled as pharaoh. Although
Andronik admits that little is known about Hatshepsut's life, she manages to glue
shards of evidence together with a plethora of "perhaps's" and "probably's" to
produce a sketchy representation of the woman regarded as god-king. Intricate
family relationships, incestuous by modern standards, that brought Hatshepsut to
the throne would have been more clearly presented in a genealogical tree than in
the text, and readers may struggle to understand that Hatshepsut is aunt, step-
mother, and even prospective mother-in-law (and referred to as "sister" in a cited
Egyptian record) to the boy whose position she usurps. Fiedler's paintings-most
in sunset hues-present figures just slightly more relaxed than those of ancient
Egyptian art but sorely missing their precise modeling and elegant proportion.
Particularly problematic, or at least underexplained, is a spread depicting temple
construction, in which an earthen ramp runs behind this building "set into the
side of a mountain" and the swing arm of a crane is obviously too short to reach
the ground. There's probably not enough information here to satisfy a "biography
report" assignment, but interpretation of the archaeological record is of consider-
able interest and students drawn to all matters Egyptian will want to take a look.
EB
AYLESWORTH, JIM, ad. 
The Tale of Tricky Fox: A New England Trickster Tale;
illus. by Barbara McClintock. 
Scholastic, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-09543-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Aylesworth (The GingerbreadMan, BCCB 2/98) revisits traditional folktales with
this story of a too-clever fox. Tricky Fox brags to Brother Fox: "Stealing chickens
is too easy!... I'm going to get me a fat pig!" Brother Fox swears to eat his hat if
Tricky Fox succeeds, so T.F. grabs a sack and off he goes. The wily animal puts a
log in the sack and proceeds to a cottage, where he not only gains entry from a
kindhearted woman but gets her promise that she won't look in his sack while he's
sleeping. To make a long cumulative tale short, she looks, and he uses her duplicity
to trick her out of a loaf of bread. Tricky Fox proceeds to the next cottage, and
then the next, each time trading up-from log to bread to chicken to pig. This old
tale may be familiar to readers and listeners from Galdone's What's in Fox's Sack?
(BCCB 10/82) or Lang's "Travels of a Fox." McClintock's mixed-media
illustrations (watercolor, ink, and gouache) are executed in an old-fashioned style
inspired by Wilhelm Busch and magazine illustrations from the turn of the twentieth
century. The rather prim images of tidy cottages housing properly dressed little
old ladies dealing with the con-fox supreme play cheekily against the humor of the
plot, and McClintock manages to make even the non-action sequences intriguingly
detailed. An occasional awkwardness in the text intermittently slows the forward
momentum, and the conclusion is just a shade anticlimactic. Nevertheless, this
tale has humor and a dashing if decorous style that will make it a strong readaloud.
Detailed source notes are included. JMD
252 
* THE BULLETIN
BENNETT, CHERIE Anne Frank and Me; by Cherie Bennett and Jeff
Gottesfeld. 
Putnam, 2001 
[352p]
ISBN 0-399-23329-6 
$18.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-9
There is some irony in basing Holocaust fiction on the premise that a person who
dies in the gas chamber can return to life all the better for the experience. Nicole
Burns is a superficial teenager who, during a class visit to an Anne Frank exhibit,
time-trips back to occupied Paris as Nicole Bernhardt and goes through the inevi-
table stages of Nazi persecution. We see in detail, and she remembers later in
flashes: "The Occupation. The Vel d'Hiv roundup. The black market. The attic.
Drancy. The transports. The selection. The gas chamber." Although reminiscent
of Jane Yolen's The Devil's Arithmetic (which is mentioned as a TV adaptation
assigned to Nicole's high school class), this lacks Yolen's storytelling finesse and
suffers from cliche in both style and substance ("Jack's words played over and over
in her mind, a wound etched on her heart"). The already complicated fantasy
structure, whose internal logic is not clear, is further cluttered by public diary en-
tries in the form of Nicole's contemporary web site and wartime letters from hid-
ing. Tonal contrasts that seem calculated to amuse instead stretch credulity, as
when Nicole turns to her Parisian mother in 1942 and says, theoretically in French,
"I used to play flute in the geek-fest school orchestra, but I sucked so bad my
parents let me quit." Even when the story gains momentum in its clearer stretches,
information-laden passages interrupt the flow of conversation or dramatic action.
The connection with and echoes of Anne Frank seem forced and spurious. The
play that generated this novel has won praise for its power, but something must
have been lost in the translation from one medium to the other. We havemany
young adult books on the subject that are strong in focus and writing, such as
Pausewang's The Final Journey (BCCB 12/96) and Lobel's No Pretty Pictures (10/
98); point readers to them. A timeline is included. BH
BLUMBERG, RHODA 
Shipwrecked!: The True Adventures of a Japanese
Boy. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[80p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029365-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17484-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Born into an early nineteenth century Japanese fishing family, fourteen-year-old
Manjiro seemed an unlikely figure to affect the course of Japanese-American rela-
tions. When a storm left Manjiro and his colleagues stranded outside legal fishing
boundaries with no hope of rescue by their countrymen, the shipwrecked fisher-
men had no alternative than to entrust themselves to Captain William Whitfield,
a New Bedford whaler passing through Japan's rich whaling grounds. Returning
with Whitfield to New England, Manjiro became the first Japanese citizen known
to visit America, and after a period of education and employment, he returned
home to become first a prisoner in his homeland and finally an honored foreign
affairs advisor as Japan reluctantly opened her doors to the West. Blumberg sets
Manjiro's encounter clearly within the context of his age and culture: foreigners
were fearsome devils, and Japanese laws aimed at preserving social and political
stability prescribed perpetual exile for citizens who left Japan and death for citizens
who attempted to return. Readers will be particularly intrigued by Manjiro's ob-
servations regarding the differences between American and Japanese living stan-
MARCH 2001 
* 
253
dards and deportment ("Ordinary men carry watches"; "A mother ... gives of all
things, cow's milk as a substitute for mother's milk"), and report writers seeking an
unusual biography will have hit the jackpot. Maps and period artwork-some
rendered or inspired by Manjiro-and source notes are included. EB
BOBER, NATALIE S. 
Countdown to Independence: A Revolution ofldeas in England
and HerAmerican Colonies: 1760-1776. Atheneum, 2001 
[368p] 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-689-81329-5 $26.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Students whose previous classroom encounters with the American Revolution left
them with little more than a blur of Coercive Acts and royal governors have a
second chance to put fragments into order. Bober offers a brilliantly organized
review ordered around the potent ideas that drew Mother Country and her rebel-
lious children-or is it Tyranny and her repressed slaves?-into conflict. Events
are covered in standard chronological order, but alternating chapters focus on the
debates that swelled and finally raged on the east and west shores of the Atlantic.
Under this scheme, colonial agent Benjamin Franklin tiptoes diplomatically among
British commoners and peers, while General Thomas Gage reports to King George
from American turf that the colonists "will be lyons." In Bober's hands, the scope
of "ideas" transcends thought frozen in documents to include those informal but
equally heated political spats over which wives harangue their husbands, friend-
ships are broken, families are irreparably divided, and ministers fall from influ-
ence. Since ideas are best understood in the context of the persons who articulate
them, Bober includes a wealth of insightful biographical sketches that humanize a
historical drama frequently in peril of passing into patriotic myth. A chronology,
list of main characters, period illustrations, and a forthcoming index are included.
EB
BOOTH, MARTIN 
Panther. McElderry, 2001 
[96 p]
ISBN 0-689-82976-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
On vacation in England's West Country, Pati and her friend Simon suspect that
legends of wild panthers preying on livestock are true. Pati in particular is fasci-
nated with the big cats and well read in tracking lore, and she intends to stalk the
animals for a provative photograph. She realizes that it must be a private expedi-
tion with just her and Simon, since otherwise the animals will be endangered by
local farmers, so she and Simon set out over the moors to find their panther. The
book is refreshingly accessible to the middle grades, and the plot is pleasantly un-
usual (though reality doesn't support its certainty about West Country big cats);
there's also a Disneyesque appeal in the two kids' adventure, the specter of the evil
authorities threatening the wild creature, and Pati and Simon's monopoly on the
proof (Pati does indeed see and photograph the panther). Some of the Disney
downsides emerge as well, however, with unlikelihood pelting the plot from all
sides (Pati's unerring tracking makes finding the panther a breeze) and goofy adult
scenes occasionally interpolated for no apparent reason. The appeals may none-
theless satisfy quite a few readers, and the book will be a particular boon to young-
sters looking for something compact but dramatic and to struggling older readers
who'll appreciate a quick payoff. DS
254 
* THE BULLETIN
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH, ad. 
How Chipmunk Got His Stripes: A Tale of Bragging and
Teasing; ad. by Joseph and James Bruchac; illus. by Jose Aruego and Ariane
Dewey. 
Dial, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2404-7 
$15.99 
R 4-7 yrs
Brown Squirrel overhears Bear bragging about his unconquerable strength and
bets him he can't keep the sun from rising the following day. Despite Bear's best
efforts, the sun does rise, and Brown Squirrel teases Bear: "Bear is foolish, the sun
came up. Bear is silly, the sun came up." Bear does not take this teasing well, and,
when Brown Squirrel flees his wrath, "Bear's long, sharp claws scratched Brown
Squirrel's back from the top of his head to the tip of his tail." When the scratches
heal, Brown Squirrel has "long pale stripes all the way down his back where Bear
had scratched him. He was Brown Squirrel no longer. He was now Chipmunk,
the striped one." This pourquoi story is succinctly written in simple, concrete
language, and repeated chants give listeners an opportunity to participate actively
in the narrative's unfolding. Aruego and Dewey's watercolors, while a bit more
jingly than their illustrations for George Shannon's Lizard's Home, feature the
same clean palette. The animal characters don't quite attain the expressiveness of
a Boynton cast, but the pictures are large enough to be seen and enjoyed by a
group, especially the opening spreads that show the huge Bear barely contained in
or breaking out of the frame. This easily appreciated tale will strike a chord with
young listeners who are probably familiar with both ends of the bragging/teasing
spectrum. Authors' notes give background on the story sources. JMD
CLARK, EMMA CHICHESTER 
Where Are You, Blue Kangaroo?; written and illus. by
Emma Chichester Clark. 
Doubleday, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90003-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32797-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Emma's sometimes a little careless with her toy friend Blue Kangaroo, leaving him
on the slide, on the bus, or near the monkey cage at the zoo. Her "Where are you,
Blue Kangaroo?" always presages his retrieval, but Blue Kangaroo begins to worry
about Emma's inattentiveness and finally deliberately secretes himself to teach her
to take better care of him. There's a pleasing rhythm to the text, and Emma's
connection to Blue Kangaroo is sympathetically treated, but the logic of the con-
clusion is stretched: why would this particular disappearance mend Emma's ways
when the others didn't? Clark's watercolors show Blue Kangaroo as a perky and
cuddleable critter and Emma as bright-eyed charmer, but the faces and composi-
tions are rather bland and the candylike colors are wearing though cheerful. This
doesn't have the emotional engagement of Hilary McKay's Where's Bear? (BCCB
1/99) or Ian Whybrow's Sammy and the Dinosaurs (9/99), but youngsters with
their own wayward toys will empathize with Emma's concerns. DS
COWLEY, JOY 
Agapanthus Hum and Major Bark; illus. by Jennifer
Plecas. 
Philomel, 2001 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-399-23322-9 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
Agapanthus Hum (ofAgapanthus Hum and the Eyeglasses, BCCB 4/99) is on a trip
to the animal shelter with her "good little Mommy" and "good little Daddy" to
pick out a kitten. Agapanthus is distracted by a "little dog with floppy ears, short
legs, and a tail like electric string" who "waggled his paws and squeaked at her."
MARCH 2001 
* 255
Despite her parents' reservations, "the heart of Agapanthus Hum was so full of
squeaky little dog that there was no space left over for a kitten of any kind," and it
is the dog she finally, happily takes home. In seven chapters the dog gets a name
(Major Bark), shreds Agapanthus' favorite T-shirt, plays with her friends, enters a
dog show, and comes home with a blue ribbon-which he promptly shreds.
Cowley's language is manageable but not dull, and her story is wholesome but not
boring. Her lively protagonist dashes through these pages with the same ease as in
her first outing, pausing only for Major Bark to lick "her glasses right off her eyes."
Plecas' watercolors are bouncy and energetic; the squiggly outlines of Major Bark
fairly quiver with excitement, while the pigtailed Agapanthus' enthusiasm is barely
contained within her own jittery lines. In Agapanthus Hum, Cowley and Plecas
capture the inexhaustible enthusiasm of an energetic child; her soulmates are out
there waiting for her. JMD
CRISP, MARTY 
Private Captain: A Story of Gettysburg. Philomel, 2001 
[304p]
ISBN 0-399-23577-9 
$18.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Ben Reynolds is unable to lighten either the family business responsibilities or the
heartache of his newly widowed mother, so he sets off to find his older brother
Reuben, a Union Army captain who Ben is certain will be at the next "big battle,"
probably on their home turf of Pennsylvania. Pampered younger cousin Danny
and Reuben's faithful retriever, Captain, tag along as local rumors lead the trio
toward the coming carnage at Gettysburg. Their adventures along the road, in-
cluding a perilous river crossing and encounters with enemy troops and deserters,
never seem too troubling though, because Captain predictably saves their collec-
tive hides at every turn, procuring a milk cow in a most timely manner, towing
Ben across the Susquehanna, finding old friends (dead or alive), fending off mur-
derous Rebs, and, of course, bringing Reuben home. Crisp's plot turns are more
likely to elicit murmurs of "What a dog!" than "What an adventure!" However,
her sensitive depiction of townsfolk in the war-torn area, who must house the
troops, nurse the wounded, and bury the dead, does contribute an unusual per-
spective to the canon of children's Civil War fiction, and Ben's involvement with
real-life photographer Alexander Gardner (forced and improbable as it is) should
impel readers to view period battlefield photos with a discriminating eye. EB
DASH, JOAN 
The World at Her Fingertips: The Story ofHelen Keller. 
Scholastic,
2001 
[256p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-90715-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In this accessible biography, Dash recaps the life of an extraordinary woman. The
popularly known events of Helen Keller's early years-the arrival of teacher Annie
Sullivan and her efforts to break through to Helen-are encapsulated in the first
few chapters, after which the text turns to Keller's continuing education, her years
at Radcliffe, and her growing autonomy. Dash is candid about teacher Annie
Sullivan's personality conflicts with Keller's other mentors and about the possible
drawbacks of Sullivan's symbiotic relationship with her pupil. The success of Keller's
books, journal articles, and lectures clearly paints her as a charismatic personality
and not just an interesting curiosity. Dash avoids sentimentality, letting the events
of Keller's life speak for themselves, although moments of heartbreaking pathos
256 
* THE BULLETIN
provide a rare glimpse into Keller's dependence and isolation (her mother's termi-
nation of Keller's engagement, without her knowledge, to an apparently sincere
suitor is one such incident). The occasional unsupported sweeping generalization
("More than most women, Helen was born to love and be loved and to become a
loving mother of children") mars an otherwise straightforward if slightly dry text.
Although a fairly substantial bibliography is included, the lack of source notes for
quotes from diaries, correspondence, and other writings is a serious drawback.
Still, the events of Keller's life have their own innate fascination, and biography
readers will appreciate this sturdy volume. JMD
DEPAOLA, TOMIE 
On My Way; written and illus. by Tomie dePaola. 
Putnam,
2001 
[80p]
ISBN 0-399-23583-3 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
The saga of dePaola's early life related in 26FairmountAvenue (BCCB 6/99) and
Here We All Are (BCCB 9/00) continues with this reminiscence of kindergarten
and first grade. dePaola describes his baby sister Maureen's recovery from pneu-
monia, a family trip to the 1939 World's Fair, and his theatrical debut as the
blushing bride in a "Tiny Tot Bridal Party." The author has a remarkable memory
for the quotidian details of his childhood, remembering not only the minutiae of
everyday existence but his emotions and thoughts as well. There is a bit more of
the grownup dePaola here than in the first two books, but the humor is clear and
the selection of incidents indicates the author has a comfortable familiarity with
the concerns of his audience. dePaola speaks directly and conversationally to the
reader and/or listener, and his simple vocabulary and sentence structure make this
easy autobiography an anxiety-free read. The chapter-heading and closing silhou-
ettes, full-page and spot art, depict a cheerful cast of characters from dePaola's
personal history set in a well-scrubbed middle-class environment. This will be
welcomed by the primary-grade set who may recognize that their lives, too, can
contain such drama. JMD
DRAPER, SHARON M. 
Darkness Before Dawn. Atheneum, 2001 
233p
ISBN 0-689-83080-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
The final book in Draper's trilogy about a group of African-American high school
students in Ohio focuses on the emotional life and times of its narrator, senior
Keisha Montgomery, but also satisfies readers' curiosity about what happened to
survivors of previous books. Keisha's narration is presented-a bit awkwardly-as
an extended flashback during the graduation ceremony. This frame (much of
which is repeated verbatim in the last chapter when the story comes full circle)
contains some evocative descriptions (the graduates' faces are "unwrapped pack-
ages of smiles and success") and allows the novel to end with Keisha's inspiring
graduation speech, after which the seniors are ready to leave "the shadows of the
past behind." The heart of the novel, however, starts with the suicide of Keisha's
boyfriend the previous year (see Tears ofa Tiger, BCCB 1/95) and ends with her
own recovery from a sexual assault. The anorexia of a young dancer (a central
character in Forged by Fire, 6/97) is also dealt with, along with the more mundane
stresses of teen romance and college applications. Events, however, move with
unnatural coherence, with two characters-one a homeless woman-serving as
little more than dei ex machina. A lack of realistic details (about anything other
MARCH 2001 
* 257
than clothes) leaves readers with a less than fully realized vicarious experience.
Dialogue is always informative but less often convincing, and role models espous-
ing healthy choices abound. That said, this vision of high school as group therapy
is not so far off the mark, and many readers will be willing and able to fill in the
emotional blanks from their knowledge of the previous books or their equally
turbulent lives. FK
EASTON, KELLY 
The Life History ofa Star. McElderry, 2001 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-83134-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
"What could happen to my brother who always came out on top of everything?"
thought Kristin before David left for Vietnam; since he returned two years ago and
lives as a "ghost" in the family attic, she now knows. At fourteen, Kristin is old
enough to see beyond the family denial to the terrible tragedy that has struck her
household, and in her journal she comments on the family strains (her parents'
marriage begins to melt under the pressure) as well as her own daily travails (her
best male friend wants to be more than friends). Easton's voice for Kristin is so on-
target she might well be channeling: the novice philosophy, the snide and super-
ficial dismissals self-considered to be perception, the heavy-handed adolescent humor
("I thought up a new replacement for the Big Bang Theory: the Squeaky Fart
Theory"); the depiction of her disintegrating family and even her friends, several
of whose lives have taken a sharp turn for the worse, is equally pitilessly accurate.
Unfortunately, this reality chokes out some narrative necessities: we don't get a
chance to develop much sympathy for Kristin, and even with some flashbacks to
her brother's prewar character we're not sufficiently engaged with him to feel the
loss of his current condition and of his eventual death. The narrator's strong voice
may nonetheless pull readers into this incisive drama of a family privately suffering
their part of a national tragedy. DS
EIGE, LILLIAN 
Dangling. Atheneum, 2001 
[176p]
ISBN 0-689-83581-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Ben's weird and wonderful friendship with his weird and wonderful friend, Ring,
takes a shocking turn when Ring walks into the river at a joint family picnic and
disappears. Unable to believe that Ring has drowned, Ben reexamines their brief
relationship from its beginning at the start of sixth grade, recalling the many mys-
teries-Ring's elaborate stories about the exploits of his friend Fox, his abrupt
disappearance at Christmas, his family's secretive ways. The full story finally comes
out after Ring turns up in another state: a ward of Ohio, Ring had run away to
join his beloved foster parents when they moved, but when it looked like his illegal
residence would be discovered he ran again in order to protect those foster parents
from trouble. Eige has a nice line in understated yet creative turns of phrase ("She
can always read me like I came in big print," Ben says of his mother), and she
makes the enigma of Ring's disappearance into an effective blend of yearning and
mystery. The book falters when Ring reappears, however, becoming suddenly
overexplanatory, and there may be some confusion about chronology (flashbacks
and present narration are both related in present tense) and characters (adults and
kids alike are referred to by first names, relationships are explained late, and delin-
eations are slow in coming). Ben's stubborn if puzzled loyalty remains absorbing,
258 
* THE BULLETIN
though, and readers will empathize with his persistence as well as Ring's dilemma.
DS
FEDER, HARRIET K. 
Death on Sacred Ground. Lerner, 2001 
[192p]
ISBN 0-8225-0741-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Vivi Hartman returns in another adventure, here traveling with her father to the
little New York town of Pikes Landing. The town was built on reservation land
leased to whites by the Seneca, and tempers are high since the rates recently under-
went a considerable hike, but Vivi's there for other reasons: her rabbi father must
preside over the services for Mindy Solomon, an orthodox Jewish girl just Vivi's
age, who died in what initially looked like an accident and is now said to be mur-
der. Vivi attends Mindy's school in order to get information for a school project,
and she begins to uncover the community factions that may have played a role in
Mindy's death and continue to present a threat. The mystery is so convoluted that
it's difficult to keep track ofwhat's happened and to whom (there's little character-
ization), and Mindy's surprise killer comes out of left field (except for his connec-
tion to a group of proselytizing Christians, who are reductively depicted as the
main source of trouble); Vivi's occasional hurt over her parents' divorce and her
mother's distance is similarly random. There's nonetheless some interest value in
the cultural convergence of observant Jews and Senecas, with Vivi intrigued by
unfamiliar customs that nonetheless resonate with her own beliefs and practices,
and the book examines some serious issues of faith. Readers taken by this unusual
theological blend may find wading through the boggy mystery a fair price to pay.
DS
FRANK, JOHN 
The Tomb of the Boy King; illus. by Tom Pohrt. 
Foster/Farrar,
2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-374-37674-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
9-12 yrs
It's hard to decide whether to howl in outrage or delight at this toe-tapping rendi-
tion of the 1917 discovery, excavation, and plunder of King Tutankhamen's tomb,
set in eight brief chapters of rhyme that fits neatly, if probably unintentionally,
with the tune "A Modern Major General." Although the careful sequencing of
events and inventory of the tomb seems to suggest a nonfiction approach, infor-
mation-book purists will surely indict Frank for allowing Carter and Carnarvon to
versify within quotation marks ("'To hire a crew of men,' he said,/ 'to labor in the
desert sun/ where nests of poisonous snakes abound/ is not a task that's cheaply
done'") and for blithely promoting the veracity of Tut's Curse without presenting
contrary evidence. (Even the epilogue, that traditional forum for setting a fic-
tional record straight, leaves readers with a host of "troubling coincidences.") On
the other hand, surging verses that gamely attempt the syntactical acrobatics of Sir
William Gilbert lyrics and a shamelessly melodramatic tone hint that we need not
take all this too seriously. Indeed, Pohrt's detailed line and watercolor pictures,
many theatrically cast as tableaux partially bordered with Egyptian motifs, are pre-
sented on a buff background that recalls treasure maps and pulp newsprint-an
invitation to accept this in the breathless spirit of period readers who followed the
drama and its celebrities in print. This insists on being read aloud rousingly, and
librarians who revel in working a room may find this an ideal vent for their histri-
onic impulses. EB
MARCH 2001 
* 259
FRAUSTINO, LISA ROWE 
The Hickory Chair; illus. by Benny Andrews. 
Levine/
Scholastic, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-52248-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 4-8 yrs
Adult narrator Louis, blind since birth, recalls his affectionate relationship with his
good-humored grandmother who always assured him he had "blind sight" and
recounts her final rascally act of leaving legacy notes hidden inside all of her favor-
ite things for each of her heirs. On the day her will is read, the family dries their
tears, remembers her exploits ("Once she sneaked into Gramps's workplace and
left him a love note-in the wrong lunchbox!"), and then begins the treasure hunt,
at which Louis proves particularly adept. Louis doesn't find a note addressed just
to him, though; it's only many years later, when his own grandchild pokes her
fingers into a hole in the upholstery of the old hickory chair, that the aged note
emerges, "For my favorite youngest grandchild with blind sight." Although other
picture books deal with the death of a grandparent, it's hard to match Fraustino's
offering for delicate prose ("She had a good alive smell-lilacs and a whiff of bleach"),
subtle humor, and masterful portrayal of family unity and strength. Andrews' oil
and fabric collage scenes are spare and understated, with a few accoutrements that
suggest setting and stark monochrome backdrops of rich mauve, green, or gentle
gray against which gracefully stylized, elongated figures mourn, celebrate, and re-
member. EB
GAMMELL, STEPHEN 
Ride; written and illus. by Stephen Gammell. 
Silver
Whistle/Harcourt, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-202682-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A brother and sister fight the age-old battle of the back seat on a grand scale in this
saga of a family drive. Narrative consists solely of dialogue, much of it resound-
ingly recognizable ("'Hey your foot is over!' 'Well you're touching!'"); the pro-
ceedings soon zoom beyond the mundane, however, when the sibs start hurling
furniture at one another, sending each other into space, and transmogrifying into
enraged and fearsome dinosaurs ("'You're about to be extinct!' 'Phew . . . You
already stinct!'"). The mop-headed sibs have an overstuffed Cabbage-Patch look,
but Gammell's free-form strokes and spatters make his characters far from cutesily
salable; the watercolor, pastel, and colored-pencil illustrations use contrasting hues
for edgy energy, with surprising touches of orange, aqua, and chartreuse that add
an appropriate frazzle. The fantasy elements (and the safety-concerned may wish
to consider the absence of seat belts in that category) blend easily into the realistic
frame, and the final scene (featuring a cross-sibling jam-sandwich squirt) foreshad-
ows a rematch. Siblings who've had a glimpse of the ideal in Zolotow's Do You
Know What I'llDo? (BCCB 1/01) will recognize a more familiar reality here. DS
GAUTHIER, GAIL 
The Hero of Ticonderoga. Putnam, 2001 
[240p]
ISBN 0-399-23559-0 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
"If you can make an oral report interesting enough-say, about drinking, swear-
ing, and generally getting in trouble-people will listen. Personally, I like it when
people listen." When the coveted report topic on local hero Ethan Allen lands in
the lap of unenthusiastic Thirese LeClerc, she adopts this as her strategy for turn-
260 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ing her "C" grade into a "B" and catching the attention of classmates, who regard
her as unredeemably quiet and average. Her spin on Allen, which plays up his less
than admirable attributes, catches their attention all right, but sixth-grade sub Mr.
Santangelo sees something in Therese's cheekiness that's worth developing, and he
presses her to expand her report into a long-running saga that culminates with a
class trip to Fort Ticonderoga. Gauthier packs plenty of comic bite into Therese's
narration, and although readers may wade through far more than they care to
know about Allen and his Green Mountain Boys (and they may wonder why the
book is set in the 1960s), the ongoing report should draw them in as surely as it
draws Ther&se's classmates. Background issues of sixth-grade squabbles, jealousies,
and busted friendships are right on the mark, and it's thoroughly refreshing to find
a protagonist who is a perfectly average student with parents who love her just the
way she is. EB
GUTMAN, BILL Adopting Pets: How to Choose Your New Best Friend; illus. by
Anne Canevari Green. 
Millbrook, 2001 
64p
ISBN 0-7613-1863-1 
$22.90 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
Gutman, author of Becoming Your Cat's Best Friend (BCCB 6/97) and other titles
in the "Pet Friends" series, here takes a different look at the pet process, making the
case for adopting pets from shelters and rescue leagues. The book outlines the
overpopulation problem in dogs and cats today and goes on to examine the prob-
lems of pet-store animals and the necessity of taking any pet acquisition seriously
(hence a digression on the inadvisability of advertising your pet as "free to good
home"); it then discusses some of the workings of shelters and the process of selec-
tion. Gutman makes a good case for thoughtful pet ownership and adoption rather
than purchase, and he also provides some useful discussion of youthful volunteer
and assistance possibilities. The advocacy sometimes tips into sheer opinionatedness,
however ("It's almost bizarre that so many people worry about lions, tigers, gorillas
and other wild animals becoming extinct, but not about the problem of too many
dogs and cats"). The book also paints rather a rosy picture of shelters where there's
always a plethora of time and knowledge for animals and people, and it offers a
wavering favoritism of no-kill shelters, often singling them out, without ever ex-
ploring the different philosophies in any depth. Still, it's a useful philosophical
treatment of a heart-tugging issue, and its thoughtful approach will make a handy
complement to Peg Kehret's more emotional Shelter Dogs (BCCB 4/99). There's
a missed opportunity here with the absence of photographs, so there are no elo-
quent real-life faces advancing their cause, but the perky colored cartoons add some
leavening to a serious subject. A bibliography of books and websites and an index
are included. DS
HEANEY, MARIE, ad. 
The Names Upon the Harp: Irish Myth and Legend; illus. by
P. J. Lynch. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2000 
96p
ISBN 0-590-68052-8 
$19.95 
R Gr. 5-8
A specialist in Irish studies undertakes the formidable task of selecting eight stories
from Celtic lore and adapting them for young readers: "Moytura" and "The Chil-
dren of Lir" from early mythology; "The Birth of Cuchulainn," "Bricriu's Feast,"
and "Deirdre of the Sorrows" from the Ulster cycle; and "Finn and the Salmon of
Knowledge," "The Enchanted Deer," and "Oisin in the Land of Youth" from the
Finn cycle. The constant battles and romantic tragedies that characterize these
tales are neither glossed over nor glamorized, and the immense cast and legendary
MARCH 2001 
* 
261
events are rendered as clearly as possible given the abridgment of what once took
days for a bard to recount. Some elements are familiar from European fairy tales
and even Biblical scenes, including-in the first story alone-a Rapunzel-like fig-
ure discovered in her tower by a handsome young man, a baby cast into and res-
cued from the sea, and a David-and-Goliath confrontation between a young hero
and his gigantic enemy. Each of these motifs, however, takes an unexpected turn
that will draw an older audience ready for more sophisticated narrative dynamics.
Lynch's vividly literal paintings bedeck every spread, from dramatically horrific
battles to windswept landscapes and queenly beauties with definite New Age ten-
dencies. Poet Seamus Heaney's translation of a poem from the Gaelic concludes
one of the stories, and an extremely helpful pronunciation guide is appended along
with source notes and a list of adult books (some from the nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries) for further reading. BH
HELLMAN, 
GARY 
The Karate Way; written and illus. by Gary
Hellman. 
Doubleday, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-385-32742-0 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
The narrator recalls the previous September, when he got the notorious "Killer
Miller" for a teacher and a bully singled him out for special attention. To add
insult to injury, his parents signed him up for an after-school activity but they
wouldn't tell him what activity. It turned out to be karate class, which, after time
and practice, increased his self-confidence as well as his physical strength and men-
tal discipline. The pedestrian text ("Karate taught me how to feel good about
myself and have a non-quitting spirit") has little pace or flair, but the content is
useful despite the absence of style. The cartoon illustrations, amateurish though
they are, sometimes possess enough unexpected humor to offset the lackluster writ-
ing. This simple introduction to karate will be a popular item in any library,
especially since the book can be easily mastered by younger or less proficient read-
ers. There is a fair amount of information here, including a clear indication that
getting good at karate requires some dedication and a very cursory introduction to
what a new student can expect in a first karate class. The order of belts is given and
there is a short glossary of terms. Hellman includes his website address for "any-
one out there who would like to get in touch and exchange ideas." JMD
HENEGHAN, JAMES 
The Grave. Foster/Farrar, 2000 
245p
ISBN 0-374-32765-3 $17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
When a mass grave is excavated in Liverpool, England, Tom finds himself drawn
to the site. A fall into the open pit takes him back in time to 1847 and transports
him to a coastal town in Ireland. Tom arrives at the moment when a boy named
Tully Monaghan has just been rescued from the stormy sea, and he uses modern
CPR techniques to restore the boy's breathing, much to the astonishment of the
crowd of villagers. The Monaghan family gratefully takes him in, despite his spooky
resemblance to young Tully, and Tom, who is an unloved foster child in his own
time, finds for the first time people that feel like family. The potato famine is
devastating the Irish people, and the Monaghan family begins a long and desperate
journey to Liverpool and then on to America. Tom leaves them in Liverpool, after
most of the family has died from disease, hunger, or both, and returns to his own
time where clues from the past help him to discover the identity of his biological
family. Although the opening leaps right into time travel, Tom's repetitive pon-
262 
* THE BULLETIN
dering about the mechanics of this travel slows the pace of the first few chapters
considerably, and the surprise ending is too contrived to be emotionally effective
(Tom was abducted as an infant by a crazy woman who later abandoned him in a
department store, and his father is a man he already knows as a caring football
coach). Nevertheless, historical-fiction readers as well as fantasy buffs will enjoy
this story about a young man who finds his first real family in his own great-
grandparents. KM
HOBERMAN, MARY ANN 
"It's Simple, " Said Simon; illus. by Meilo So. 
Knopf,
2001 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91201-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81201-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-5 yrs
Simon is out for a stroll in the city when he meets a dog. The dog challenges the
boy: "'I bet you can't growl,' growled the dog. Simon growled a low growl. 'Very
good,' said the dog. 'It's simple,' said Simon." The boy subsequently meets a cat
and a horse, who challenge him, respectively, to stretch and jump; Simon meets
both challenges with ease and the same refrain ("'It's simple,' said Simon"), but his
next antagonist is a bit harder to please. The tiger makes Simon growl louder,
stretch farther, and jump higher, before tricking the boy onto his back (ý la the fox
and the gingerbread boy) in order to take him home and eat him. Simon then
tricks the tiger into the river, where the boy makes his escape: "'Help!' yelled the
tiger. 'I can't swim!' 'It's simple,' said Simon. And he swam down the river and
got home just in time for supper." Hoberman's choice of swimming, a skill tigers
in the wild actually possess, as the means of the animal's undoing may irk budding
naturalists, but the cumulative momentum will carry listeners. So's graceful ren-
derings feature a cocky, energetically drawn Simon, but the animals steal the show.
Dog, cat, and horse exude a cozy domesticity that lends them a certain settled air;
the tiger, however, is far from domestic. Orange watercolor and washes of black
ink with fine line detailing suggest a powerful natural force that draws the eye in
nearly all images in which it is present. Storytime listeners will hold their breath
until the final splash. JMD
HOFMEYR, DIANNE, ad. 
The Star-Bearer: A Creation Myth from Ancient Egypt;
illus. by Jude Daly. 
Farrar, 2001 
[26p]
ISBN 0-374-37481-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 7-10 yrs
This is a stately retelling of the birth of Atum and his creation of the gods, god-
desses, and the world they rule. The conflict between divine creator Atum and the
lovers, Geb (the earth) and Nut (the sky), is the crux of the action. As with many
creation cycles, the complexity of this myth is difficult to condense, and the book
is heavily weighted with text and concept. While the text sometimes strains for the
poetic, Daly's stylized hieroglyph-inspired art is graceful and involving. The light-
filled, elegant paintings mediate the density of this tale through controlled compo-
sitions and perspectives that alternate between closeups of gods and goddesses and
sweeping vistas of earth and sky. The palette leans heavily on varying blue hues,
with touches of gold and white for emphasis. The illustrations are set on cean
white pages with the text blocks beneath; the arrangement of paintings ranges
from a panel a page to multi-paneled pages that resemble a comic strip. A brief
note on the origin of the story is included. JMD
MARCH 2001 
* 263
HOLT, KIMBERLY WILLIS 
Dancing in Cadillac Light. Putnam, 2001 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-399-23402-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Jaynell's parents are worried that her grandfather is starting to lose touch with
reality, but she's thrilled that Grandpap is moving in with her family and she's
content to follow him around and keep her eye on him, as her parents wish. Though
she relishes her spy mission and her increasing closeness to Grandpap, she's puzzled
by his interest in the Pickenses, the family Jaynell's normally tolerant mother de-
nounces as "white trash." Grandpa dies shortly after passing on his empty house,
the family home, to the Pickenses; when Jaynell's relatives refuse to believe he
genuinely gave the impoverished family the house, Jaynell is torn between her
jealousy and dislike of the Pickens clan and her knowledge that the bequest was
indeed her grandfather's true wish. The multitude of plot threads diffuse the
story's impact somewhat (the 1969 time period and the anticipated moon shot
never really pull their narrative weight), and Jaynell's dramatic intervention in a
Pickens emergency has more than a touch of contrivance, but this is a sensitive and
effective portrayal of a granddaughter's evolving understanding of a beloved grand-
father. Holt also gives respectful treatment to Grandpap's final reexamination of
his life in the gift of the house and also in his splashing out on a flashy Cadillac,
which thrills his grandchildren but arouses other, more complicated emotions in
his adult relatives. The thorny aspects of familial relationships are honestly de-
picted, whether it be Jaynell's distaste for her sister, Racine (whose dance lessons
are funded by the sale of the Cadillac, much to Jaynell's chagrin), or the tension
between the adult offspring of Grandpap, who have very different approaches to
his legacy. This is both a tender account of a grandparent-grandchild relationship
and a subtle exploration of long-term family dynamics. DS
HORVATH, POLLY 
Everything on a Waffle. 
Farrar, 2001 
[160p]
ISBN 0-374-32236-8 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 5-8
Primrose lives in Coal Harbour, a small village in British Columbia, and she's
waiting for the return of her parents, despite the fact that everyone insists that they
died in a storm at sea. When her bachelor uncle Jack's life finally overlaps with
hers, she moves in with him, trying to avoid the machinations of syrupy counselor
Miss Honeycut (who wants Primrose out of Jack's house and Miss Honeycut in).
Primrose finds comfort in familiar surroundings and acquaintances, such as her
mothball-scented former foster mother, Miss Perfidy, and Miss Bowzer, owner
and chef at the town restaurant, where everything is served on a waffle. She's
sufficiently distracted, however, that she manages to lose not one but two digits
under Jack's care, and that's enough to get Primrose sent into foster care with the
irresistibly sympathetic Evie and Bert, who leap into Primrose's life with wonder-
fully partisan vigor. The book doesn't offer an easily encapsulated plot but instead
sees Primrose through her time of troubles as she bounces off people and events
like a pinball, anchoring herself down each chapter with a narratively relevant
recipe (finishing, of course, with waffles). Sharp in both perceptions and honed
edges, Primrose details not the gentle and predictable path of therapeutic adjust-
ment but the price and reward (her parents do indeed return) of a determined
adherence to instinctive belief. If there's a villain here, it's orthodoxy: it's the
uncategorizable and surprising bonds between people that bring satisfaction, not
264 
* THE BULLETIN
the ordained social protocols. Add to this Horvath's tart and relentless humor,
and you've got a fine, quirky followup to The Trolls (BCCB 2/99). DS
HOVEY, KATE, ad. 
Arachne Speaks; illus. by Blair Drawson. 
McElderry,
2001 
40p
ISBN 0-689-82901-9 $17.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Hovey braids strings of couplets into the voices of Arachne, self-made weaver and
artisan, and Athena, goddess of wisdom and patroness of weavers. Arachne holds
her gift for weaving with fierce possessiveness; she credits only herself for her skill
and refuses to pay tribute to the goddess. Her disrespect draws Athena to earth,
and the two compete to see who is the mistress of the loom. Arachne weaves a
brilliant blasphemy, for which she is severely punished by Athena; in a last effort to
maintain her autonomy Arachne hangs herself and wakes "from death's white vi-
sion still dangling from the tree." Athena has turned her into a spider, but Arachne
has the last word: "Now, hosts of artisans/ spin on in Arachne's name./ Athena, on
her throne,/ languishes alone,/ still envying my fame." Death and transformation
leave Hovey's Arachne smugly satisfied with the outcome of her encounter with
the goddess; not even immortality can win against this determined woman's art.
Rhyming couplets can be deadly, but for the most part Hovey has admirable con-
trol over any singsong tendencies, and her storytelling is forceful. The narrative-
in Arachne's voice, with occasional interpolations by Athena-has a dramatic arc
and furious pace that rushes over any rhythmic irregularities in the text. Drawson's
acrylics ratchet the intensity up a few notches with their in-your-face perspectives.
Monumental views of the stern Athena contrast with framed scenes of the ancient
action set as if on a movie screen, complete with toga-garbed viewers. Drawson's
uneven but still compelling images are deliberately awkward, and the harsh angu-
larity of line adds a stylized sharpness to the human figures that makes them both
distant and startling. The unusual illustrations are certain to attract browsers; the
passionate words and images will hold them fast. JMD
HURST, CAROL OTIS 
Through the Lock. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2001 
[172p]
ISBN 0-618-03036-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Etta doesn't have many options: though the early nineteenth
century Massachusetts economy provides a mill job for her older sister, and her
brother's got a place on a farm, she's struggling to survive on her own. Walter, a
boy also on his own, grudgingly allows her to share space in his shack by the canal,
and they're soon joined by Jake, the son of parents cloistered in the Shaker settle-
ment. The three determine to secure their position by taking over as lockkeepers,
thereby getting on the canal company payroll, but first they have to chase away the
river boys who are paid to sabotage the canal construction and maintenance. Hurst
structures her story around one of the less-celebrated aspects of American history,
and she paints a vivid picture of a New England teetering all unknowing on the
precipice of radical change; Etta's narration is never heavy-handed or
overexplanatory, however (nor preachy-her older sister is quite happy with the
millwork that allows her financial independence and a more urbanized life), and
the story keeps a firm focus on the three youngsters' attempts to eke out a living
and control their own destiny. The cover unfortunately confers a misleadingly
contemporary look, but readers intrigued by Ellen Howard's story of British ca-
MARCH 2001 
* 
265
nals, The Gate in the Wall (BCCB 5/99), will want to check out this account of
their American counterpart. DS
ICHIKAWA, SATOMI 
The First Bear in Africa; written and illus. by Satomi
Ichikawa. 
Philomel, 2001 
33p
ISBN 0-399-23485-3 
$14.99 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
With hospitable grace, Meto and his savanna-dwelling family tolerate a group of
Asian tourists who come to visit their small African village. After submitting to
photographs and videotaping ("I smile. They look funny"), he gazes with friendly
curiosity at a little girl holding a stuffed toy. The tourists drive away, Meto and
the little girl waving to one another: "But no! The girl has forgotten her little
animal!" The tale of six tourists now turns into an epic chase as Meto races through
the savanna in pursuit. He meets Kiboko (hippopotamus), Simba (lion), Tembo
(elephant), and Twiga (giraffe); the indigenous fauna are curious about the "strange
animal" Meto carries. They follow him to the airstrip and watch him return the
bear to its owner. The news of the stuffed toy's ursine identity spreads among the
animals, who "marvel" at the appearance of "the first bear in all of Africa." The
quick switch from the meeting between Meto and the tourists to a talking animal
tale is unexpected, but most youngsters will probably not only roll with it but like
it. The opening illustrations present the meeting of Meto and the little girl with
childlike solemnity; by contrast, Meto's encounters with the animals have a touch
of visual slapstick (his dash across the savanna on the giraffe's back, waving the
stuffed bear in the air and followed by a horde of curious carnivores and herbi-
vores, is particularly effective). Ichikawa's watercolors are precise without losing
their sense of spontaneity. The savanna and its occupants are a tad generic, but the
connection between Meto and the little girl is a sincere one, and the scenes of
Meto with the various animals will no doubt inspire Dolittle dreams. The realistic
beginning of the story is slow, but the chase has built-in suspense, a strong pace,
and a rousing conclusion. A brief glossary of Swahili words is included. JMD
JACOBSSON, ANDERS 
In Ned's Head, written by Anders Jacobsson and S6ren Olsson;
tr. by Kevin Read. 
Atheneum, 2001 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-689-83870-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Sixth-grader Ned leads a life fraught with trials: there's his hapless friend Arnold;
the class bully, Nugget; the girl(s) of his dreams; the awful name of Ned; and the
fear that someone will discover that he keeps a diary-this diary, in which he
describes his days. Amid the pell-mell chaos of his life, Ned manages to attain two
important milestones in one fell swoop when he finds that his adored Nadia likes
him and also likes his name. The pleasures here are more those ofwriterly milieu
than of plot; events are mostly wryly amusing everyday occurrences piling on top
of each other, but Ned's narration has a humorous bluntness and fetching weird-
ness that makes it all enjoyable ("Arnold is a good friend. He's worse at ice hockey,
he's pretty weak, and his dad doesn't have a red convertible Corvette"). Though
Ned's saga is considerably lighter, the wide-eyed knowingness here is similar to
that in Bjarne Reuter's Buster books (Buster's World, BCCB 9/89, etc.), and like
Buster, Ned has a weakness on the concept of correlation that leaves him often
viewing events as random though he's precipitated them. This Swedish import
differs from the Buster books in being largely Americanized in its translation (though
266 
* THE BULLETIN
not always effectively), and there's a relentlessness to the boys' breast fixations that
doesn't balance well with the generally airy approach. Overall, though, this is an
odd and amusing narrative, and the one-lineresque short sentences will spice up a
readaloud as well as inviting more tentative readers to dive in. DS
JACQUES, 
BRIAN 
Castaways of the Flying Dutchman; 
illus. by Ian
Schoenherr. 
Philomel, 2001 
[327p]
ISBN 0-399-23601-5 
$22.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In a few dozen rousing, cliche-ridden pages ("Off into the seas the battered craft
sped, like a fleeing stag pursued by the hounds of hell into the midwinter wastes of
the ocean, headed again for Cape Horn and destiny"), Jacques reimagines the fate
of the mythical "Fleiger Hollander" (as he renders the Dutch). Avaricious, mur-
derous, and ultimately crazed Captain Vanderdrecken loses the Dutchman and is
condemned to sail his ghost ship throughout eternity, but a heavenly apparition
saves mute stowaway Neb and his faithful Labrador retriever, Den, restores Neb's
speech, gifts Den with the ability to communicate his thoughts, and sends the duo
on an everlasting mission to do good in the world. After a brief, disjointed episode
in which Neb and Den brighten the life of a lonely Chilean shepherd, Jacques
finally gets down to the real business of his novel-Neb and Den's reappearance
nearly three hundred years later in a cozy English village badly in need of saving
from a heartless developer. Ben and Ned, who have now pointlessly reversed their
names, pursue a trail of clues to establish the good guys' claim to the land-and
toss some pedantic messages about constructively coping with bullies and anger
into the bargain. Jacques nearly scuttles his own ship with an overweighted, un-
balanced cargo of plotting. Readers hoping for a heart-pounding tale of the
Dutchman's doomed crew will be disappointed, but those who fancy old-fash-
ioned sleuthing with a touch of fantasy may nonetheless find the survivors'
landbound adventures diverting. EB
JORDAN, SHERRYL 
Secret Sacrament. HarperCollins, 2001 
[352p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028905-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028904-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 8-12
As the eldest son of a wealthy Navoran merchant, Gabriel is expected to take over
the family business when his father dies. With his mother's support, Gabriel re-
fuses, and he instead pursues his dream of becoming a healer. His success takes
him to the best teachers in the land and brings him into favor with the Empress
Petra, who comes to treasure him above all her counselors in the interpretation of
her dreams. Young Gabriel becomes increasingly aware of animosity towards him
amongst the Empress's powerful advisors, until one night an attempt on Gabriel's
life goes awry, and his favorite brother is killed. While taking a walk after his
brother's funeral, he meets a beautiful woman named Ashila, who is one of the
Shinali people. Although the Shinali were conquered long ago by the Navoran
people and driven away from the coast and into the plains, a prophesy well known
to both groups says that the Shinali will rise again, and a Navoran will spark their
rise. Gabriel fulfills the first part of the prophesy, saving the captured Shinali from
slaughter by using his influence with the Empress, although he is forced to sacri-
fice his own life in the process. Although the pace occasionally lags, Jordan has
woven a richly detailed tapestry of augury and political intrigue, and Gabriel's
MARCH 2001 
* 267
growth, both in his understanding of himself and in his awareness and acceptance
of his foretold role, sustains the narrative through the tragic end. Gabriel is a
memorable character who is both mystically powerful and engagingly human, and
young adult fantasy fans will be transfixed by this mythic tale of an injustice that is
slowly but surely overcome. KM
KETTEMAN, HELEN 
Mama's Way; illus. by Mary Whyte. 
Dial, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8037-2413-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
With "daddy gone," Mama has been hard pressed to make ends meet by cleaning
houses and doing seamstress work. Wynona takes their reduced circumstances
with pretty good grace until it comes time for her sixth-grade graduation and she is
faced with wearing a friend's hand-me-down dress. Pleading and sulking don't
seem to bring the eighty-five-dollar dress Wynona covets any closer, and after
calmly but firmly stating the impossibility of her daughter's wishes, Mama is silent
on the subject. Shortly before the big event Mama presents Wynona with the
requisite cash, which she has obviously earned through extra work, but a younger
brother's broken bone (a convenient contrivance serving as little more than impe-
tus to a predictable plot) changes the plans: "We can use this money for the
hospital bill, Mama. I already have a dress." Whyte's watercolors bring the old-
timey tone of Ketteman's text up to date with a very contemporary cast-blue-
jeaned Mama has sensible short hair and worry-worn but attractive features, and
quintessential adolescent Wynona is quite pretty when she isn't pouting. Back-
ground scenes dissolve into areas of patchy texturing, which direct viewers to focus
on the emotional interplay of characters rather than setting. While crusty adult
readers may be unsympathetic, child listeners will focus on Wynona's sacrifice of
her money and on the beautiful dress Mama remakes for the graduation. EB
KIMMEL, ERIC A. 
Website of the Warped Wizard; illus. by Jeff Shelly. 
Dutton,
2001 
[12 8p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-525-46656-8 
$14.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-141-31167-3 
$4.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Jessica (Jess) is satisfied with playing endless games of the videogame "Gopher,"
until her friend Matt suggests they try a new website (fictional, though located at a
real domain). When she enters the site, she realizes this is not just any other
internet game: it talks back to her, and her room begins to fill with objects and
characters from the game, including a knight in black armor, who then reveals
himself as her friend Matthew (now Sir Matthew the Lionhearted). As the two
journey through the game, they discover they are in the time of King Arthur, albeit
a time filled with technological anachronisms. They make friends (Dennis the
Centaur whose last job was with someone who carried a wand and whose initials
were HP, a black horse who used to be Sir Lancelot, and Elfric the Elf-now-Giant)
and enemies (Robin Hood and his band of Merrie Biking Men-and women in
the case of Maid Marian; and Marion, Merlin's evil cone, discovered in the "Cham-
bers of Secrets"). Madcap adventures ensue, with a final showdown between Jess
and Marion (don't worry, no one really dies in cyberspace). Kimmel writes with
slapstick, sometimes forced humor, sending his characters across the screen at warp
speed; unfortunately the plot is predictable and the characterizations too minimal
to add much depth. Still, kids will love the idea, belabored premise or not, of
268 
* THE BULLETIN
being sucked into a computer game. Fans of Scieszka's Time Warp Trio series
(Knights ofthe Kitchen Table, BCCB 7/91, etc.) will enjoy this spoof. EAB
KORNBLATT, MARC 
Understanding Buddy. 
McElderry, 2001 
[120p]
ISBN 0-689-83215-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Fifth-grader Sam misses the warmth and affection of the family housekeeper, Laura
White, after her death in a car accident. When Laura's son Buddy appears in
Sam's class and refuses to speak, Sam feels an unspoken connection to him. He
therefore defends the silent Buddy against class taunting, even to the point of
causing a rift between himself and his friend Alex. Sam's struggle to understand
death is intensified by the silence imposed at home (Sam's mother thinks she's
protected her son from the sad truth about Laura), carried out at school, and rein-
forced by Buddy's silence after his mother's death. Through soccer, Sam and Buddy
begin interacting, at first without words, then building to written communication
and later spoken words. Kornblatt effectively portrays the inner life of children
struggling with death, grounding the story in details of familiar daily life (family,
school, synagogue, soccer). His conclusion brings together the story threads but
resists tying them up neatly: though Sam and Alex are reconciled, Sam acknowl-
edges their relationship may never be the same, while he recognizes that he and
Buddy have only started their friendship. Offer this to readers not quite ready for
Konigsburg's Silent to the Bone (BCCB 10/00). EAB
LALICKI, TOM 
Spellbinder: The Life of Harry Houdini. Holiday House,
2000 
88p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1499-X 
$18.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Harry Houdini may not have instant recognition with grade-school kids, but he is
still the father of modern magic and illusion. Lalicki's biography of the master
escape artist and showman follows this Jewish immigrant from Wisconsin to New
York City, from vaudeville to European theatres, focusing on his fierce determina-
tion and drive to be the best in his field. Black-and-white period photographs of
Houdini in action-Houdini dangling above a Washington D.C. street in a strait-
jacket; Houdini being submerged in the icy waters of a bay-add a frisson of
sensationalism to this lively biography. Quotes from Houdini and his contempo-
raries provide a personal context for what youngsters may consider ancient history.
In an author's note, Lalicki describes his research into primary and secondary sources,
and a timeline, bibliography, and index are included. Lalicki has bridged the di-
vide between past and present with an irresistible distillation of the daring, danger,
and magic that was Houdini's life. JMD
LESTER, JULIUS 
Ackamarackus: Julius Lester's Sumptuously Silly Fantastically Funny
Fables; illus. by Emilie Chollat. 
Scholastic, 2001 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-48913-5 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 3-5
Lester provides six original fables (each complete with a pair of morals) that offer
some unusual looks at the animal kingdom. In "How Bernard the Bee Lost His
Buzz," for example, Bernard sacrifices his buzz in pursuit of his beloved bluebird
but then finds a happier match with a bee thrilled with a non-buzzing partner;
"The Flies Learn to Fly" tells of the time when flies discovered the advantages of
MARCH 2001 
* 269
commercial air travel; "Ellen the Eagle Finds Her Place in the World," which is
not a rocky eyrie but a cushy penthouse apartment where she models for govern-
mental eagle images on stamps and whatnot. Lester's writing is uneven, with some
of the stories weak and meandering and his style sometimes dipping into the pre-
cious, but there's some rollicking and energetic storytelling as well. Both readal-
oud audiences and readers alone will appreciate the anaconda who is "so long its
tail is in Monday and its eyes are looking into next Tuesday," and they'll relish the
trials of Adalbert the alligator, depressed about the ugliness of alligators: "Alliga-
tors have tried wigs and makeup and if you want to see something that is truly
ugly, it is an alligator in a blonde wig. Being so ugly meant they didn't have any
friends. Well, that's not exactly true. They didn't have any friends because they
ate them." The font variations (phrases periodically emphasized in color and itali-
cization) are generally superfluous, but the picture-book layout is attractive. Spiky
acrylic art with occasional touches of collage has a complementary solid weirdness,
but the illustrations sometimes lack focus and power, leaving them jostling graph-
ics rather than narrative propellants. This nonetheless offers some useful and en-
tertaining possibilities, including popping a fable into an otherwise serious unit
about animals and encouraging kids to write their own stories. DS
LONG, MELINDA 
Hiccup Snickup; illus. by Thor Wickstrom. 
Simon, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82245-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Our narrator is distraught one morning when she's visited with an intractable case
of hiccups. Her grandmother assures her that a triple iteration of the rhyme "Hic-
cup snickup/ Rear right straight up./ Three drops in the teacup/ Will cure the
hiccups" will do the trick, but before the girl can complete the task the whole
family's after her with hiccup solutions of their own. The cumulation of remedies
adds absurdity ("So there I was, scared to death, in a wet shirt, wearing a paper bag
and eating an apple, while standing on my head, holding my breath, and saying,
'Hiccup snickup ... '"), but it doesn't seem to chase the hiccups away. Finally the
whole family, eight including the dog, perform the rhyme together, working their
way up to a frenzied and hilarious rendition that leaves them all laughing and the
narrator cured-but the rest of them with the hiccups. The cumulation isn't
enough to lift this out of a one-joke groove, and the repeated rhyme doesn't have
enough sparkle of its own to bear the repetition, but there's plenty of opportunity
for lively performance drama with this little number; you'll have no trouble roping
audience members in for assistance. The illustrations are somewhat muddy-toned,
but there's a rubbery limberness to the participants' wiggly arms and legs that adds
bounce to the already gleefully disheveled scenes. The participatory hiccups will
continue long after the book is closed, so be ready with remedies of your own. DS
LOOK, LENORE 
Henry's First-Moon Birthday; illus. by Yumi Heo. 
Schwartz/Ath-
eneum, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-82294-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
All the Chinese relatives will be arriving to celebrate the one-month birthday of
narrator Jen-Jen's baby brother Henry, and Jen-Jen is running the show-with a
bit of assistance from Gnin-Gnin (Grandma), who handles such minor details as
all the cooking and most of the cleaning. If the specifics of this particular celebra-
tion are unfamiliar to many listeners-red envelopes of money tucked into the
crib, good-luck symbols adorning the house-the pandemonium of preparations
270 
* THE BULLETIN
hindered by an overexcited sibling won't be. Heo's loopy mixed-media scenes, in
which floors tip and household accoutrements fly while tight-lipped Gnin-Gnin
struggles to keep her humor, are explained by Jen-Jen in turn ("This is how to eat
pigs' feet and ginger soup. My cousins and I spit out the knuckles and try to
reconstruct the feet"). Hostess Jen-Jen is sweet and frenetic as a sugar high, and
her party is a definite event of the season. A glossary of Chinese terms is included.
EB
LYNCH, CHRIS 
Freewill. HarperCollins, 2001 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028177-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028176-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Will labors away at woodwork in his remedial high school,
where even among the weirdos he's a weirdo, keeping determinedly to himself.
He's surprised to feel the start of a connection to fellow woodworker Angela, a
tough athlete, and that connection is underscored when they're both moved first
by a fellow student's death in a nearby pond, then the subsequent death of that
student's boyfriend. Will is himself haunted by tragic deaths in water, and he
sculpts wooden monuments for his fallen schoolmates; the woodworking teacher
is dismayed both by Will's powerful and formless sculpture (when there's a real
market for Will's kitschy little gnomes) and also Will's removal without permis-
sion of the classwork that technically belongs to the school. There's more distress
than that when Will's sculptures start appearing at locations in advance of tragedy
there; outsiders begin to suspect Will of involvement, while he attempts to unravel
the mystery. Lynch's control over Will's narration is superb; the boy refers to
himself as "you" throughout, distancing himself from his own existence and giving
a dreamlike flavor to the bizarre sequence of events. There's a real Holden Caulfield
echo as well, but with the grief and rage of bereavement (Will's father drove his car
into the water, killing his wife and himself) as well as the constant threat of suicide,
so that the pain and desperation are magnified. The crime element and its conclu-
sion lack the sheer hypnotic fascination of Will's treading water in his world, but it
does help to illuminate his genuine attachment to Angela (a character who retains
both mystery and admirable impact to the end) when one of his sculptures signi-
fies danger for her. The indelible component here is Will's struggle with the ter-
rible freedom to follow his father or to live ("Choice, Will. It can kill you. It is
supposed to be what makes living worthwhile. It is what makes not living an
option"), which will resonate with the many readers who know that struggle inti-
mately. DS
MANDEL, PETER 
My Ocean Liner: Across the North Atlantic on the Great Ship
Normandie; illus. by Betsey MacDonald. 
Stemmer House, 2000 
45p
ISBN 0-88045-149-1 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Fictional adult narrator Paul remembers the Normandie crossing that brought him
and his family from New York to Le Havre in spring of 1939. The insubstantial
plot turns involving a shipboard friend stuck in a storage bin and a romance be-
tween a cabin steward and stewardess could easily be resolved in a few lines. The
real interest here is the ship herself and the pampered life aboard her-from her
dominance of Pier 88 to her mammoth engine room, from formal dinners to luxu-
riously appointed suites. MacDonald's watercolor scenes and vignettes are occa-
sionally successful at conveying the astonishing size and opulence of the vessel;
MARCH 2001 
* 271
awkwardly rendered figures, whose hair and clothing are annoyingly inconsistent
from spread to spread, are far less convincing. A guest introduction offers items of
interest concerning the Normandie and the French Line, but it is cast in prose too
challenging for many chapter book readers: "Normandie remains forever a para-
digm of elegance, chic, and stylishness, boasting the most compelling maritime
design scheme ever conceived." Still, resurgent interest in the Titanic tragedy has
directed children's gazes seaward, and Mandel demonstrates that an ocean liner
may be of considerable interest even when it remains afloat. EB
MILICH, ZORAN 
The City ABC Book; illus. with photographs by Zoran
Milich. 
Kids Can, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 1-55074-942-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Stephen T. Johnson's Alphabet City (BCCB 1/95) used photorealistic painting to
display the letters of the alphabet in various aspects of the urban landscape; Milich
goes one step further and uses actual photographs, employing overlaid red to high-
light the letters' forms in the black-and-white images and offering upper and lower-
case examples of the letter in question underneath or across from the photo. While
the book takes some latitude, with a few pictures relying on fairly arbitrary bound-
aries for definition of individual letters, in general it's loyal to its reality with some
fascinating results. High points include the A of a front-door transom and a Q
found in the wheels of the bicycle-lane symbol. Some of the pictures have a stark
drama even without their alphabetic emphasis (the row of S railings trailing off
into the distance, for instance), while others require that red accent to pull the
image together, but all of them have an austere handsomeness as well as conceptual
utility. This might make an interesting contrast with Johnson's book, and it could
certainly prompt a variety of assignments ranging from urban studies to art. The
final single-page gallery offers tight closeups of all the letters in situ. DS
MILLER, DAVID Just Like You and Me; written and illus. by David Miller. 
Dial,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2586-8 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Vivid collage spreads offer comparisons between animals and people: "Deep in
the jungle the bird of paradise loves to show off.// Just like you and me." Other
similarities include moving like the wind (the cheetah and a girl on in-line skates),
a desire to play together (penguins and a sports team), and "lounging lazily" (a lion
and a kid tipped upside down in an armchair). The series is just a catalogue in no
particular order, and some of the characterizations and comparisons are pretty
stretched; nor is it entirely clear what concept this sequence of parallels is further-
ing. Some of the interpretations are wryly amusing, however, such as the kid who,
like the chameleon, tries to blend in (covered in paint, he hides under the table as
parental legs stand right by him). The main value of the book really lies in the
paper-sculpture art, which is clearly the product of intricate craftsmanship (the
leopard is an amazing assemblage of tiny paper strands in a checkerboard pattern
that results in the impression of spots); though the craftsmanship is sometimes
more intriguing than the ultimate artistic impact, the animals especially have a
texture and dimensionality that makes them unusually corporeal. This doesn't
match the utility of Steve Jenkins' cut-paper baby biology, but some youngsters
may appreciate this offbeat look at our place in the animal kingdom. End matter
explains a bit more about the featured fauna. DS
272 
* THE BULLETIN
MOERI, LOUISE 
The Devilin Ol'Rosie. Atheneum, 2001 
202p
ISBN 0-689-82614-1 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Wart's mother is in labor, which in itself is a dangerous prospect in 1907 on an
isolated Oregon horse ranch, and at the same time the wildest horse, 01' Rosie, has
torn through the fence again, leading all the horses out into the large cattle pas-
tures. Wart's father sends him out to bring back the horses on the one old horse
that didn't run, and the boy begins a harrowing twenty-four hours of survival. His
horse is injured, he cuts his hand, blinding snow begins to fall, and he sees bloodstains
along a ravine wall that show that a cougar has wounded one of the horses. Moeri's
tense and suspenseful writing keeps the pace moving rapidly through a series of
near disasters in which Wart's inexperience and distractibility are shown with nail-
biting clarity. When he finds the horses, he suffers a serious injury (he ropes a
horse that lunges suddenly, scraping the skin around one of his eyes so badly that
he cannot see), and when they are almost home, wild 01' Rosie attacks and kills
the cougar that has been stalking the horses; both incidents are graphically de-
scribed but not gratuitously gross. Eventually, Wart makes it back to the ranch,
leading all of the horses behind him, into the arms of his previously critical father,
who affords the boy new respect and demonstrates his previously unspoken love of
his son. Despite one or two slow moments when Wart is reliving memories along
his trek, Moeri's writing is gripping and her storytelling is outstanding. Readers
will have trouble putting down this gritty story of a young boy's quest to save his
family's ranch. KM
MOSER, BARRY, ad. 
The Three Little Pigs; ad. and illus. by Barry Moser. 
Little,
2001 [32p]
ISBN 0-316-58544-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Moser, whose forays into folk and fairy tales have included a retelling of
Rumpelstiltskin (Tucker Pfeffercorn, BCCB 6/94), here revisits that popular if un-
fortunate trio of brothers, the Three Little Pigs. Let loose by their mother on
Valentine's Day, the three take the usual path, leading to disaster for two of them
and triumph for the third. Moser sticks with tradition in his retelling (it's very
close to Jacobs' version), but his illustrations are another snort-inducing matter.
The humans have a generic monumentality, but the animals are more individual-
ized; the pigs' watercolor visages are emotion-specific, and their pink potbellied
bodies with their thick curly tails have a porcine solidity that rivals other versions'
depictions. The illustrations feature a generous helping of visual jokes: the wolf
reclines in the ruins of pig number two's house with a distended tummy, cleaned
ribs in a bucket, and a bottle of"Bubba's No Cook BBQ Sauce" ("It's excellent on
Pork!"); the third little pig builds his house of "nowolf brick" held together with
"Wolfe Pruf Cement." Part of what makes this arch retelling feel so irreverent is
that the laughter of the finally triumphant pig is a knowing guffaw and not an
innocent giggle. No source note is included. JMD
MURPHY, RITA 
Black Angels. 
Delacorte, 2001 
[208p]
ISBN 0-385-32776-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Celli lives in the small town of Mystic, Georgia, with her mother, brother Ellery,
and Sophie, the black woman who works for their family. Sophie "speaks her
MARCH 2001 
* 
273
mind," organizing efforts to end the racist customs prevalent in 1961; although
Celli's mother doesn't mind, Celli herself is exasperated by Sophie's insistence on
participating in potentially dangerous demonstrations, particularly since Celli's
mother is off visiting their aunt for the month of July and Sophie is in charge of
the two children. Celli also longs for some contact with her long-missing father,
and her hopes soar when she receives a letter from her grandmother on her father's
side. The girl arranges to meet her grandmother for lunch, but she is shocked
when she finds that Grandmother Pearl is black. Slowly, Celli begins to accept her
biracial heritage as well as the significance of civil-rights struggles, and, after a
heated demonstration, she hides a fugitive biracial man and then helps to free
Sophie from jail. The opening of the novel is weighed down by long exposition
and slow introduction of central conflicts, and the plot strains at the seams, barely
holding together the various threads of a missing father, an absent mother, small-
town racism, and Celli's repeated visions of "black angels" outside her window
and in her backyard. Nevertheless, Celli is an engaging character, portrayed with
sympathy and emotional complexity, and this is an often-compelling portrait of a
young girl's struggle with her own biracial identity in the context of the civil rights
movement. KM
MURPHY, WENDY B. 
Spare Parts: From Peg Legs to Gene Splices. 
Twenty First
Century Books, 2001 
160p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-1355-9 
$23.90 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The human body's amazing capacity for regrowth often lags behind its need for
same, and over the centuries we've made some ingenious attempts at bridging that
gap. Murphy traces the history of those attempts from Roman-era artificial legs to
twentieth-century experiments with the artificial heart. Along the way, she covers
the role of war in surgical developments, the development of medical hygiene, and
other factors in the evolution of component-replacement technology. While the
components aren't always successfully grafted together, and historical practice is
sometimes credulously assumed from historical textbooks, there's a provocative
range of ground covered here. "Repair Shop" sidebars offer precis on particular
procedures (blood transfusions, false teeth, and plastic surgery get their moments
in the limelight), and the book personalizes the problem by using one chapter to
focus on a young amputee learning to use his prosthetic leg (the prosthetist notes
that limb prostheses, like computers, are improving so fast that users are keen to
upgrade long before their current models wear out). More than just a congratula-
tory puff piece, the book makes no bones about many contemporary limitations
and also touches usefully on ethical questions surrounding much of this progress.
Photographs of varying degrees of utility appear throughout; endnotes, a glossary,
a bibliography, and an index are included. DS
MUSGROVE, MARGARET, ad. 
The Spider Weaver: A Legend ofKente Cloth; illus. by
Julia Cairns. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2001 
[34p]
ISBN 0-590-98787-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Musgrove tells a story "widely known among the weavers of Ghana" of the origin
of kente cloth. Two expert weavers are inspired by a spider's dance while she
constructs an intricate web: "In time, the weavers redesigned their looms so they
could imitate the spider's weaving dance. At first, they copied her patterns in
274 
* 
THE BULLETIN
black and white thread, but soon they dyed their threads in bright colors and
developed many new patterns themselves. And they named this new woven cloth
kente-nwen-ntomoa-what today is commonly called kente cloth." Musgrove,
author ofAshanti to Zulu (BCCB 3/77), omits any specific source for the tale, but
her afterword gives historical information about the origin and uses of kente cloth
and the various ideals and proverbs its patterns represent. While the story itself has
some appealing elements (the friendship between the weavers, the connections
between humans and nature), the pace is slow and the concluding payoff is mini-
mal. Compositions are simple, and they feature several examples of the complexly
woven and dyed kente cloth. Jungle green vegetation provides a restful back-
ground for the weavers' discovery of the spider, but other compositional elements
are too undifferentiated to have much impact. While this title lacks spark, it has
obvious curricular applications that may make it a useful addition to classroom
and other collections. JMD
NEWMAN, LESL1A 
Cats, Cats, Cats!; illus. by Erika Oiler. 
Simon, 2001 
[2 6 p]
ISBN 0-689-83077-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Mrs. Brown lives "in a great big house on the edge of town" amid a sea of "cats,
cats, cats!" She dearly loves her kitties ("She loved the softness of their fur/ She
loved the loudness of their purr"), but after she goes to bed a wild feline party
begins ("Cats in the entryway throwing confetti/ Cats in the dining room eating
spaghetti"). Come dawn it's naptime for the cat crowd as Mrs. Brown once more
purrs with pride in her kitty brood. The verse is sometimes awkwardly crafted,
and the elements of the story aren't quite clear: does Mrs. Brown know that the
cats are partying all night, and if not, why doesn't the confetti and such make her
suspicious? The watercolor blobs of cats are exceedingly endearing, however, with
their blocky bodies and squarish heads balanced by perky spikes of ears. There's
not much individuation or specific focus, so the splendor here lies in numbers and
overall effect, but viewers will also enjoy hunting through the catastrophes for
their favorite feline in the Brown family and the odd detail of kitty celebration.
This doesn't have the witty cohesion of Hassett's Cat up a Tree (BCCB 11/98),
but it's still a world filled with lovable malkins, which is all that some young view-
ers will desire. DS
NICKLE, JOHN 
TV Rex; written and illus. by John Nickle. 
Scholastic,
2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-12043-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
Rex misses his grandfather and the things they used to do together, such as watch-
ing Deep Sea Hunt, their favorite TV show. In his loneliness, Rex climbs into the
console of his broken television, where he finds himself inside an episode of Deep
Sea Hunt; an octopus with eight TV sets gives Rex a magical remote control that
allows him to travel into any show on the air. Rex moves through program after
program until he finds himself in an old black-and-white sci-fi show with a robot
chasing him. Rex feels the robot's clamp on his back, but then realizes that he is
actually feeling the grip of pliers, and holding the pliers is his Grandpa, who has
just returned from Florida. The final illustration shows Rex snuggled in Grandpa's
lap, illuminated by the cathode-ray glow. Although the fantasy of Rex's TV ad-
MARCH 2001 
* 275
venture has some appeal, the sudden return of Grandpa is utterly confusing, since
the placement of Grandpa's tools, TV, and pictures in the attic implied that Grandpa
was more permanently absent from Rex's life. The illustrations have a retro feel,
showing '50s style furniture and appliances in a garish palette of turquoise and
orange, lit by the occasional lurid glow of a television set; they're more glitzy than
fanciful, and their jarring loudness makes the textual confusion more acute. Young-
sters who engage with the channel-surfing TV fantasy will be put off by the decep-
tive presentation of Grandpa's absence and the rosy but illogical conclusion. KM
PARK, LINDA SUE 
A Single Shard. Clarion, 2001 
[160p]
ISBN 0-395-97827-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Tree-ear, an orphaned Korean boy who lives under a bridge with his crippled adult
friend Crane-man, dreams of bettering himself by learning the potter's trade. His
twelfth-century village is renowned for its delicate celadon ware, and the crafts-
manship of Min, a master revered by fellow masters, is the benchmark by which
Tree-ear sets his standards. Unfortunately, trade apprenticeship is traditionally
limited to sons, and although Tree-ear manages to connive his way into working as
Min's assistant, his chances of becoming a potter are virtually nonexistent. When
a royal commission comes within Min's grasp, however, Tree-ear seizes a chance
to rise in his employer's eyes by delivering sample vases to the emissary at Songdo.
Patience and perfectionism, as Park demonstrates, are vital to a celadon potter's
art, but although Tree-ear eventually masters both, readers will become squirmy
waiting for him to hit the road to Songdo, adventures, and the happy (if wishful)
ending. Concluding notes expand on the celadon trade and discuss liberties taken
with Korean history of the period. EB
PECK, ROBERT NEWTON 
Extra Innings. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028868-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028867-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
When three generations of the Stonemason family die in the explosion of a private
jet, sixteen-year-old Tate, the sole survivor, moves into Great-Granddad's Florida
mansion to wait out his final years of adolescence and to recover from the devastat-
ing emotional and physical damage of the crash. Great-Aunt Viddy, the quintes-
sential proper Southern black lady, redirects some of Tate's frustration and anger
by confiding to him long-withheld stories of her own past, leading up to her adop-
tion into the white Stonemason clan at age ten. Baby Vidalia had been abandoned
in the bus of the Ethiopia Clowns, a black baseball team that eked out a living
during the Depression by playing exhibition games with small-town white teams-
games the Clowns had to lose if they were to leave town with their pay and their
hides intact. Tate comes to realize that although his shattered leg shatters his
hopes for a career on the diamond he can turn his writing skills to recording the
Clowns' tale with the verve and sensitivity it merits. Peck paints a seductive por-
trayal of a young man's journey back to health-so seductive that only in retro-
spect will readers suspect there's a lot of tale left untold. How did Vidalia transform
from shoeless waif to heiress within the context of a white Southern family? And
how does Viddy know about Tate's writing skills? Still, the Stonemasons are a
family worth meeting, and Viddy's memories alone are well worth hearing. EB
276 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PETERS, JULIE ANNE 
A Snitch in the Snob Squad. Tingley/Little, 2001 
[196p]
ISBN 0-316-70287-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
The four sixth-grade friends known collectively as the Snob Squad (see Revenge of
the Snob Squad, BCCB 9/98) are back, and they're facing a real problem: money
has been stolen from a teacher's purse, and everybody's under suspicion. Tough
Snob Squadder Max is the administration's prime suspect. A second theft impli-
cates Max further (though suspended for the first theft, she was seen on school
property at the time of the money's disappearance), but her friends try to keep
their faith in her. They'd like to blame Ashley, the principal's snobbish daughter,
but several other people are also wielding suspicious amounts of money-and one
of them is narrator Jenny's boyfriend, Kevin. Though the book offers a provoca-
tive wrinkle in Jenny's discovery that her friends have been reluctantly suspecting
her, the theft plot is muddy and contrived (Kevin may be cleared of theft charges,
but a sixth-grader who gives his girlfriend expensive gold jewelry may need inves-
tigation nonetheless). The additional subplot ofJenny's troubled family's attempts
to grow closer is often awkward, but there's some genuine warmth in Jenny's evolv-
ing relationship with her older sister. There's little in the way of characterization
or depth here, but it's still a serviceably speedy low-impact school story. DS
PINCZES, ELINOR J. 
Inchworm and a Half illus. by Randall Enos. 
Houghton,
2001 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-395-82849-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
4-7 yrs
Inchworm's raison d'etre is mensuration, and with each "loop" (Pinczes' term for
her locomotive technique; kids might prefer "scrunch") of her agile little corpus
she ticks off another inch of the particular vegetable she traverses. Then "one day
the unthinkable happens;/ 'My measurement's off just a bit./ One, two, nearly
three! How could this be?/ There's no way I can possibly fit.'" Obviously what's
needed is a fraction, and a series of progressively smaller fraction-of-an-inchworms
come to her aid. Pinczes' bouncy text lays out problem and solution with reason-
able clarity, but Enos' illustrations are quite another matter. Although his colored
linocuts featuring a sweetly perplexed inchworm and smug little helpers are ap-
pealing in their own right, disregard for scale will leave visual learners befuddled.
"Tiniest 1-inch new greens" are several times larger than the "3-inch pole beans"
which with they share a spread; "4 1/2-inch asparagus spears" vastly outstrip the
"7-inch celery" that retreats into the background. In another scene, the half-inch-
worm attempts to demonstrate his relative length by measuring the inchworm's
girth. Stick with Bruce MacMillan's Eating Fractions (BCCB 9/91) for an elemen-
tary-level introduction, or better yet, hand a child a ruler. EB
RENEAUX, J. J., ad. 
How the Animals Saved the People: Animal Tales from the
South; illus. by James Ransome. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[64p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16254-1 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16253-3 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Renowned storyteller and musician Reneaux retells eight tales from the American
South in this lively collection. The tales are diverse, coming from Appalachian,
African-American, Creole, and other cultures, but all have one thing in common:
the overt humor and singular language of the reteller. Reneaux has a knack for the
MARCH 2001 
* 277
tasty turn of phrase, and these stories are spiced with images, from Miz Alligator's
"smooth-as-silk, pea-green suit" to a gigantic black cat's "green glassy eyes." The
illustrative style echoes a paler Barry Moser or Jerry Pinkney (although the animals
are more stuffed menagerie than active story participants); awkward drafting and
clumsy layout mar the presentation. Still, there is enough energy in the mixed-
media images to keep the pages turning. Reneaux's is an engaging voice, and her
surefire, never-fail stories to read and tell will be a happy addition to folktale shelves.
Source notes and suggestions for "digging deeper" are included. JMD
ROCHELLE, BELINDA, comp. 
Words with Wings: A Treasury ofAfrican-American
Poetry andArt. Amistad/HarperCollins, 2001 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029363-2 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16415-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Poets are paired with artists here for a gallery of twenty spreads portraying various
aspects of African-American experience. Many of the selections are well known:
Countee Cullen's "Incident" faces Lev T. Mills' charcoal drawing "Gemini I";
Gwendolyn Brooks' "John, Who Is Poor" partners Charles Dawson's painting
"Marbles"; and Langston Hughes' "My People" shares a spread with Aaron Dou-
glas' painting "Into Bondage." Bold-hued backgrounds contextualize each set,
often picking up dominant colors in the graphic images; the page designs are all
distinctively different but each spread is internally cohesive. Although styles vary
both verbally and visually, the overall result is an eye-catching picture book for
older elementary, junior high, and even high school students who can catch the
conceptual intricacies of a piece such as Alice Walker's "How Poems Are Made: A
Discredited View" and Beauford Delaney's attendant "Can Fire in the Park," a
brilliant composition that looks like finger painting has been used to depict heat
mirage. As is inevitable with works not originally conceived as parts of a whole,
the words and pictures occasionally seem to limit or over-define each other's mean-
ings rather than expand or complement them. Sometimes, however, the exposure
of one form to another can magnify echoes, and the quality of such a set rivets both
mind and eye in a format that will attract attention from young people who might
never make it to an art museum or more substantive anthology. BH
RODOWSKY, COLBY 
Clay. 
Farrar, 2001 
[176p]
ISBN 0-374-31338-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Eleven-year-old Elsie is starting to question the peripatetic and isolated life she
lives with her mother and younger brother, Tommy, and when some suppressed
memories reawaken she realizes she has good reason for concern: her mother kid-
napped Elsie (really L. C., short for Linda Clay) and Tommy (really Timmy) from
the home of the siblings' custodial father. Her mother's long-ago insistence that
Elsie's father doesn't want his children any more makes her uncertain, but when
Tommy becomes ill and Elsie's mother refuses to seek outside help, Elsie alerts
someone to their predicament. By extending its focus to include Elsie's return to
her father and grandfather, the book gives a side of the drama not often seen, but
it also attenuates the energy and hinges the book in the middle; neither Elsie's
spontaneous recollection nor her self-renaming as "Clay" (neither Elsie nor Linda)
are credible, and her mother is more a villain than a well-rounded character. Elsie's
voice is honest and vivid, however, and her narrative is particularly effective at
278 
* 
THE BULLETIN
conveying her anxiety about her troubled younger brother, who proves to be autis-
tic, and her struggle to negotiate her loyalties to Tommy and to her mother. While
this doesn't have quite the drama of Mazer's Taking TerriMueller (BCCB 6/83) or
the psychological tension of Pfeffer's Twice Taken (3/94), the naturally dramatic
situation retains its interest, and readers will find Elsie's dilemma absorbing. DS
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
The Great Gracie Chase: Stop That Dog!; illus. by Mark
Teague. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-10041-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Gracie is a "little round dog" who likes her restrained and familiar surroundings:
"For Gracie, a quiet home was the best home." She's therefore considerably dis-
comfited when painters arrive and set everything askew, with their "clangy ladders
and big-person voices!" Their response is to put the noisy little dog outside, where-
upon she starts to take a walk by herself; when she's spotted leaving, the pursuit
begins, with eventually the whole town joining in The Great Gracie Chase. The
text doesn't always make sense (why would Gracie still think of her outing as a
walk when she knows she's running away from people trying to catch her?), and it
occasionally has a slightly precious air (especially with direct addresses to the reader
such as "Do you know what?"), but the story of the baffled little dog's eluding of
her pursuers remains enjoyable. Teague's compositions never quite give the group
chase its frenetic due, but he creates a round and pettable world enhanced by
unusual perspectives ranging from dog's eye to overhead (the latter revealing a
blimp apparently following along with the chase). The art adds some entertaining
items to the pursuit (bicycle wheels flying off from the speed, concerned onlookers
observing through windows), and Gracie herself is a solidly endearing armful of
brown-and-white pup. If you've got kids ready for a little canine chaos, this might
just go the distance. DS
SEDGWICK, 
MARCUS 
Floodland; written 
and 
illus. 
by 
Marcus
Sedgwick. 
Delacorte, 2001 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-385-32801-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Zoe's eking out a living in what used to be the cathedral city of Norwich, now an
island since greenhouse-effect floods have drowned much of England. Acciden-
tally left behind when her parents took a boat to the remaining mainland, she's
determined to find them again, and she manages to get away in a boat she's been
keeping secret. She ends up not with her parents, however, but on what's left of
another island, the former Ely, where culture has fragmented and a gang of youths
maintain a rough guerrilla order and fight turf wars with nearby islands. The
leader would like to make Zoe and her boat part of his private plan for escape, but
Zoe seeks to evade his grasp and continue in her search for her parents. Sedgwick
perceptively imagines the postdiluvian world, realistically suggesting that different
communities would fare differently in such a crisis, and it makes for an effective
plot device as well as setting. Unfortunately, the book slides past some significant
questions (what happened to air travel, satellite contact, and radio?) and never
quite brings anybody but Zoe into focus; the end (Zoe's happy reunion with her
parents on the mainland) is so abrupt that readers may wonder if pages are miss-
ing. The flood-plagued world remains a compelling one, however, and this may
therefore satisfy readers looking for a take on postapocalyptic existence. DS
MARCH 2001 
* 279
SIMONT, 
MARC 
The 
Stray Dog; written 
and 
illus. 
by 
Marc
Simont. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028934-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028933-3 
$15.95 
R 
3-7 yrs
A family on a picnic befriends a scruffy little dog, naming him Willy; believing he
belongs to somebody, they leave him behind in the park. After a week of thinking
about him, they return to retrieve him, but they discover that he's being pursued
by the dog warden. Fortunately, the resourceful kids convince the warden that the
boy's belt is Willy's collar, the girl's hair ribbon is his leash, and Willy is their dog,
and the family takes Willy home. This is a simple and straightforward story with
a certain old-fashioned innocence, and youngsters will appreciate the quick clever-
ness of the kids in saving their canine friend. Simont's art possesses its usual de-
ceptive ease and friendly watercolor fluidity, both in swift vignettes detailing Willy's
charms and double-spreads that bring the viewers right into the world of the park
(and in one evocative spread, the bathroom where Willy's getting shampooed to a
fare-thee-well). Dogophiles will particularly relish the city-dog paradise that shows
a collection of frolicking dogs and humans in an urban park. Especially with the
story's reported basis in reality, this will have pooch-loving kids investigating every
park with hope and determination. DS
SNELL, GORDON, ed. 
Thicker Than Water: Coming-of-Age Stories by Irish and
Irish American Writers. Delacorte, 2001 
[240p]
ISBN 0-385-32571-1 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
A dozen strong short stories center on young adults dealing with the personal and
social conflicts that comprise contemporary rites of passage. Most are set in Ire-
land, though one, "Landlocked" by Helena Mulderns, pinions a point of matura-
tion for an Irish girl working in Texas, and another, "OffYa Go, So" by Chris
Lynch, details the bittersweet denouement of an American boy's love affair in
Galway. Emma Donoghue's title story, "Thicker Than Water," captures a family
event that seems mundane but has a shocking effect on two sisters' relationship.
Other stories deal with an unhappy adolescent's escape from his alcoholic father to
an uncertain future in the U.S.; ; a woman's vivid recollection of a childhood
marked by her mother's affair with an enchanting neighbor; and a boy's classically
daredevil defiance of death as he climbs atop a ruined mansion. Tonal variety
makes each story a distinct experience, while careful arrangement assures a cohe-
sive flow to the whole sequence. The characters are subtly nuanced, the plots
credibly developed, and the settings richly imagined. These closeups will have
young-adult readers seeing across the Atlantic with ease. BH
TANG, GREG 
The Grapes ofMath: Mind-Stretching Math Riddles; illus. by Harry
Briggs. 
Scholastic, 2001 
[40p]
ISBN 0-439-21033-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Sixteen rhymed riddles invite readers to discover shortcuts to finding the number
of items in double-spread scenes. In each case grouping is the key-finding a
pattern among related items and occasionally adding to or subtracting from the
total. There's some genuine higher-order mathematical thinking involved here, as
children call upon intuition, observation, and strategizing as well as reliable old
280 * THE BULLETIN
"math facts" to calculate rather than count. "Know Dice" shows six pairs of dice
(two rows of double sixes, ones, and threes) and provides the hint, "Before you
start please look around,/ Adding's fast when tens are found." It suddenly be-
comes obvious that it will be quicker to group six/one/three four times than to
point and count each dot. The "riddles" themselves never amount to more than
rhymed instructions, and the workmanlike computer art, which does provide con-
cise diagrams for counting, is flat and bland. Consistent repetition of the same
math strategy works well here, though, and with appended answers as a boost,
readers who start out slowly will have lots of opportunity to build aptitude and
speed. EB
TAYLOR, THEODORE A Sailor Returns. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2001 
[160p]
ISBN 0-439-24879-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
The impending visit of Grandpa "Chips" Pentreath, a ship's carpenter presumed
lost at sea thirty years ago in 1884, is the most exciting event in eleven-year-old
Evan Bryant's life, and he and his best friend Buddy conjure all manner of specu-
lative tales to account for those missing years. Pentreath in the flesh bears little
resemblance to their fancies, but he promptly wins their hearts through his good-
natured gentleness, his intriguing stories of maritime adventure, and his willing-
ness to share his expertise in fishing and boat-building. But before Grandpa is
quite ready to reveal the seedier side of his past, including a self-defense homicide
and subsequent imprisonment in Dartmoor, a local murder casts suspicion upon
him and tests the loyalty of his newfound relatives. Taylor's narrative, which merges
Evan's point of view with Grandpa's italicized reflections, is both sensitive and
suspenseful. The dying old man's longing to reconcile with his daughter and her
son is quietly poignant but never overplayed, and the murder plot is neatly inte-
grated into the larger family tale. Accessible text and challenging human drama
could make this an exceptionally good classroom selection for readers of varying
abilities. EB
URE, JEAN 
Skinny Melon and Me; illus. by Chris Fisher and Peter Bailey. 
Holt,
2001 
202p
ISBN 0-8050-6359-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Eleven-year-old Cherry is stewing in her negative feelings for her new stepfather,
children's book illustrator Roland Butter, despite said stepfather's apparently inex-
haustible patience (and the cheery rebus notes that he slips under her bedroom
door almost daily). Cherry's resentment of the scruffy but good-natured Roland
becomes more intense when it turns out that her stepfather's allergies mean that
the dog Cherry's mother promised her (post-divorce and pre-remarriage) is now
out of the question. Eventually, Cherry comes around, partly because Roland is a
good guy and partly because a visit proves that her father and his new wife obvi-
ously have little time for her. Cherry tells her own story through her journal
entries. Her stepfather's rebus notes are included in the body of the text for the
reader's decoding pleasure (answer key in the back of the book), and her mother's
letters to a friend in Texas about Cherry's adjustment (or lack thereof) to the
situation are interspersed throughout. The rebus notes are enjoyable, but the let-
ters, written strictly from the adult point of view, function mainly as a way to show
readers how wrong-headed Cherry is being. The letters interrupt the flow of the
MARCH 2001 
* 281
story and stall the momentum, and they give little information not available through
the main text (Cherry's journal). Skinny Melon (aka Melanie), Cherry's best friend
who helps her along her emotionally rocky road, has a relatively minor role in all
this so the title may bewilder more literal readers. Nevertheless, Cherry's is a
natural, unaffected voice, and the way she uses her journal to "clear things out of
the cupboard" of her mind and emotions may encourage readers to do the same.
Black-and-white line drawings and facsimiles of the rebus notes are scattered
throughout. JMD
WARNER, SALLY 
How to Be a Real Person (In Just One Day). 
Knopf,
2001 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-90434-4 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-80434-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
"Alone is when you feel the most real," thinks sixth-grader Kara, who's trying to
keep a public face of normality despite the turmoil going on at home. With her
father working and living a few hours away, Kara's on her own with her mother,
whose mental ups and downs have turned into just downs. Kara struggles to keep
the nature and extent of her mother's illness a secret, but her schoolwork is suffer-
ing, her best friend, Stephanie, is starting to wonder, and her mother is slipping
further away from reality. Warner stacks the situational deck a little to leave Kara
as isolated as possible, but emotionally Kara's narration is absolutely truthful and
her desperation credible and heartbreaking. The book also makes excellent use of
Kara's periodic instruction lists to herself ("How to Get Out of Giving an Oral
Presentation," "How to Blend In," "How to Fool Your Own Best Friend"), and
flashbacks help contextualize Kara's plight; there's also a recurrent theme of her
fascination with Karana in Island of the Blue Dolphins, whose solitude she envies.
Things wrap up overeasily, but Kara's sufficiently entitled to succor that readers
won't begrudge her rescue, and they'll all empathize with her fear that she won't be
able to meet the demands life places on her. DS
WARREN, 
ANDREA 
Surviving Hitler: 
A 
Boy in 
the Nazi Death
Camps. HarperCollins, 2001 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029218-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17497-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Jack Mandelbaum is twelve years old when Hitler invades Poland in 1939. He
and his family flee to relatives living in more isolated, rural areas, hoping to escape
the worst of the occupation. They fail: Jack, his mother, and his younger brother
are rounded up with other Jews and sent to a concentration camp; only Jack sur-
vives. Jack's survival is dependent upon the quirks of fate, the whims of guards
and kapos, and his stubborn will to live. Warren interviewed her subject for this
bio-history, and Mandelbaum's unadorned words have blunt impact. His deter-
mination to find his family after the war (his father, mother, and brother all died
in the camps, but he was able to locate a favorite uncle), his refusal to succumb to
hatred of the enemy, and his building of a successful life in the United States all
resonate with the power of personal tragedy and triumph. There is steel in
Mandelbaum's determination to "beat Hitler," and his ultimate deliverance will
be cheered by young readers. Warren provides some contextual information about
282 
* THE BULLETIN
the concentration camps, the human cost of World War II, and a list of suggested
readings; an index will be included in the bound book. This Holocaust memoir
will find an audience among those readers too young for Bitton-Jackson's I Have
Lived a Thousand Years (BCCB 4/97) or Lobel's No Pretty Pictures (10/98). Black-
and-white photographs bring the camps, prisoners, and Jack Mandelbaum's life
into sharp focus. JMD
WEATHERLY, 
MYRA 
William Marshal: Medieval England's Greatest
Knight. 
Morgan Reynolds, 2001 
[112p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 1-883846-48-X 
$20.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Hot on the heels of Shelley Tanaka's In the Time of the Knights (BCCB 2/01),
Weatherly offers another biography of the fourth son of a minor lord, who rose to
become tournament champion, loyal advisor to Plantagenet kings, and regent of
England for Henry III, and who, even more remarkably, died an old man in his
own bed. With a higher page count and more modest visuals than Tanaka em-
ployed, Weatherly includes somewhat more biographical detail and expanded views
of duplicated episodes. Since much of the extra space is accorded to mini-essays
on feudalism, courtly love, Saladin, etc., and to machinations within the Plantagenet
family, readers will glean relatively little extra information on Marshal himself,
and it's in a far less visually inviting format. The author does, however, offer
source notes as well as a better explanation of the Histoire de Guillaume le Mareschal
from which much information concerning the knight was originally derived, mak-
ing this the preferred choice for conscientious report writers. A timeline, glossary,
bibliography, and index are also appended. EB
WHITE, CAROLYN 
The Adventure of Louey and Frank; illus. by Laura
Dronzek. 
Greenwillow, 2001 
[26p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16605-9 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16503-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Louey the bunny and Frank the bear set out on a nautical adventure, but things
don't quite go as planned: the rock on which they take refuge proves to be a whale
(which resents having a campfire built upon it), and then they lose their boat, get
caught in a storm, climb up on a log (which is really a fish), and finally make it
back to shore. The understated, let's-pretend tone of the narrative gives this mari-
time outing (inspired, flap copy indicates, by St. Brendan's camping on a whale)
an offbeat coziness. Tender touches include Louey's fondness for marshmallows
and Frank's for pickles and the continuing but equable disagreements between the
two, and there's a guileless charm in the succinct text ("They climbed onto Louey's
rock that was Frank's whale. 'I saved the marshmallows,' said Louey. 'Good,' said
Frank. 'Now save the boat'"). Dronzek's acrylics depict Frank and Louey as toys
(they're small enough to fit into their boat made of shoes), but there's a surprising
amount of expression in body position and even in Frank's glassy eyes. Deep sea
blues (with brushstroke waves) provide dreamy and attractive backdrops for the
main action, and the thick expressionistic lines effectively expand the toylike flavor
to landscapes as well as the main characters. A pair of friends on an adventure is a
fairly common picture-book plot, but this has an endearing oddness that makes it
more than your usual jaunt. DS
MARCH 2001 
* 283
WILD, MARGARET 
The Pocket Dogs; illus. by Stephen Michael King. 
Scholastic,
2001 
[3 2 p]
ISBN 0-439-23973-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"Mr. Pockets had a very big coat, and in his very big coat he had two very big
pockets," which is convenient because that gives him a way to carry around his two
pocket-sized dogs, Biff and Buff. A problem arises when one of Mr. Pockets'
pockets develops a hole, and Mr. Pockets is deaf to Biffs woofed warnings about
this looming danger; eventually Biff falls through the hole and finds himself among
strangers. Friendly people try to help him back home by putting him in a shop-
ping basket, a doll carriage, and a shopping cart, but it's pockets or nothing for
Biff, and eventually he's found by Mr. Pockets himself and restored to his repaired
pocket. Bits of the story are pure padding, with a jingly edge ("Along the way,
people always said: 'Hello, Mr. Pockets!'"), but the basic lost-dog story and the
notion of portable pooches in pockets are appealing. King's wiggly lines have a
puppyish touch themselves, and he adds enlivening details to the spreads (a mouse
and a bird help open up the fateful hole); Biff himself is an enjoyably scruffy little
gray guy (though viewers may be confused by the white circle around one of his
eyes and wonder why that eye is wide open and staring). The audience will yearn
for pocket pups of their own, and they'll appreciate the comforting reassurance of
Biffs reunion with his owner. DS
WILSON, JACQUELINE 
Bad Girls; illus. by Nick Sharratt. 
Delacorte,
2001 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-385-72916-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Mandy is an overprotected ten-year-old, and she's the butt of merciless teasing by
the popular girls at school. Redemption comes in the form of tough fourteen-
year-old Tanya, who moves into the foster home next door and takes a shine to
Mandy, who's the age of Tanya's much-missed little sister. While Mandy thrives
under Tanya's protection, Mandy's mother is concerned that Tanya is an unsuit-
able companion, and Mandy herself is uneasy about Tanya's shoplifting. When
Tanya's daring finally gets her and Mandy into trouble, Tanya's sent away and
Mandy's facing her tormentors alone once again. Wilson has a keen ear for youth-
ful tones of all kinds, from Mandy's aggrieved narration to the smug needling of
her classmates, and she's equally good at the loving missteps of Mandy's mom,
who's perpetually fired with the desire to do exactly the wrong thing to protect her
daughter. The story's strongest point, however, is its depiction of the friendship
between Tanya and Mandy; both girls are clearly fulfilling some unmet needs with
the relationship, but rather than belabor the point the book simply emphasizes the
importance of the companionship. There's therefore a bit of a balance problem at
the end, when the focus moves more to Mandy's persecution (her new teacher,
clearly a leading light in Britain's anti-bullying movement, makes the topic a class
issue) and leaves Tanya behind (no one ever suggests that Mandy can write or visit
her dear friend). Nonetheless, the sympathetic and accurate portrayal of Mandy's
desperation and affection will be immediately recognizable to many young read-
ers. Sharratt's trim, controlled line drawings are scattered throughout to enliven-
ing effect. DS
284 
* 
THE BULLETIN
WULFFSON, DON 
SoldierX. Viking, 2001 
[24 4p]
ISBN 0-670-88863-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
See this month's Big Picture, p. 249, for review.
WYETH, SHARON DENNIS 
A Piece ofHeaven. 
Knopf, 2001 
200p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98535-2 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-88535-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Mahalia (Haley) Moon, the precocious narrator of this thoughtful novel, eventu-
ally makes her own small piece of heaven, but her story begins ominously. On a
hot summer night before Haley's thirteenth birthday, "Ma, already in her paja-
mas, sat motionless at the table in the center of the room, staring at the bills,"
while fifteen-year-old Otis sits on the sofa-bed in their one room inner-city apart-
ment sulking about being grounded for getting three Ds and an F on his report
card. Things get worse. Soon after a manic late night grocery-shopping spree, Ma
admits herself to the hospital to get treatment for depression. Otis and Haley
struggle on together with some help from neighbors and within the structure pro-
vided by their own summer jobs-until Otis is arrested for selling stolen merchan-
dise and detained at the juvenile detention center. At this point, Haley herself is
forced to move to a group home. The novel's ending self-consciously avoids the
fairy-tale resolution that both the reader and Haley-a devoted reader of Grimms'
tales-yearn for. While Haley does find supportive friends and some joy, her
mother is making only tentative progress and Otis still languishes in jail (a lack of
closure that may disturb imaginative readers who relate more to this conflicted
underachiever than to his straight-A sister). Instead, readers are invited to appreci-
ate the aesthetic and therapeutic value of the well-swept "dirt garden" Haley has
created in place of the junk-strewn yard her employer/mentor hired her to clean
up. Though the dialogue sometimes sounds more written than spoken, and Haley's
narrational voice is oddly affectless (a treasured thesaurus provides her with both
an emotional outlet and an unconvincingly sophisticated vocabulary), an event-
filled domestic plot that gives attention to both the practical and some of the
quirkier details offers readers a thought-provoking slice of life. FK
ZUSAK, MARKUS 
Fighting Ruben Wolfe. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2001 
[224p]
ISBN 0-439-24188-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
After their father loses his job, Cam and his older brother Ruben cast about for
some way to make extra cash. A nasty remark about their sister propels Ruben into
a fistfight, and word of his talent for boxing reaches fight promoter Perry Cole.
Both Ruben and Cam agree to fight for Cole in the raucous fight clubs (fifty
dollars for a win, good tips for a good loss), Cam as "The Underdog" and Ruben as
"Fighting Ruben Wolfe." It is clear from the outset that Ruben is the fighter, the
winner, the champ; Cam is distinguished by his ability to get up off the mat, no
matter how much he wants to stay there. Ruben is undefeated in the ring but he
isn't sure he can win outside it; Cam wins some and loses more, but he always
comes back. When the brothers are scheduled to fight one another Cam knows he
can't win, but he's determined to make sure Ruben knows he's in a fight, not a
rout. Cam's narrative voice is sweetly naive, his love of his family, especially Ruben,
MARCH 2001 
* 
285
clearly evident. The physical action revolves around the boxing ring and the rau-
cous crowd of fight fans: "They're just voices now. No names, no blondes, no
beers or anything else. Just voices drawn toward the light, and there's no way to
liken them to anything else. They sound like people gathered around a fight.
That's all. That's what they are and they like what they are." Zusak portrays a
blue-collar family on the edge of falling into poverty, their dogged determination
the only thing keeping them afloat. The brothers are distinctly evoked, Cam through
his own narration and Ruben through Cam; secondary characters are vague and
amorphous, snapping into clarity only when Cam focuses upon them. Scenes of
home and family slow the forward momentum of the plot but also provide a con-
text for the personalities of the two brothers. The occasional clumsy phrase or
faulty analogy is quickly overwhelmed by the drama of the fights and the brothers'
search for meaning. JMD
286 
* THE BULLETIN
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 2001
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Richard Peck for A Year Down Yonder
(Dial). The Newbery Honor Books are Hope Was Here, by Joan Bauer (Putnam);
The Wanderer, by Sharon Creech (Cotler/HarperCollins); Because of Winn-Dixie,
by Kate DiCamillo (Candlewick); and Joey Pigza Loses Control, by Jack Gantos
(Farrar).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to David Small for So You Want to Be Presi-
dent?, written by Judith St. George (Philomel). The Caldecott Honor Books are
Casey at the Bat: A Ballad of the Republic Sung in the Year 1888, illus. by Christo-
pher Bing, written by Ernest Lawrence Thayer (Handprint); Click, Clack, Moo:
Cows that Type, illus. by Betsy Lewin, written by Doreen Cronin (Simon); and
Olivia, written and illus. by Ian Falconer (Schwartz/Atheneum).
The Coretta Scott King Award for writing will be presented to Jacqueline Woodson,
author of Miracle's Boys (Putnam), and the award for illustration goes to Bryan
Collier for Uptown, text by the illustrator (Holt). The King Honor Book for
writing is Let It Shine!: Stories ofBlack Women Freedom Fighters, written by Andrea
Davis Pinkney and illus. by Stephen Alcorn (Gulliver/Harcourt). King Honor
Books for illustration are Freedom River, illustrated by Bryan Collier, written by
Doreen Rappaport (Jump at the Sun/Hyperion); Virgie Goes to School with Us
Boys, illustrated by E. B. Lewis, written by Elizabeth Fitzgerald Howard (Simon);
and Only Passing Through: The Story of Sojourner Truth, illus. by R. Gregory
Christie, written by Anne Rockwell (Knopf).
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is
Scholastic Press/Arthur A. Levine for Daniella Carmi's Samir and Yonatan; the
honor award goes to David R. Godine for Ultimate Game, by Christian Lehmann.
The Michael L. Printz Award for a book that exemplifies literary excellence in
young adult literature goes to David Almond for Kit's Wilderness (Delacorte).
Honor books are Many Stones, by Carolyn Coman (Front Street); The Body of
Christopher Creed, by Carol Plum-Ucci (Harcourt); Angus, Thongs, and Full-Fron-
tal Snogging, by Louise Rennison (Delacorte); and Stuck in Neutral, by Terry
Trueman (HarperCollins).
The Robert F. Sibert Award for most distinguished informational book for chil-
dren goes to Marc Aronson for Sir Walter Ralegh and the Quest for El Dorado
(Clarion). Honor books are The Longitude Prize by Joan Dash, illus. by Dusan
Petricic (Foster/Farrar); Blizzard! by Jim Murphy (Scholastic); My Season with
MARCH 2001 
* 
287
Penguins: An Antarctic ournal, by Sophie Webb (Houghton); and Pedro andMe:
Friendship, Loss, and What I Learned, written and illus. by Judd Winick (Holt).
The 2002 May Hill Arbuthnot Honor Lecture will be delivered by Philip Pull-
man.
Robert Lipsyte is the 2001 winner of the Margaret A. Edwards Award for Out-
standing Literature for Young Adults honoring an author's lifetime contribution
in writing books for teenagers.
The Scott O'Dell Award for Historical Fiction goes to Janet Taylor Lisle for The
Art of Keeping Cool (Jackson/Atheneum).
The ALSC Distinguished Service Award goes to Margaret Mary Kimmel.
The Canadian Library Association's Best Book of the Year for children is Kenneth
Oppel's Sunwing (Simon). The Amelia Frances Howard-Gibbon Illustrator's Award
goes to Zhong-Yang Huang for The Dragon New Year: A Chinese Legend (Raincoast).
The Young Adult Canadian Book Award goes to Katherine Holubitsky for Alone
at Ninety Foot (Orca).
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Aidan Chambers for Postcards from No Man's
Land (Bodley Head).
The Kate Greenaway Medal was awarded to Helen Oxenbury for Alice's Adven-
tures in Wonderland (Candlewick).
The Hans Christian Andersen Award for writing goes to Ana Maria Machado of
Brazil. The award for illustration goes to Anthony Browne of the United King-
dom.
NCTE's Orbis Pictus Award for Outstanding Nonfiction for Children goes to
Hurry Freedom: African Americans in Gold Rush California, by Jerry Stanley
(Crown); Honor Books are America's Champion Swimmer: Gertrude Ederle, by
David A. Adler, illus. by Terry Widener (Harcourt); TheAmazing Life ofBenjamin
Franklin, by James Cross Giblin, illus. by Michael Dooling (Scholastic);
Michelangelo, written and illus. by Diane Stanley (HarperCollins); Wild and
Swampy: Exploring with Jim Arnosky, written and illus. by Jim Arnosky (Harper-
Collins); and Osceola: Memories ofa Sharecropper's Daughter, ed. by Alan Govenar
and illus. by Shane Evans (Hyperion).
l-r53
288 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Africa-stories: Ichikawa
African Americans-fiction: Draper;
Murphy, R.
African Americans-poetry: Rochelle
ALPHABET BOOKS: Milich
American Indians-fiction: Feder
American Indians-folklore: Bruchac
ANIMAL STORIES: Aylesworth;
Bruchac; Hoberman; Lester;
Miller; Moser; White
Animals: Gutman
Animals-fiction: Booth
Archaeology: Andronik
Archaeology-poetry: Frank
Arithmetic: Pinczes; Tang
Art and artists-fiction: Lynch; Park
Aunts-fiction: Peck
Baseball-fiction: Peck
BIOGRAPHIES: Blumberg; Dash;
dePaola; Lalicki; Warren;
Weatherly
Birthdays-stories: Look
Boxing-fiction: Zusak
Brothers-fiction: Crisp; Zusak
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Easton;
Rodowsky; Wyeth
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Gammell; Ketteman; Look
Bullies-fiction: Wilson
Cars-stories: Gammell
Cats-stories: Newman
Chinese Americans-stories: Look
Civil rights-fiction: Murphy, R.
Civil War-fiction: Crisp
Computers-fiction: Kimmel
CONCEPT BOOKS: Milich
Crime and criminals-fiction: Feder;
Lynch; Peters; Rodowsky; Taylor;
Wilson; Wyeth
Death and dying-fiction: Holt;
Kornblatt; Peck
Death and dying-stories: Fraustino
Diaries-fiction: Jacobsson
Disabilities: Dash; Murphy, W.
Disabilities-stories: Fraustino
Divorce-fiction: Ure
Dogs-fiction: Crisp
Dogs-stories: Cowley; Rylant;
Simont; Wild
Ecology: Alexander
Egypt, ancient: Andronik; Hofmeyr
Egypt-poetry: Frank
Ethics and values: Feder; Ketteman;
Warren
FABLES: Lester
FANTASY: Heneghan; Jacques;
Jordan; Kimmel; Nickle;
Sedgwick
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Aylesworth; Bruchac; Heaney;
Hofmeyr; Moser; Musgrove;
Reneaux
Food and eating-fiction: Horvath
Food and eating-stories: Moser
Forests: Alexander
Foster care-fiction: Eige; Horvath
Friendship-fiction: Booth; Eige;
Hurst; Jacobsson; Kornblatt;
Lynch; Peters; Wilson
Friendship-stories: White
FUNNY STORIES: Jacobsson
Games-fiction: Kimmel
MARCH 2001 
* 289
Gods and goddesses: Hofmeyr;
Hovey
Grandfathers-fiction: Holt; Taylor
Grandfathers-stories: Nickle
Grandmothers-stories: Fraustino;
Long; Look
Grandparents-fiction: Heneghan
Hiccups-stories: Long
HISTORICAL FICTION: Bennett;
Crisp; Easton; Gauthier;
Heneghan; Holt; Hurst; Moeri;
Murphy, R.; Park; Peck;
Wulffson
History, U.S.: Bober
History, world: Alexander;
Blumberg; Bober; Frank;
Weatherly
Holocaust, the: Warren
Holocaust, the-fiction: Bennett
Horses-fiction: Moeri
Ireland-fiction: Heneghan; Snell
Ireland-folklore: Heaney
Japan: Blumberg
Karate: Hellman
Kidnapping-fiction: Rodowsky
Knights and chivalry: Weatherly
Korea-fiction: Park
Magic and magicians: Lalicki
Martial arts: Hellman
Medicine: Murphy, W.
Mental illness-fiction: Warner;
Wyeth
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Rodowsky; Ure; Warner; Wyeth
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Ketteman
MYSTERIES: Eige; Feder; Taylor
MYTHOLOGY: Hofmeyr; Hovey
Orphans-fiction: Lynch; Peck
Pets: Gutman
Pets-stories: Cowley; Wild
Physical education: Hellman
Pigs-stories: Moser
POETRY: Rochelle
Reading aloud: Aylesworth; Frank;
Heaney; Lester; Reneaux
Reading, easy: Cowley; dePaola;
Hellman; Mandel
Reading, reluctant: Booth
Religion-fiction: Feder
RHYMING STORIES: Hovey
RIDDLES: Tang
School-fiction: Draper; Gauthier;
Jacobsson; Kornblatt; Peters
Science: Murphy, W.
Sexual assault-fiction: Draper
SHORT STORIES: Snell
Sisters-fiction: Hurst
Soccer-fiction: Kornblatt
Social studies: Bober
SPORTS STORIES: Zusak
Stepfathers-fiction: Ure
Storytelling: Aylesworth; Bruchac;
Heaney; Moser; Reneaux
Storytime: Aylesworth; Bruchac;
Clark; Hoberman; Ichikawa;
Long; Miller; Moser; Rylant;
Simont; White
Suicide-fiction: Lynch
SURVIVAL STORIES: Moeri
Television-stories: Nickle
Tigers-stories: Hoberman
Time travel-fiction: Heneghan
Tourists-stories: Ichikawa
Toys-stories: Clark; Ichikawa; White
Transportation: Mandel
Trees: Alexander
Veterans-fiction: Easton
Vietnam War-fiction: Easton
Voyages and travel: Mandel
Voyages and travel-fiction: Jacques
Voyages and travel-stories:
Gammell; White
Weaving-stories: Musgrove
Women's studies: Dash
World War II: Warren
World War II-fiction: Bennett;
Wulffson
Writers and writing: dePaola
Writers and writing-fiction: Peck
I 
_
i__?*ri 
_j
evc;p up
with the
latest in
Teaching!
VIAKr,, 
.. 
, 
I let~rhi'nn-~V~Q
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
ýE 1AL, oFFER.
-5 C 
ion
One year subscript*
(8 issues) only $19.77*
Itio
e-
-outside U5 
dd $10 postage
Cove, price $4-50.
i ~"~ru~ 
----
______
iC-~-· 
-
r
IT'S RAINING
PIGS &
NOODLES 
y
Poems by JACK PRELUTSKY
Drawings by J•
'~ "The reigning (
poetic havoc with ye
The sassy selection (
poems will further ei
Meanwhile, Stevens<
his inimitably impish
to these two gloriot
-Starred 
review / Put
"Sure to tickle
readers young and ol
-The 
Horn Book
"Wonderful tools for
teachers, the poems
a child's sense of hu
or independently. -School 
Library Journal
Ages 5 up. $17.95 Tr (0-06-029194-X); $17.89 Lb (0-06-029195-8)
B Greenwillow Books 
An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
"Powerful...
elegantly conceived
iL and executed."'*
S"These 18 folktales
emphasize feminine
strength, courage and wit.... A fine mes
send to budding feminists as well as to
brothers."-School Library Journal (starred
* "Tales of swashbuckling adventure...
compassionate courage...redemptive I
and clever self-determination.... The
larger-than-life heroines aregiven statL
energy, and power through the artist's
characterizations.... Belongs on the she
in the library, and in school."
-The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books (starred review)*
Little, Brown and Company
I
-Kirkus Reviews stars
- "Appealing, shot-in-the-wild photographs [are matched] to a
fluently informative report on the gorilla's physical make-up and
typical behavior. Simon's approach is wonderfully accessible ...
the photographs capture how expressive gorilla faces can be.
Who could resist their charm? A sure way to turn gorilla-phobes
into gorilla-philes."-Starred review/Kirkus Reviews
"The extremely handsome, oversized color photographs
complement the text perfectly. This attractive, informative book
certainly deserves a place in all collections."-School Library Journal
"The combination of text and photographs creates a striking
impression. Good for browsing as well as reports."-ALA Booklist
Ages 5-8. $15.95 Tr (0-06-023035-5); $15.89 Lb (0-06-023036-3)
-
Among Seymour Simon s animal photograph books-
Each: Ages 5-8. Full-color photographs
Crocodiles & Alligators
$15.95 Tr (0-06-027473-5); $15.89 Lb (0-06-027474-3)
Sharks $16.95 Tr (0-06-023029-0); $6.95 Pb (0-06-446187-4)
Snakes 
$16.95 Tr (0-06-022529-7); $6.95 Pb (0-06-446165-3)
9: Haipei-Colins(bdd)-c'ýBoo
books. 
)
AhOOS-
.lAoc:
is 
leat"r 
lu
"An effective set of concept 
0
books admirably executed; 
is NuerOS
multiple copies are a must." 
t nubevs 
I
-The 
Bulletin of the Center
for Children's Books
"Thanks to Emberley's high-
impact cut-paper collages,
the pictures themselves are
virtually self-explanatory."
-Publishers
weekly 
C
*14f 
Pes MI 
,,,beIIeY
ispFoeras 
sevecca
Ages 2-4. 
J
$5.95 each
LB~ruleflu.
L '~
Little, Brown and Company
II F T
At night, while the
other villagers
dreamed of
catching fish,
Lemuel dreamed
of sailing over the
horizon."
$15.9- I "1 -
LEMUEL THE FOOL
Written by Myron Uhlberg
Illustrated by Sonja Lamut
From the author of FLYING OVER BROOKLYN comes
the charming story of Lemuel, a fisherman and a
fool. Lemuel dreams of building a boat that will
take him across the sea to an enchanted,
magical city that he is sure must lie just beyond
the horizon. Come along with Lemuel on his
journey and smile at his wonderfully twisted logic.
"Youngsters will delight in the idea of such a snow-filled
flight.. .a magical winter storytime."
-School Library Journal on FLYING OVER BROOKLYN
Q
PEACHTREE PUBLISHERS
1700 Chattahoochee Avenue * Atlanta, GA 30318-2112
Ph/ 800-241-0113 * Fx/ 800-875-8909
www.peachtree-online.com
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
0008-9036(200103)54:7; 1 -I
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2000 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age, or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.orglccbl
2. You will be asked for a username and password, both of which are set
as the four- or five-digit number printed in the upper left-hand corner
of the mailing label on your print copy. When entering, do not
include the letter at the end of this number sequence.
3. The first time you log in, you will be required to change your pass-
word to something other than your username.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only
individual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions. Look for
details later this year.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at our homepage: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
