I LL I N 0
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
AP 
41
f
*"Both the joy of family relations and the problematic
moods of childhood are strikingly conveyed."*
1A Vi 'f 
hr
THE
B uL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
October 1992
Vol. 46 No. 2
A LOOK INSIDE
33 THE BIG PICTURE
The Stinky Cheese Man, by Jon Scieszka and Lane Smith
34 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
35 
* "Who Was that Masked Man, Anyway," by Avi
36 
* Squashed, by Joan Bauer
40 
* Shortcut by Donald Crews
43 
* Drylongso by Virginia Hamilton and Jerry Pinkney
50 
* Where Does It Go?, by Margaret Miller
56 
* The Widow's Broom, by Chris Van Allsburg
59 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
61 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
4%,
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 54 East Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, U. of II. at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education
Violet J. Harris, Assistant Professor, College of Education
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Dept. of Speech Communication
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Carol Fox, Youth Services Consultant, Illinois State Library
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$5.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $3.00. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1992 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
This publication is printed on acid-free paper
OCTOBER 1992 
* 
33
THE BIG PICTURE
The Stinky Cheese Man and Other Fairly Stupid
Tales
by Jon Scieszka, illustrated by Lane Smith
Post picture books? Or what can we call them, the new wavy (but that's old)
picture books by artists such as Maira Kalman, Dale Gottlieb, and the author/
artist collaboration ofJon Scieszka and Lane Smith? These artists, who all bring to
picture books a new-art sensibility quite different from mainstream picture book
traditions, bring as well a new kind of storytelling, witness both The Stinky Cheese
Man and Gottlieb's Seeing-Eye Willie, reviewed further on in this issue. Unlike,
for example, David Wiesner's Caldecott-winning frog-fantasy Tuesday, these books
are rooted in a chancy, weird world. Tuesday is plenty weird, but in a cozy, Our-
Town kind of way-those frogs are our friends, and their story follows a funny but
inevitable trail: what goes up must come down. That's a theme in The Stinky
Cheese Man, too, but what comes down is the Table of Contents page, and it falls
on Chicken Licken, manically ("Ducky Lucky! Ducky Lucky! The sky is falling!
The sky is falling!") trying to catch a plane to warn the President. Like he'd listen.
Deconstructionists, welcome: You will have at least as good a time with
this book as will any third-grader on a nodding acquaintance with the basic folk
heroes of Western culture and of library story hours, such as Goldilocks, The Ugly
Duckling, The Frog Prince, and Little Red Running Shorts. What marvelous
liberties Scieszka and Smith take here, playing around with the entire cast of Into
the Woods but managing to be twice as funny as Stephen Sondheim. In these
"fairly stupid tales," the Frog Prince was just kidding ("and the princess wiped the
frog slime off her lips"); Little Red outruns the wolf ("My, what slow feet you
have"); Andersen's Duckling has a big problem: "Well, as it turned out, he was
just a really ugly duckling. And he grew up to be just a really ugly duck. The
End." And ugly as this Duck is-a gauche doofus with his tongue hanging out,
framed by his elegant siblings-he has our sympathies and our recognition: we
know that this is how the story really goes.
But kids don't need to be cynical to get these spoofs. They can cherish
Cinderella at the same time they can appreciate Cinderumpelstiltskin, "the Girl
who Really Blew It." They can chase after the Gingerbread Man, and bring the
same enthusiasm to dodging the Stinky Cheese Man. The fondness for the first is
the only thing that allows us to laugh at the second. It's cultural literacy with the
ante upped, showing kids a way to parlay the basics to levels of irony, social com-
mentary, and literary criticism, and extending the book to readers well beyond the
usual picture book age.
34 
* THE BULLETIN
The jokes here don't stop with the stories. The introduction, for ex-
ample, zens introductions: "If you read this last sentence, it won't tell you any-
thing." Similarly, the upside-down dedication page urges readers on to better
things: "Whoever looks at that dedication stuff anyhow? If you really want to read
it-you can always stand on your head." An endpaper, courtesy of narrator Jack,
shows up in the middle of the stories: "Shhhhh. I moved the endpaper up here so
the Giant would think the book is over." The Little Red Hen, who has nagged her
way through the entire volume, turns up on the back cover to kvetch about the
ISBN. Such bibliometricks-meta-tricks?-are entirely at home in this jigsawed
tale-type storyworld, which is as dark, the pictures tell us, as the Grimms'. Bertolt
Brecht and Edvard Munch lurk just beyond these illustrations, which present a
sinister fairyland cabaret. "Rendered in oil and vinegar," the pictures are funny
but spooky: the smell lines wafting from the Stinky Cheese Man reek of some-
thing stranger than cheese; the giant's face as he eats the bread (and the little red
hen who made it) leers like a fallen man-in-the-moon. The effect, though, isn't
scary, because the book is too funny and, besides, it keeps reminding us that it's a
book. The book also keeps reminding readers that they're reading, a tap on the
shoulder that feels less like a monitory nudge than it does a congratulatory slap on
the back.
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Agee, Jon 
Go Hang a Salami, I'm a Lasagna Hog and Other Palindromes; written
and illus. by Jon Agee. 
Farrar, 1992 
73p
ISBN 0-374-33473-0 
$12.21 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
The rules: each page (or double-spread) must have its palindromic phrase while a
simple line drawing illustrates; punctuation and capitalization do not count; and
colloquial spellings are acceptable. That description, however, hardly captures the
inspired lunacy of Go Hang a Salami, I'm a Lasagna Hog (read that title back-
wards); it's like a mad lexicographer's alphabet soup. Agee scales narrative heights
with his palindromes ("Mac snubs Bob's bun scam"), demonstrating fearlessness
in the face of apparent absurdity ("Tell Abe to vote ballet" is quite logical in its
given context, when one tutu-clad dancer says it to another as our sixteenth presi-
dent casts a ballot for waltz, polka, ballet, rumba, cha-cha, or mazurka). The
simple, cartoonish illustrations have stories of their own to tell, giving "No, son" a
plot and setting worthy of a three-volume novel. Kids may not catch the reference
OCTOBER 1992 
* 35
as the disappointed fiddler sits on his roof and sings "If I had a hi-fi," but the
joyous silliness of "Elsie's on a nose isle" is apparent to all. Reluctant readers will
be reassured by the cartoon-book size, shape, and format, and any kid who's writ-
ten out his or her name backwards will catch the spirit and follow the game (as did
the publishers: note the book's palindromic price and ISBN number). It's a gen-
erously ridiculous and clever book that shows the marvel of words and the sense in
nonsense. DS
Anderson, Rachel 
The Bus People. Holt, 1992 
102p
ISBN 0-8050-2297-X 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
"Wouldn't swap my fruitcakes for the world," says the genial driver of the special
education bus about his riders. This British novel examines, chapter by chapter,
the lives of the kids who ride that bus: there's Rebecca, who has Down's Syn-
drome and who's being cheated out of her long-awaited post as bridesmaid in her
beloved sister's wedding; there's Micky, in a wheelchair and incapable of compre-
hensible speech, who wants desperately to be free of his doting mother and to
experience his awakening sexuality; there's emotionally disturbed Fleur, who has
finally found a home where she feels secure after much rejection. Point of view
varies from chapter to chapter, with third-person narration for most, but speech-
less Micky narrates his own story, and Gail tells of her brother Thoby, brain-
injured in an accident but still in love with music. There's a small story hinting at
a much larger one in each chapter, with another subtle but significant episode
linking all the bus riders at the end, but Anderson's main achievement here is to
evoke the lives of young people who frequently pass unconsidered by the rest of us.
The petty meannesses toward and among the kids are depicted well enough to
make readers thoughtful, and it's also clear that these children have wishes, suc-
cess, failures, and relationships (siblings come off quite well, but parents rather
poorly). This is an engaging and reflective series of portraits. DS
Avi 
"Who Was that Masked Man, Anyway?" Jackson/Orchard, 1992 
170p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08607-0 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05457-8 
$14.95 
R* Gr. 5-8
In Nothing but the Truth (BCCB 9/91) Avi told his story through a variety of
conversations, diary entries, letters and memos; here, he relies entirely on the spo-
ken word, mingling conversations (their speakers left unidentified) with transcripts
of 1940s radio theater as heard by a boy only too ready to imagine himself a hero
along the lines of the Lone Ranger or the Green Hornet. Frankie isn't a bad kid,
but he is an impulsive and annoying one, trying the patience of every adult within
his vicinity, including his parents, the family's boarder, Mr. Swerdlow, and his
teacher, Miss Gomez: "Franklin, once again you will stay after school." Even
Frankie's sidekick, the practical and literal Mario, is reluctant in face of Frankie's
main scheme: to trap Mr. Swerdlow as an enemy spy so that Frankie can have his
own room back. Avi's good ear for dialogue serves him especially well here; what's
more remarkable, given the contrivance of technique, is how naturally the story
moves, and how quickly readers-like radio fans of old-will get used to doing
without the conventional trappings of fiction. Each voice is distinct, the comedy
is unforced, the wartime setting (and sadnesses) arise easily from the talk. The
ultimate effect is a paradox: readers can close their eyes and listen. RS
36 
* THE BULLETIN
Barasch, Lynn 
Rodney's Inside Story; written and illus. by Lynn
Barasch. 
Orchard, 1992 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08593-7 
$13.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05993-6 
$13.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
Mom is reading to Baby Gray, a young rabbit, a bedtime story about Rodney:
"Rodney Rabbit lives in a cabbage. In it, he has ... a celery phone to make a call
on, a radish doll to hug and an eggplant desk to sit behind." Then, according to
Mom, Rodney reads a book about Baby Gray, who "lives with his family in a
hollow under a tree. The Grays' favorite pastime is eating," and they scarf down
the same kind of vegetables that make up Rodney's house "till no one can eat
another bite"; then the Gray family in their book, Rodney Rabbit in his book, and
Baby Gray in this book all doze off. It's a little convoluted, but kids will understand
and appreciate that the gray bunny is in the white bunny's book and vice versa.
Barasch explores the vegetable house idea with enough detail to make it funny
rather than merely cute, and the cruditds are a crisply constant theme throughout.
The line and watercolor illustrations give the vegetables a cozy kitchen-wallpaper
look, and the slightly humanoid rabbits have a Thurberesque individuality to them.
This'll give young herbivores and others a fanciful new slant on Mr. McGregor's
garden and its denizens. DS
Bauer, Joan 
Squashed. Delacorte, 1992 
[208p]
ISBN 0-385-30793-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-10
Ellie grows exceptional pumpkins, big enough to compete in the Rock River Har-
vest Fair for the title of The Biggest Pumpkin in the State of Iowa. Ellie relies on
the support of her grandmother and cousin for her obsession, because her wid-
owed dad's low opinion of farming makes Ellie defensive. Ellie perseveres in grow-
ing Max, her champion pumpkin, despite storms, animals, and, worst of all,
pumpkin thieves, who poach the giant vegetables for Halloween profit. She allows
herself to be distracted from her cause only by the new boy in town, who grows
corn and doesn't seem to mind Ellie's spare twenty pounds. This first-person
narrative of a sixteen-year-old is told with humor and tenderness, moving easily
from cousin Richard's opinion of first-year teachers who "couldn't help them-
selves, having been filled with all that poop in college," to Ellie's description of her
mother's death; from Ellie and Dad's capture of a pumpkin thievery ring to Nana's
advice about competition ("Four generations of Morgans worked that soil to get it
how it is, sweating themselves silly in the field, and I don't want you messing
things up by thinking that winning today is more important than that"). Ellie is a
determined character who knows who she is and hails from a loving and complex
family. Even readers who have never planted a seed will admire Ellie's passion for
growing things. KJ
Beatty, Patricia 
Who Comes with Cannons? Morrow, 1992 
[192p]
ISBN 0-688-11028-2 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
It's 1861, and twelve-year-old Tabitha Ruth, nicknamed Truth by her Quaker
family, has been sent (after her mother's death and father's illness) from her Indi-
ana home to live with relatives in North Carolina. A trademark Beatty heroine,
OCTOBER 1992 
* 37
Truth is brave, plucky, and inclined to speak her mind, and she is soon caught up
in the Bardwell family's secret work: helping escaped slaves along the Under-
ground Railroad to the North. The author works in a great deal of information
about the pacifist Quakers' courageous resistance during the Civil War, but the
exciting story never falters in service to the history. Truth helps hide slaves under
the fireplace and in a secret cave; she travels along the Underground Railroad
herself after her cousin has been captured by Yankees and imprisoned in New
York. Here events involving Frederick Douglass and Mrs. Lincoln become a bit
unconvincing, but the narrative hand remains sure and easy to read. Appended
notes supply information about the Quakers and historical figures in the book. RS
Bechard, Margaret 
Tory and Me and the Spirit of True Love. 
Viking,
1992 
[15 6 p]
ISBN 0-670-84688-0 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Mysterious, long-lost Aunt Louisa has just died, and eleven-year-old cousins Tory
and Emily indulge in romantic fantasies about her upcoming funeral: "Won't it
be great if Uncle Arthur throws himself across the coffin, sobbing uncontrollably?"
asks Tory dreamily. Louisa's husband Arthur, however, is dour and dogmatic,
seeming hardly worth the girls' imaginative efforts. The cousins' desire for a ro-
mantic gesture leads them to make an illegal nighttime visit to'the cemetery (to
place flowers on Louisa's grave at midnight), but Emily finds out more about the
spirit of true love while helping Uncle Arthur clean up the grave the next day. The
characterization here is believable, with irritating and charismatic Tory leading
Emily into adventures small and large, while Uncle Arthur's and Emily's quiet
attachment is genuine enough to make his eventual death quite saddening. Bechard
is deft with smaller touches as well, such as Emily's great basketball moment when,
in front of her great crush, she sinks her shot and splits her shorts. This is a well-
balanced account of a young girl who's beginning to realize that her relatives are
real people, and that there's a difference between adolescent fantasy and true love.
DS
Begay, Shonto, ad. Ma'ii and Cousin Horned Toad: A Traditional Navajo Story;
ad. and illus. by Shonto Begay. 
Scholastic, 1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-45391-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Begay's vigorous watercolor and color pencil pictures illustrate a tale of Coyote's
greed backfiring once again when he swallows his cousin Horned Toad in order to
own and eat all the corn that Horned Toad has worked so hard to grow. It doesn't
take Coyote long to realize he's made a mistake, as Horned Toad pulls Coyote's
ribs, lounges around in his stomach, and pinches his heart. The tale is a satisfying
one for preschool storytelling sessions or primary-grade students of Native Ameri-
can lore, and the art, though occasionally crowded in its reliance on mottled tex-
tures and circular background lines, has some intriguing shadowy effects, includ-
ing a traditional icon of the horned toad stylized among more literal images. A
note about "Coyote Out Walking Stories" and a glossary of Navajo words, with a
pronunciation guide, are appended. BH
38 
* THE BULLETIN
Beirne, Barbara Riders Up! Preparing for a Pony Race; written and illus. with
photographs by Barbara Beirne. 
Carolrhoda, 1992 
56 p
ISBN 0-87614-714-7 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-5
Here's a photoessay to generate envy: Jasmine is eight, and she's training her
pony-and herself-to enter a local pony race. Her mother's a riding instructor
and her father's a blacksmith; Jasmine gets to take care of and ride Charlie, a
doughty steed even if he is the smallest one around. (She also participates in Pony
Club, where she rubs elbows with hot young steeplechase jockey Blyth Miller.)
Training isn't all smooth sailing: sometimes Jasmine falls off, or Charlie bolts
(practice races are held in a fenced paddock because "it's safer here than in an open
field in case one of the ponies decides not to stop"). Finally the great day comes,
and Jasmine in her cotton-candy pink silks and brave Charlie come seventh in the
race, but run the distance in their fastest time ever. It's a kick-as it were-to see
such a young rider in such an exciting event rather than the more sedate and usual
horse show, and this book has all the alluring horsey details that fans crave. A few
photographs seem posed, but they're generally clear and vivid in depicting Jasmine
in her equine milieu. Pair this one with Patricia Easton's Stable Girl(BCCB 10/91)
for horse-oriented kids who want deeper immersion in horsekeeping than is of-
fered by Krementz' A Very Young Rider (BCCB 5/78). DS
Bradshaw, Gillian 
The Land of Gold. Greenwillow, 1992 
[160p]
ISBN 0-688-10576-9 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Set in ancient Nubia, this sequel to The Dragon and the Thief(BCCB 12/91) is
even more exciting than its predecessor. Two Egyptian men, Prahotep and Baki,
and their unusual companion, Hathor the dragon, sail right out of the first story
and into this one-looking for other dragons in Nubia. Before they get a chance
to search, they find themselves embroiled in local politics. From the moment they
rescue a Nubian princess who's been left as a sacrifice for a hungry water monster,
they are committed to helping the princess return to her rightful throne. There's
action around every bend of the river as the friends race to get the princess back to
her capital city before an evil general takes over the country. The companions are
true heroes: Prahotep is clever, Baki is strong, the princess is brave, and Hathor is
magical. The message that Egyptians and Nubians can get over generations of
hatred through friendship is a clear but light-handed racial commentary. The
constant action, theme of friendship, and exotic setting make this book as success-
ful as the first. KJ
Brimner, Larry Dane 
A Migrant Family; written and illus. with photographs by
Larry Dane Brimner. 
Lerner, 1992 
4 0p 
(In My Shoes)
ISBN 0-8225-2554-2 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
In an interesting series that explores social issues by focusing on an individual
child's life (another entry was Greenberg's Out ofthe Gang, BCCB 6/92), this slim
photodocumentary is a measured, accessible, and personalized account of the prob-
lems faced by migrant farm workers. "They want us to work," says twelve-year-old
Juan, "and they want us to disappear." When Juan and his parents aren't traveling
north to pick crops in California's Central Valley, they live in a migrant camp in
OCTOBER 1992 
* 
39
the rough chaparral near San Diego. "Houses" are made of plywood and plastic
scraps; there's no electricity or running water. Juan only intermittently attends
school and the migrants routinely face eviction and discrimination; the fact that
they are working in this country legally is no protection against dishonest employ-
ers. The black-and-white photographs show great poverty but no sensationalized
squalor. There is no "bright side" to the story, which is an excellent companion/
introduction to Brent Ashabranner's Dark Harvest (BCCB 12/85). RS
Bryan, Ashley 
Sing to the Sun;written and illus. by Ashley Bryan. 
HarperCollins,
1992 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020833-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020829-5 
$15.00 
R Gr. 2-4
"Sing to the sun/ It will listen/ And warm your words/ Your joy will rise/ Like the
sun/ And glow/ Within you// Sing to the moon/ It will hear/ And soothe your
cares/ Your fears will set/ Like the moon/ And fade/ Within you." Ashley Bryan's
"Song" introduces a lyrical collection of 23 poems accompanied by fluid paintings
reminiscent of Chagall's overlapping images though marked with sharper color
contrasts. Many of the poems center on Caribbean rhythms and references, but
the mood is varied from lilting ("Sweet Talk," "The Blackbirds' Party") to thoughtful
("The Artist," "Pretty Is"). Children will feel the deeper meanings in "Do Good":
"Donkey want water/ Birdies want food/ Somebody ought to/ Do them good//
Birdies got a mama/ Papa on the go/ Bring them food and water/ Feed them, too/
/ Donkey tied proper/ He holler, he bawl/ No mama, no papa/ To feed him at all."
Most of the verses harbor promising sound effects, especially "Hurricane" ("The
wind howled,/ 'Whooree!/ I blow as I wish/ I wish/ I crush and/ I splash and/ I
rush and/ I swish."'). Read these aloud and then let the kids follow suit-the
words are simple but they dance, while the art achieves just the right combination
of swirling symbols and literal figures to enrich rather than distract from the verbal
nuance. BH
Buller, Jon 
Mike and the Magic Cookies; written and illus. by Jon Buller and
Susan Schade. 
Grosset, 1992 
4 8p 
(All Aboard Reading)
Library ed. ISBN 0-448-40388-9 
$7.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-40386-2 
$3.50 
R 
Gr. 2-4
It's another boring summer day, and Mike's mom has sent him to the Stop and
Spend for cookies to accompany the family barbecue. Taking a short cut through
the woods, he spots instead a tempting bake shop and a funny little baker who sells
him some delicious-looking animal cookies, one for each in the family: "a rabbit
for Mike, a pig for Rose, a chicken for Mrs. Tracy, and a nice frog for Mr. Tracy."
Readers who spot the "brain muffins" and "lady fingers" in the baker's case wouldn't
touch those cookies with a ten-foot spatula, but Mike and his family don't even
wait for dessert, eat the cookies, and slowly begin to acquire the behavioral and
physical characteristics of their respective cookies. "'Ga-dunk!' said Dad. He
stuck out his tongue to catch a fly." Face it, this is the kind of book that you will
think is incredibly stupid but kids will eat right up-which is exactly what you
want in an easy-reader. Cartoon illustrations reminiscent ofSyd Hoffjoin right in
with the suburban lunacy, featuring an especially fetching mom clucking away in
her wheelbarrow nest. RS
40 
* THE BULLETIN
Carlstrom, Nancy White 
Northern Lullaby; illus. by Leo and Diane
Dillon. 
Philomel, 1992 
[28p]
ISBN 0-399-21806-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 2-5 yrs
"Goodnight Papa Star/ Goodnight Mama Moon,/ Bending your silver arms/ down
through the darkness." Natural elements and wild creatures are personified here
in poetic and graphic forms, with a spare text and sweeping illustrations that both
imply the vast, snow-covered spaces of the far North. Smooth dark portraits set
into patterned masks and costumes give faces to Sister Owl, Brother Bear, Cousins
Beaver and Fox, Auntie Willow and Auntie Birch, Great Moose Uncle, Wolf Uncle
Gray, Snowshoe Hare, and landmarks of earth and water. A dark sky flecked with
square snow flakes and rounded mounds of cloud and snow give a comforting
organic feel to the lullaby, which will calm the most fearful toddler as it seems to
have done the sleeping Native American child trundled on the last page. The
format itself is spaciously designed, with double-spread pictures snuggled against a
swathe of pebbled paper, at the bottom of which the verses are discreetly tucked.
The end effect is both simple and sophisticated: "Shine down Mama Moon,/
Shine down Papa Star,/ Wrap me in your soft quilt/ of stillness tonight." BH
Conrad, Pam 
The Lost Sailor; illus. by Richard Egielski. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 1992 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021696-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021695-6 
$15.00 
R* 
5-8 yrs
"Once upon a sea" the sailor who stars in this picture book adventure "was known
from longitude to longitude, from latitude to latitude, for his great seamanship
and incredible luck." His seamanship doesn't help much against the storm that
wrecks his ship, but his luck holds at last, after a lifetime of Robinson Crusoe
survival on a deserted island. The story is skillfully straightforward, its energy
invested in prose that rocks with the rhythm of ocean waves. Egielski's illustra-
tions draw a fine line between honoring the seriousness of the story and lightening
its effects with controlled shapes and modulated colors. In the blue-and-green
storm scene, for instance, a giant wave-stylized like a Japanese painting but filled
with a more ominous power of movement-curves over the rain-driven ship. This
brand of fantastical realism is tonally reminiscent of Ardizzone's young maritime
voyagers (though the art and narrative bear more resemblance to Van Allsburg's
Wretched Stone) and should hold listeners with a similar promise of heroic action.
BH
Crews, Donald 
Shortcut; written and illus. by Donald Crews. 
Greenwillow,
1992 
[3 2 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-06437-X 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-06436-1 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 4-7 yrs
The endpapers, black and brown letters reading "KLAK-KLAKITY-KLAK" in
spooky rows, are the clue to the suspense in the narrator's words, "we decided to
take the short-cut home" along the railroad tracks. Listeners will agree that "we
should have taken the road," especially when they spy the "WHOO" of a train
coming around the bend. By the time the whistle gets louder ("WHOO-WHOO")
OCTOBER 1992 
* 
41
and the bright yellow light has found these seven children, they jump off the tracks
without thinking about briars or snakes or whatever else waits below the steep
slope. It's a close call, and viewers are treated to several pages of powerful machin-
ery as the train thunders by ("KLAKITY-KLAKITY-KLAK-KLAK"). It's one of
those childhood incidents that can teach a lifelong lesson without a word spoken:
"We didn't tell anyone .... And we didn't take the short-cut again." The life-or-
death urgency of the situation lends narrative weight that's unusual for such a brief
text, and graduates of Crews' Freight Train (BCCB 2/79) can practise counting
cars through the five full-page spreads that stretch from engine to caboose. BH
Cummings, Pat 
Petey Moroni's Camp Runamok Diary; written and illus. by Pat
Cummings. 
Bradbury, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-02-725513-1 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Petey Moroni's diary of his two weeks at camp focuses on two things: comics
("Samurai Surfer meets Bonzai Dave for only the second time, and this time on
earth") and food, especially the disappearing act every camper's edible treasures are
performing ("Nancy Patanky knew she had three boxes of individually wrapped
fruit-flavored Puff n' Stuff Pastries she bought from home, but two whole boxes
were missing"). Even after a raccoon is identified as the culprit, the kids' ingenuity
is no match for that of the raccoon, who has clearly won this summer's round
("Ollie found nothing but a hole where he put his Caramel Crunchies"). The
illustrations are slickly and robustly goofy, if occasionally somewhat luridly col-
ored, with boys and girls in all shapes and colors remaining oblivious to the raccoon's
constant peeking; the critter itself has a strongly human attitude as it lies sleepily
among the snack food wrappers and then dons a camp T-shirt. Since no introduc-
tions are provided, it may take young readers a bit to figure out which kid is Petey
Maroni, but it's always clear what's going on. Cummings uses some nicely hu-
morous specificity, such as the strategic employment of food brand names and
comic book heroes. You won't learn much about camp activities here, but both
the protagonists and the readers should find Runamok an entertaining camp expe-
rience. DS
Darling, Kathy 
Tasmanian Devil: On Location; illus. with photographs by Tara
Darling. 
Lothrop, 1992 
[4 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09727-8 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09726-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
While the Darlings may be a little too eager to anthropomorphize their subject-
"They really are as mean as people think they are"--one can understand the temp-
tation, faced with the fact that, aside from humans, the main threat to the marsu-
pial Tasmanian devils is themselves: "the number one killer of baby devils is other
devils." Primarily nocturnal, Tasmanian devils live alone, spending only a few
months out of their mother's pouch before she forces them away (or kills and eats
them). The Darlings' account of these "genuine tough guys" is personalized (mother
and daughter observed, photographed and fed the devils at Cradle Mountain Na-
tional Park) and enthusiastic, describing a devil "cramming lengths of intestine
into his mouth like bloody spaghetti." The photos, primarily teeth shots, are often
cute, notwithstanding the Darlings' assertion that the devil is one of nature's
"unhuggables." A page of "Devil Facts" and an index are appended. RS
42 * THE BULLETIN
dePaola, Tomie Jingle the Christmas Clown; written and illus. by Tomie
dePaola. 
Putnam, 1992 
[40p]
ISBN 0-399-22338-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Left with his troupe of baby animals in a small, almost deserted village while the
rest of the circus travels on, Jingle the little clown boy brings Christmas to the
lonely old villagers. This is an awful lot of sentimental button-pushing for one
little picture book, but while the pathos seems somewhat calculated, the pictures
tell a better story. Beginning with Bonjour, Mr. Satie (BCCB 3/91), dePaola's
work has become a lot more interesting, with a broader but subtler palette that has
an emotional weight often lacking in his earlier books. The coloring here is posi-
tively voluptuous, with rich pinks and orchid blues accenting the aqua-gray
backgrounds, and if Jingle himself sometimes seems a little too fey, the dignity of
the old villagers is quietly conveyed in the deep browns and blacks of their clothing
and the strength of their bearing. The baby animals are doe-eyed adorable (espe-
cially the wolfhound pups), but with a strangeness about them that leavens the
cuteness. RS
Dorris, Michael 
Morning Girl. Hyperion, 1992 
74 p
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-285-3 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-284-5 
$12.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Morning Girl and her brother Star Boy alternately narrate chapters describing
their everyday lives just before the arrival of Columbus to their island. Binding the
somewhat disparate episodes are strongly braided family dynamics: sibling rivalry
and reconciliation, mutual sadness over the loss of a new baby, the comforting
spiritual presence of a dead grandfather when Star Boy is overtaken by a hurricane,
reassurance from the children's parents, teasing from their relatives. It is the subtle
complexity of these developments that underscores the irony of Columbus' jour-
nal, excerpted unexpectedly as the epilogue: "... it seemed to me that they were a
people very poor in everything. . . . They should be good and intelligent
servants ... at the time of my departure I will take six of them from here to Your
Highnesses in order that they may learn to speak." The first juvenile novel to be
written from the Tainos' standpoint, this will offer a persuasive counterpoint to
the cabin-boy's-view historical fiction that has--except for Francine Jacobs' non-
fiction The Tainos (BCCB 5/92) and Jane Yolen's picture book Encounter (BCCB
5/92)--characterized Quincentennial children's literature. BH
Gerson, Mary-Joan, ad. 
Why the Sky Is Far Away: A Nigerian Folktale; illus. by
Carla Golembe. 
Joy Street/Little, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-316-30852-8 
$15.95 
R 4-8 yrs
This Nigerian folktale is oral in every sense, for its primary image is an edible sky
so close to the earth that people need only reach up and break a piece off for their
food: "Sometimes the sky tasted like meat stew, sometimes like roasted corn, and
sometimes like ripe pineapple." Free of arduous labor, the men and women can
concentrate on art, weaving, and storytelling; but of course, where there is an Eden,
there is an Eve-in this case a greedy woman who disobeys the sky's injunction
against wasting its gifts. The sky recedes in anger, and the people must till the land
OCTOBER 1992 
* 43
and plant crops. An intriguing story to pair both with the Biblical episode of
manna from heaven and with the Zuni myth of the Corn Maidens' punishment
for First People's wasting food (Jerrie Oughton's How the Stars Fell into the Sky,
BCCB 6/92), this is dramatically illustrated, its brilliant hues textured with finger-
painting effects. Rich patterns play on a flat perspective, while the stark black
figures lined with white and posed against a blue sky render the book effective for
group display as well as close-up absorption. BH
Gottlieb, Dale 
Seeing Eye Willie; written and illus. by Dale Gottlieb. 
Knopf,
1992 
[3 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-92449-3 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-82449-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Faced with the sad conundrum of "Seeing Eye Willie," an old man who always sits
in front of Spike's Stationery, a little girl tries to puzzle out his story-"Maybe
Seeing Eye Willie doesn't have a home. Maybe he doesn't want a home. Maybe
he'd like my home"-and comes up with a fantastical tale that follows Baby Willie
around the world. A lion accidentally blinded Willie's eye in Africa, an Indian
mother elephant gives him a ride to China, a monkey gives him the embroidered
slippers ("These slippers will grow with your feet. They will tell the story of you")
that Willie always wears. The innocence of the narration is complemented by the
post-modernish paintings, flatly-planed and boldly colored, that convey the girl's
naively optimistic attempt to explain Willie's silent presence. Unlike many recent
picture books that sentimentalize the homeless (see Komaiko and Cornell's Leonora
O'Grady, BCCB 5/92), this one instead concerns a child's instinctive empathy. In
the end, the girl knows that her story is not Willie's story, but "if he ever wants to
tell it, I hope I'm there to listen." Flap copy ("Dale Gottlieb offers one vision of a
man some might call homeless but others would say has made a home where he
is") is a cheap come-on that entirely misses the point of this offbeat and distinctive
portrait of a girl's attempt, through storytelling, to right a perplexing world. RS
Hamilton, Virginia 
Drylongso; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. 
Harcourt, 1992 
56 p
ISBN 0-15-224241-4 
$18.95 
R* 
Gr. 4-6
Although the conditions resemble the Depression Dustbowl, the year is 1975.
With drought threatening everything they plant on their farm, Lindy and her
father are putting in some tomatoes when a wall of red dust hits their house and
sends a young stranger stumbling into the door. He says his name is Drylongso,
an old African-American term for periods of dry weather. Drylongso stays with
Lindy's family long enough to help them find a spring with his dowsing stick,
which he leaves behind for Lindy the day he moves on to find his own family.
Illustrated with rusty-brown watercolor full- and double-page spreads, this is a
blending of picture book, short story, novel, and folklore; in a few places, the stress
points show, as in the case of information about twenty-year drought cycles trying
to work itself into conversation. For the most part, however, the strange drama of
the situation, the strong black family and their timeless battle against natural forces,
dominates the book's landscape for a strong, middle-grades read-aloud that will
make interesting company for Myers' Red-Dirt Jesse and Stanley's Children of the
Dust Bowl both reviewed below. BH
44 
* THE BULLETIN
Hausherr, Rosmarie 
What Instrument Is This?; written and illus. with photo-
graphs by Rosmarie Hausherr. 
Scholastic, 1992 
[38p]
ISBN 0-590-44644-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
4-8 yrs
Using a question-and-answer format that adds a gently riddling tone to this superb
sequence of photographs, Hausherr here introduces the musical instruments that
most young children will find familiar and/or appealing. "What instrument is
played sideways and can sing like a bird?" The question page has a color photo of
a young boy holding a flute; the verso has a black-and-white photo of a woman
playing a flute, captioned by a brief, informative paragraph about the instrument.
The photographs have a great variety of tone, from the adorable to the elegant to
the witty-one of the best shows two boys playing cellos, one with wary earnest-
ness, the other with the panache of du Pre. Often, the flip from question photo to
answer photo provides illuminating contrast: a bespectacled young black girl in
lace and velvet plays what has to be some impossibly serious music on the violin;
the verso pictures a down home Vermont farm family harmonizing on their fiddles.
More directly informative than Ann Hayes' Meet the Orchestra (BCCB 3/91) this
book also has a welcome and unselfconscious mix of boys and girls; black, white,
Hispanic, and Asian kids. Valuable appended material includes notes on other
instruments not covered in the book, a glossary and taxonomy of instruments, and
advice to parents about children and music lessons. RS
Hesse, Karen 
Lettersfrom Rifka Holt, 1992 
14 8p
ISBN 0-8050-1964-2 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
This epistolary novel chronicles twelve-year-old Rifka's journey from Russia to
America, interrupted in Poland when she almost dies of typhus and in Belgium
when the ringworm she has contracted on a freight train prevents her from board-
ing the ship with her family. From then on and through her stay on Ellis Island,
she is alone except for the letters she writes to her cousin in the blank pages of a
book of Pushkin's poetry. This device seems a little unbelievable, since Rifka's
letters run to 145 pages, but the story itself is credibly developed and the voice
convincing. Rifka's detainment leaves her realistically disillusioned about the im-
migrant experience: "You have to be perfect to come to America. I have this bald
head and you, you have a crooked back .... We are not welcome." A number of
novels have focused on the experience of Jews in Russia or new arrivals to the U.S.;
this one is vivid in detailing the physical and emotional toll exacted for passage.
BH
Houghton, Eric 
The Backwards Watch; illus. by Simone Abel. 
Orchard,
1992 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08568-6 
$13.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05968-5 
$13.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"When I was your age, I kept myself clean and neat," Sally's granddad tells her
(several times), but then Sally finds out the truth when she accidentally winds
Granddad's watch backwards, and it takes both of them back to when he was a
little boy. Sally and Granddad, now George, have a gloriously illicit time playing
in a junkyard until Granddad's father drags him home, complaining about how
filthy he always gets. When Granddad wakes up, Sally confronts him with the
truth about his messy childhood, and Granddad recalls the girl who came, just that
OCTOBER 1992 
* 45
once, to play. Line and watercolor illustrations show a slightly Dickensian grand-
father, who is still quite plausible as the grown version of obstreperous George; the
junkyard is very cleanly and safely junky, parental outrage notwithstanding. It's
unusual to find such a successful compression of the time-travel theme in a picture
book, and it's neatly developed here. This is a clever story, with a shared grownup-
and-child giggle at the joke that should appeal to readers-aloud as well as the read-
to. DS
Hughes, Shirley 
The BigAlfie Out ofDoors Storybook; written and illus. by Shirley
Hughes. 
Lothrop, 1992 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-688-11428-8 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
3-6 yrs
Honest and never cute or condescending, Hughes' series of books about Alfie is a
hallmark of realistic fiction for young children. The events are ordinary: Alfie and
little sister Annie Rose play store; Alfie and his father sleep out in a field; Alfie finds
a pet rock and loses it at the beach. Using the last as an example, it is remarkable
how much drama Hughes generates from simple situations, and anxious listeners
will be relieved when "Bonting," still wearing the little bathing suit Alfie's mother
made for it, turns up in Annie Rose's beach bucket. Occasional poems inter-
spersed between the stories are a little too ordinary, cozy but prosy. Hughes' line-
and-watercolor paintings are superbly drawn, verdantly colored and washed with
light, and include all the details that listeners will be looking for. RS
Killilea, Marie 
Newf; illus. by Ian Schoenherr. 
Philomel, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-399-21875-0 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Based loosely on "a north country legend," according to the jacket flap, this is the
story of the friendship between a big Newfoundland dog and a tiny cat. Newf
mysteriously comes out of the rough sea and proceeds to make his home in an
abandoned cottage, where Kitten is also holed up; at first Kitten is afraid of the big
animal, but he gradually comes to rely on his companion for warmth and comfort.
Newf, true to his rescue-dog heritage, saves Kitten twice: once when the cat has
been swept into the sea and another time when Kitten is buried in the winter
snow. Although the animal figures are somewhat approximate, the illustrations
are moody and effective, with thickly pigmented golden evening light illuminating
the quiet white kitten and the bearlike dog, or gray-green waves spewing white
spume over Kitten as he attempts to withstand the watery onslaught. The com-
plete absence of humans from this story gives it a quiet serenity that in no way
detracts from the charm of this odd couple's story, which is sort of like a stationary
Incredible Journey. The final snow rescue is a trifle anti-climactic, since we've
already seen the sea rescue, but it's still a good animal story, and Killilea writes a
suitably legendary opening and closing that should make this a successful read-
aloud with the pet set. DS
King-Smith, Dick 
Pretty Polly; illus. by Marshall Peck. 
Crown, 1992 
122p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-58607-X 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-58606-1 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Abigail's enchantment with an expensive parrot leads her straight from the pet
shop to the hen house, where she names a chick Pretty Polly and teaches it to talk.
46 
* THE BULLETIN
Pretty Polly progresses from eat wheaties, which Abigail selects because of the pho-
netic resemblance to peep and cheep, to a relatively large, if totally uncomprehended,
vocabulary (Polly seems a mentally average chicken). The story generates some
tension through Abigail's warding off threats of unwanted publicity and an even
more unwanted fox, but King-Smith relies, as he did in Ace, the Very Important Pig
(BCCB 12/90), on lively episodes rather than on the sustained plot and arch tone
of Foxbusters (BCCB 10/88). Although Pretty Polly is not as clever as either of
those books, it's easier to read, with the built-in appeal of a friendly human pro-
tagonist and the inherent humor of a talking chicken. BH
Krementz, Jill 
How It Feels To Live With a Physical Disability; written and illus.
with photographs by Jill Krementz 
Simon, 1992 
176 p
ISBN 0-671-72371-5 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Ranging in age from six to sixteen years, a dozen children talk about their disabili-
ties. There's a variety of daunting genetic problems, accidents, and diseases, but
the voices have a common courage and resolve that will impress readers, who can
gain considerable perspective from the tragedies these subjects have overcome. Few
of us pause to consider what it's like to be born with missing facial bones (Treacher
Collins disorder), missing arms and legs (thrombocytopenia absent radius), bro-
ken bones (osteogenesis imperfecta); to have diseases like cerebral palsy or retina
blastoma bilateral, a cancer that required the removal of both eyes in the 13-year-
old interviewed here; or to have accidents such as the airplane crash that killed
another girl's father and paralyzed her with a spinal injury. Although a few of
these kids acknowledge moments of bitterness, they are sustained by strong par-
ents and complex medical support, making the book a positive introduction for
readers unfamiliar with the differences of the disabled. The first-person narrative
form also sets up a tone more intimate than that of books such as Thomas Bergman's
equally informative series, Don't Turn Away (BCCB 2/90). BH
Krisher, Trudy 
Kathy's Hats: A Story of Hope; illus. by Nadine Bernard
Westcott. 
Whitman, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-4116-8 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Listing the many hats she has worn through the years, Kathy recalls sunbonnets,
dress-up hats, and bathing caps, but then "something happened to me . . . that
doesn't happen to many children": Kathy has cancer. She hates being sick, she
hates the treatments, and she hates, most of all, being bald, so that while her friends
have "bangs and barrettes and ponytails and curls . . . all I had was hats." But
Kathy personalizes her hat with badges and buttons and eventually, with her whole
class following suit, celebrates her remission by throwing her hat in the air. While
this book is quietly straightforward about the fear and pain of a life-threatening
disease, its real strength lies in its understanding of the draining indignities of
chronic illness: Kathy's feeling ugly and awkward is a serious predicament, and
Krisher (who writes in an afterword of her daughter's successful battle against can-
cer) addresses it as such. She also treats Kathy's cancer as one difficult episode of
an entire life, since the book depicts a time before the cancer and ends with Kathy,
her hair regrown, contemplating the promise of an after. The illustrations are
simple line-and-watercolor, airy and bright with lots of white space but never sac-
charine. This is a matter-of-fact book (previously published, with different illus-
trations, in a small private edition) about a tough time and subject, and its calm
and respectful treatment well serves a story that is indeed one of hope. DS
OCTOBER 1992 
* 47
Krull, Kathleen 
Gonna Sing My Head Off.; illus. by Allen Garns. Knopf,
1992 
14 6p
ISBN 0-394-81991-8 
$20.00 
R* 
5 yrs up
Krull's informative notes and Garns' versatile pastel illustrations enhance this col-
lection of sixty-two American songs ranging from the tried-and-true traditional,
such as "I've Been Working on the Railroad," to modern composed songs that
have entered the folk canon, such as Malvina Reynolds' "What Have They Done
to the Rain." The arrangements, which include guitar chords, are clean and simple
("without being boring," as the compiler/arranger correctly notes), easy enough
for adults remembering long-ago piano lessons as well as for kids just beginning.
Krull's tempo and tone directions ("Spunky," for "Oh, Susanna," "Like an opera
singer," for "I Gave My Love a Cherry") are clever without cuteness, and the wide
variety of the anthology-work songs, cowboy sagas, spirituals, protest songs, etc.,-
encourages an equal variety of possibilities for use, including classroom singalongs,
bedtime story hours, and family recreation. Garns does an admirable job of wed-
ding image to music: "Down in the Valley" faces a full-bleed picture of a pastoral
setting framed by prison walls; his sketch for "Stewball" streaks a racing horse and
rider against a vibrant aqua sky. The notes that preface each song give interesting
bits of both musical and American history; first-line and song-type indexes are
appended. Handsome, useful, unstuffy and lots of fun, this is the perfect contem-
porary companion to Margaret Boni and the Provensens' classic Fireside Book of
Folk Songs, an antecedent Krull acknowledges in her preface. RS
Le Guin, Ursula K. 
A Ride on the Red Mare's Back; illus. by Julie
Downing. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1992 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08591-0 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05991-X 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
In the universal tradition of sister-rescues-brother tales (e.g. "Baba Yaga," Andersen's
"Snow Queen," Sendak's Outside Over There), Le Guin has set this original story
in the gloomy winter woods of Sweden. After the girl's brother is stolen by trolls,
their parents are helpless with grief, so the girl fills her pockets with her treasures
and sets off. Le Guin's poetic language ("Her mother's voice was like a fine, thin
thread of silk or silver that lay behind her") merges well with Downing's some-
times eerie watercolors of the distraught parents, the girl alone in the woods, the
misshapen trolls. In her journey, the girl finds a use for all her treasures, including
her most prized possession, her red painted horse. The red mare grows and comes
to life in the magic of the forest and bravely offers to distract the trolls while the
girl rescues her ungrateful brother. The troll from "Three Billy Goats Gruff'
makes an appearance when he asks the girl "Who's that stamping on my bridge?"
A lonely feeling and magical mood are maintained throughout the story, and the
girl's love for her brother is matched only by the loyalty of the red mare. KJ
Lee, Marie G. 
Finding My Voice. 
Houghton, 1992 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-395-62134-8 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 8-12
The only Korean in her small Minnesota high school, Ellen (Myong-Ok) narrates
the story of her senior year, which is a pressure cooker of conflicts: her strict,
traditional parents demand from her the same scholastic perfection that got her
sister into Harvard; her best girl friend and the boy she grows to love become
48 
* THE BULLETIN
temptations to rebel; and some of her peers torment her with the epithet "Chink,"
a racist attitude reflected not much more subtly by her chemistry teacher and gym-
nastics coach. Although the plot is episodic, the tension increases steadily with
Ellen's emotional stress, and the characterization deepens credibly with the devel-
opment of various choices made by the protagonist, her friends, and her enemies.
Beyond a vivid portrayal of the standard anxieties about grades, application to
colleges, and adolescent social dynamics, Lee has detailed the strain of ethnic "dif-
ference"-both from immigrant parents and from a homogeneous community-
and the insecurity it breeds about an individual's looks, abilities, and possibilities.
Readers will empathize with Ellen's pain and celebrate her emerging confidence.
BH
Lerner, Carol 
Cactus; written and illus. by Carol Lerner. 
Morrow, 1992 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09637-9 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09636-0 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Lerner's clear prose and precise botanical drawings in color and black and white
enhance this presentation of a plant family that is inherently interesting for its
adaptation to arid conditions. The book opens with a description of succulents'
mechanism for storing water and proceeds to elaborate on the development of
cacti, their differences from other plants, and the environments in which they
manage to survive. The contrasts speak impressively: "A medium-sized elm tree,
for example, may give off a ton of water in a single summer day" while "a column-
shaped cactus standing twelve feet high loses only a little over a tablespoon of
water." Carefully labeled diagrams clarify the explanations, as in the cross section
of a ribbed cactus stem before and after rainfall. With a glossary and index that
increase the book's usefulness for reports, this is a practical and appealing choice
for the science shelf. BH
Littlewood, Valerie 
Scarecrow!; written and illus. by Valerie Littlewood. 
Dutton,
1992 
[29p]
ISBN 0-525-44948-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
While you might find more information about scarecrows in Giblin and Ferguson's
The Scarecrow Book (BCCB 3/81), you won't get Littlewood's crisp autumnal water-
colors, filled with details both relevant and spooky, such as an Audubon-like portrait
of four crows perched high above a rolling field while farmer and scarecrow labor
below. (Interestingly, Littlewood points out that some farmers believe scarecrows
are misnamed, "since the crow is one bird they might not want to scare away.
Feeding crows can control the populations of an insect called the corn borer and
other worms and grubs.") There's some history here, descriptions of kinds of
scarecrows (pop-up and plastic are contemporary variants), and information about
other kinds of pest-scaring devices, such as a half-buried bottle that will whistle
when the wind blows. Additional double-spread sections cover scarecrows in
legends and in literature, and directions for making a scarecrow at home. First-
rate Halloween browsing. RS
Lourie, Peter 
Yukon River: An Adventure to the Gold Fields ofthe Klondike; writ-
ten and illus. with photographs by Peter Lourie. 
Caroline House, 1992 
48p
ISBN 1-878093-90-8 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 4-7
As in his photoessay Amazon (BCCB 11/91), Lourie takes a trip down a fabled
OCTOBER 1992 
* 49
waterway, here the Yukon River, from Whitehorse to Dawson in Canada's Yukon
territory. The color photos have a snapshot quality and are informative if not
inspiring; similarly the text and page design are a little bland and prosaic, but easy
to follow and read. What Lourie does best is to use his own travels as a way to
evoke the Yukon of the late 1890s, when the region was stampeded with gold
prospectors, and the historical photographs he includes are a good complement to
his own. A brief interview with a contemporary gold miner who uses old-fash-
ioned methods ties the two periods together and will remind readers of the fortune
of most of those who come to the Yukon for gold: "When we met Pierre, he was
poor again." RS
McCully, Emily Arnold 
Mirette on the High Wire; written and illus. by Emily
Arnold McCully. 
Putnam, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22130-1 
$14.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Young Mirette, daughter of the Widow Gateau, helps her mother run a theatrical
boardinghouse in fin de sitcle Paris, where she meets the famous high-wire walker
Bellini. Bellini warns her that "once you start, your feet are never happy again on
the ground," but Mirette loves walking the tightrope; she grows so proficient un-
der Bellini's tutelage that she is able to save him and his performance when his
nerve fails during his big comeback. The illustrations are effectively reminiscent of
the period, with a lively Toulouse-Lautrec flavor in the scenes of Parisian life;
McCully uses some creative perspectives (Mirette, her mouth open with concen-
tration, seen from underneath the wire on which she balances) and a varied palette
that is most effective in the somber interiors and luminous night scenes, where
Mirette's orange hair shines out in contrast. She makes an enviable and plucky
heroine, darting among the theatrical crowd and doggedly practicing her difficult
skill; young readers will want to pull on their own high-button boots and join her
as she dances between the rooftops. DS
Macken, Walter 
The Flight of the Doves. 
Simon, 1992 
218p
ISBN 0-671-73801-1 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 5-7
First published in 1968, this is the story of Finn, twelve, and his seven-year-old
sister Derval. Since the death of their Irish mother they've lived in England with
their unloving stepfather, Uncle Toby, but when his mistreatment proves too much
to bear, the children run away, intending to reach their grandmother in Ireland.
It's an old-fashioned melodramatic adventure and a good one, as the kids, with the
aid of lovable Irish rogues, rather stereotyped gypsies, and a sympathetic police-
man, keep one step ahead of Uncle Toby's attempt to retrieve them (he needs
them in order to receive a substantial inheritance). There's not much moral ambi-
guity here but there's plenty of action; the kids-against-the-odds story has a
Disneyesque flavor (the book was made into a movie, in fact, in 1972) enhanced
by the various colorful characters along the way, all of which helps make this a
good galloping read in a familiar and honorable tradition. DS
Miller, Margaret 
Where Does It Go?; written and illus. with photographs by
Margaret Miller. 
Greenwillow, 1992 
[4 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10929-2 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10928-4 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
1-3 yrs
With the surefire appeal of Hill's Where's Spot?or Watanabe's How Do IPut It On?
50 
* 
THE BULLETIN
or Carlstrom's Jesse Bear, What Will You Wear? Miller has dared to inject humor
into photography, which is often pretty but boring in picture books for very young
children. The full-color close-ups here will immediately engage listeners in a game
that can also reinforce their early attempts at order. "Where does Tavo put his
socks?" begins the first full-page question. "Among the flowers? On his nose? On
the dog's paw? In the wading pool?" ask the four funny pictures on the next page,
which, when you turn it to the verso, declares in boldface print across from a large
picture of a delighted little boy, "On his feet!" The ludicrousness of some of the
suggestions (ice cream on a sandal, book on a baby brother, doll between jars of
peanut butter and jelly, jacket in the refrigerator) will tickle kids at the same time
it gives them a sense of achievement that they know better than the book. With an
imaginative variation of subjects, races, and genders, this will invoke sensational
responses as a group readaloud (loud is the operative word here) or as a one-on-one
exchange. With some friendly persistence, it could even become a clean-up litany!
BH
Myers, Anna 
Red-Dirt Jessie. Walker, 1992 
107p
ISBN 0-8027-8172-1 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
After twelve-year-old Jessie Harper's baby sister dies, their father withdraws into a
psychological depression so deep that no one can reach him, even though the
family is hard-pressed to survive the Depression in rural Oklahoma. Jessie and her
little brother help their mother as best they can, their only bright spot being a half-
wild dog named Ring, left behind by an aunt and uncle gone to pick crops in
California. Jessie has almost won the dog over when it's shot, and even her com-
passionate mother draws the line after the injured dog threatens her. It's too bad
that such a realistically detailed novel succumbs to a melodramatic ending, when,
in the last page and a half, Ring reappears to save Jessie from another wild dog and
Papa reappears to save Ring. Kids will love the excitement, however, and the
consistent quality of the sustained first-person narrative more than compensates
for a last bit of contrived action. BH
Osofsky, Audrey 
My Buddy; illus. by Ted Rand. 
Holt, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-1747-X 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Buddy is a soulful-eyed yet smiling golden retriever, and he is the service dog of the
narrator, a boy of about ten whose muscular dystrophy has made it necessary for
him to use a wheelchair. In short and simple sentences the boy tells how he and
Buddy trained together after Buddy's two-year individual training, and how they
go to school, go shopping, and play with friends. It's a book about the partner-
ship, rather thanthe illness that has made it necessary, but there are some impor-
tant points subtly made about the narrator's similarities to the more physically
fortunate: he gets a haircut, takes a shower (with Buddy, at the training camp),
and sleeps stretched out in his bed with Buddy at his side. It's also made clear that
Buddy is not a pet: he wears A sign saying "Working dog--don't touch," and the
narrator says his mom "wanted to give Buddy a hug too, but she couldn't, because
he was working." Rand's watercolors are sunny but realistic, and both Buddy and
his master have a boyish appeal. As more service dogs appear in the community,
it's useful for kids to have an idea of what they do and how important they are, and
dog fanciers will love watching Buddy go through his paces. DS
OCTOBER 1992 
* 51
Petit, Genevieve 
The Seventh Walnut; illus. byJoelle Boucher; tr. from the French
by Dagmar Herrmann. 
Wellington, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-922984-10-7 
$13.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Sent off to school with a treat of seven walnuts, John drops one which becomes the
delight of, successively, a squirrel, magpie, dormouse, and water rat, each of whom
treasures the nut until chased, sometimes caught, by something higher on the food
chain. It's a rather charming introduction to what seems, for most young chil-
dren, a brutal reality, and the walnut, if not its possessors, has a happy ending,
eluding all and growing into a fine tree. Watercolor illustrations are fine-lined and
bold, with a naturalistic precision that offsets the sometimes anthropomorphic tilt
of the text. Appended pages include a more detailed explanation of food chains,
explaining the feeding and predatory habits of the animals in the story, and con-
cludes with a recipe for walnut cake-tasty, if you can stop the kids from firmly
planting the nuts in the ground, safe from prey. RS
Porter, A. P. Jump at de Sun: The Story of Zora Neale Hurston. Carolrhoda,
1992 
9 6 p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-87614-667-1 
$12.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87614-546-2 
$6.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
With a down-home storytelling style that enlivens his already flamboyant subject,
Porter treats Zora Neale Hurston' life as if it were one of her own best stories. In
describing Hurston's unhappy peripatetic adolescence, shunted among relatives,
rejected by her father, Porter writes, "still, Zora was a choosy beggar and as mouthy
as ever. Being needy didn't make her humble." Although it is for younger readers
than Mary Lyons' Sorrow's Kitchen: The Life and Folklore of Zora Neale Hurston
(BCCB 1/91), Porter's book captures all the complications and contradictions of
Hurston's character, her ornery refusal to kowtow to any authority, whether it was
the demands of a wealthy white patron or the chidings of the "respectable" black
literary establishment. Like the tales she collected in the South and the Caribbean,
Hurston's life is a hard thing to pin down on paper, but Porter goes a long way in
giving young readers a picture of someone who must have been just as hard to live
with as she was irresistible. Plenty of photos, notes, bibliography, and an index are
included. RS
Pringle, Laurence 
Antarctica: The Last Unspoiled Continent. Simon,
1992 
56 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-671-73850-X 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
While there was nothing really wrong with Suzanne Winckler's Antarctica, re-
viewed last month, it read like an encyclopedia article; in his book on the conti-
nent, Laurence Pringle shows-once again-a nose for interesting and telling detail.
To convey the immensity of some of the Antarctic's calved icebergs, for example,
he uses not an analogy, but a fact. "B-9 contained an estimated 287 cubic miles of
fresh water. That is enough to give everyone on earth two glasses of water a day for
1,977 years" (note, too, the precision: 1,977 is more convincing than "almost two
thousand"). Pringle's explanations of continental drift, the ozone layer, and the
greenhouse effect are clear and aptly placed; along with the discussion of natural
and physical phenomena, he describes the research techniques used by scientists to
understand the same. Color photos are numerous and neatly labeled; the format is
easy and open. A glossary and an index are appended. RS
52 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Robbins, Ken 
Make Me a Peanut Butter Sandwich and a Glass of Milk; written
and illus. with photographs by Ken Robbins. Scholastic, 1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-43550-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr, 1-3
"Did anyone ever stop to think about where this favorite snack came from?" Robbins
asks, and proceeds to outline briefly the genesis of peanut butter, bread, and milk.
He shows how peanuts progress from seeds-peanuts-to plants, through har-
vesting and shelling to grinding into butter; similarly concise explanations go for
the wheat-to-bread and cow-to-carton processes. (Interestingly enough, it appears
from Robbins' introductory note that he photographed at the smaller companies
because the big ones refused permission.) The text is quite informative despite its
brevity, although some descriptions are fuzzy ("The bushes grow stalks that bend
over and push back into the ground. .. new peanuts grow on the ends of these
stalks") and the thorough child will wonder where yeast, casually mentioned in the
bread section, comes from. Robbins' trademark hand-tinted photographs of agri-
culture and manufacturing are evocative in their own right, but combined with
the early-textbook typeface and the food symbols in the margins (a peanut for the
peanut butter section, a loaf for the bread, a cow for the milk, all in shades of
brown) the overall effect is rather stodgy. Even so, for a child looking for a simple
explanation of a favorite treat, this will be a pleasantly pastoral solution. DS
Rose, Malcolm 
The Highest Form of Killing. Harcourt, 1992 
22 6 p
ISBN 0-15-234270-2 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 9 up
This suspenseful novel of eco-terrorism will probably find an audience among
adult Koontz and King fans as much as it will a YA readership, so we won't give
away the ending. A horribly discolored, mutilated dog corpse washes up on an
English beach, causing a huge secret government coverup ... but not before some-
one takes a picture of the corpse, and someone else realizes that this is no ordinary
dead dog. Three people-a classic 50's horror movie love triangle-become in-
volved: Mark, an impulsive lad willing to sacrifice everything to win back the girl
he loves; Derek Thorn, the idealistic young biochemistry professor whose feelings
for one student have gone beyond the pedagogical; and Sylvia, the brilliant, beau-
tiful, perfect young coed who spurs them both on. Although the book aspires to a
certain highmindedness concerning issues of animal rights and biological weap-
ons, it's actually pretty lowbrow, with a melodramatic quality that will be enjoyed
by the susceptible and cynical alike: "No other woman had ever meant more to
him than Sylvia did now. He needed her youth and her attitude. And he needed
to touch her. Even in the forensic lab, he could not resist it." But if the writing
isn't subtle, the story is taut in all the right places, the pace is terrific, and the
Andromeda Strain-like paranoia makes for spooky fun. RS
Sachar, Louis 
Marvin Redpost: Kidnapped at Birth?; illus. by Neal
Hughes. 
Random House, 1992 
6 8p 
(A First Stepping Stone Book)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-91946-5 
$9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-81946-0 
$2.99 
R Gr. 2-5
Marvin Redpost is, in his opinion, the Lost Prince of Shampoon. The evidence:
he's nine years old (the age the prince, kidnapped at birth, would now be), he's
left-handed (his teacher, also left-handed, says that means one has royal blood),
and his grandmother can't say which parent he looks like (he has red hair like the
OCTOBER 1992 
* 
53
King of Shampoon). This discovery brings thorny problems: are his parents-er,
Mr. and Mrs. Redpost-the kidnappers? If not, is the real Marvin Redpost dead?
What does he do about the money his royalty-struck classmates have begun to give
him? Mrs. Redpost generously agrees to take him to get his blood tested with
other potential lost potentates, and while he passes the first hurdle (right blood
type) he decides that his place is with the Redposts after all. The end is rather
abrupt, but the rest of the story is wonderfully logical and absurd, with a wit and
attention to detail rare in an easy reader. Sachar has a knack for quick but telling
characterization, and Marvin's charming family ("You are speaking to Prince Rob-
ert," Mrs. Redpost loyally declares to a hostile fellow prince-candidate) and faith-
ful friends add to the appeal. The illustrations are realistic, well-modulated pencil,
tonally unsuited to the broadly comedic story, but the text is quite lively enough to
keep the reader absorbed in Marvin's dynastic saga. DS
San Souci, Robert D., ad. 
The Tsar's Promise; illus. by Lauren Mills. 
Philomel,
1992 
32 p
ISBN 0-399-21581-6 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Romantic watercolors with golden borders illustrate a story retold from Andrew
Lang's Green Fairy Book. Trapped by his father's foolish promise, a Tsar's son
finds himself the prisoner of a water-demon. Fortunately for Ivan, he is loved by
Princess Maria, a talented magician who helps Ivan outwit the demon. The adap-
tation of this complex tale is simply and smoothly written, moving convincingly
from the demon's tricking of the Tsar to Maria's and Ivan's difficult escape. In the
illustrations, Mills has successfully combined a Russian flavor with the universal
fantasy of folklore, with gnarly demons contrasting well with the noble beauty of
Maria and Ivan. For the young lover of fairy tales, this attractive, action-packed
book will become a favorite. KJ
Scieszka, Jon 
The Stinky Cheese Man and Other Fairly Stupid Tales; illus. by
Lane Smith. 
Viking, 1992 
[56 p]
ISBN 0-670-84487-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 2-8
See this month's Big Picture, p. 33.
Seabrooke, Brenda 
The Bridges of Summer. Cobblehill, 1992 
[176p]
ISBN 0-525-65094-6 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-8
Fourteen-year-old Zarah is a flamboyantly creative dancer whose mother has shipped
her off from New York City for a summer's visit with her paternal grandmother,
Quanamina, on an isolated South Carolina island. Zarah confronts the challenge
of maintaining her African-American pride in face of white prejudice-and in face
of Quanamina's hidebound Gullah traditions, which involve both superstition
and strict religious observance, as well as rich historical memories. Finally, Zarah
must also face her grandmother's death and the responsibility for her five-year-old
cousin. This is an ambitious novel that succeeds on the strength of two unique
main characters. The sub-plot of Zarah's friendship with a white visitor her own
age seems strained, though it does add dramatic contrast to the plot. The setting
itself is developed with vivid detail. During the early stages of the novel, Seabrooke's
prose is occasionally overexplanatory: on one page, "'I can't be plain,' she said. 'I
54 
* 
THE BULLETIN
have to be Zarah'"; on the next, "But she couldn't be plain. She just couldn't. She
had to be Zarah." However, the writing intensifies as the focus on the main char-
acters sharpens toward a concentrated and memorable ending. BH
Sender, Ruth Minsky 
The Holocaust Lady. Macmillan, 1992 
[192p]
ISBN 0-02-781832-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-12
Sender's previous memoirs The Cage (BCCB 11/86) and To Life recounted her
childhood and youth in the Lodz ghetto and in Auschwitz; the present book tells
of the author's experiences in America, visiting classrooms and writing to explain
to young people the reality of the Holocaust. Certainly, it is a story that needs to
be told; just as certainly, Sender has the moral authority to tell it. Unfortunately,
this book is so colored with a sense of self-aggrandizement that the truth the author
is attempting to tell becomes obscured behind the egocentricity of the teller. No
one, it seems, has ever quite moved readers or listeners to an understanding of the
Holocaust as has this author: "You are the living Anne Frank," says a Hebrew
school teacher to the author, just one of the many compliments Sender delivers to
herself via the words of others. You don't have to doubt that the man said this to
ask why the author feels the need to recount it. When a doctor acknowledges
Sender's stoic endurance of gallstones ("'Fourteen years.' He sighs. 'Half your life
you lived in pain'"), the supposed focus of the book becomes trivialized, calling the
reader's attention to the author's suffering and strength at the expense of the suffering
and strength experienced by those whom she means to commemorate. This is a
difficult book to criticize, challenging the reviewer's dictum that the book, not the
author, be the subject under review-but Sender has placed herself so far in front
that it is hard to see anything beyond her. RS
Shasha, Mark Night oftheMoonjellies; written and illus. by Mark Shasha. 
Simon,
1992 
33p
ISBN 0-671-77565-0 
$14.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
This is a day-in-the-life story of young Mark, seven years old, who helps out at his
grandmother's hot dog stand on the New England coast. Mark works hard at his
kitchen duties: ".... 
I checked the catsup, mustard and relish jars. I was also in
charge of straws and napkins." After work, his grandmother takes him out in a
boat to return his morning find, a "moonjelly," to its shimmering cousins in the
sea. Evening-lit pastel illustrations on heavily textured paper are sometimes ap-
pealingly naive and sometimes awkward, but varying perspectives and some keen
uses of contrasting colors (the warm ruddy glow of the ship's cabin, for instance,
that precedes the aquamarine palette of the moonjellies at sea) keep the pictures
moving. Kids will love seeing the important child in the thick of grownup work,
and the happy bustle of the nostalgically recreated food stand is an appetizing
milieu. The iridescent moonjellies (presumably some sort of phosphorescent jelly-
fish-a note of explanation for ignorant inland readers would have been useful)
add a serenely otherworldly touch to a cozy summery story. DS
Shreve, Susan 
Wait for Me; illus. by Diane de Groat. 
Tambourine, 1992 
96 p
ISBN 0-688-11120-3 
$13.00 
R Gr. 4-6
Molly has been the baby of her family (youngest of four) and the Baby Bear of her
OCTOBER 1992 
* 
55
group of friends, the Three Bears, and "she loved the warm and cozy safety of her
life as the smallest and the youngest and the most loved." As Molly enters fifth
grade, however, her safe world seems to be falling apart: her brother and sisters no
longer have time for her, and her two best friends (both in the class of "Mr. Will-
iams the great" while Molly has "Mrs. P. Lear the witch") have found a new third
to play with. Molly, hurt and bereft, wishes she were "so important and in such a
hurry that everybody else would beg me to wait for them" and, to achieve her aim,
secretly begins to train for a track event to be held on the school athletic day.
Character and character dynamics are the important things in this book: Shreve
treats Molly's fear of change with tenderness and respect without evading the fact
that Molly has had it pretty easy until now. Molly's family have their own lives to
lead, but they're normal and loving and show up to cheer her on to victory; her
friends don't stop being her friends, but they do drift a bit, as does Molly. A good
example of a readable middle-grades book that doesn't go for a joke a minute, this
is a thoughtful and reassuring treatment of the kind of childhood social dynamics
that many adults dismiss and all kids experience. DS
Soto, Gary 
The Skirt; illus. by Eric Velasquez. 
Delacorte, 1992 
[80p]
ISBN 0-385-30665-2 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Children's anxiety about losing something precious is certainly common enough
to form the basis of a cogent story in which a nine-year-old girl leaves behind, one
Friday afternoon on the school bus, a Mexican folkldrico skirt that belonged to her
mother as a child. Miata is supposed to perform in the skirt Sunday morning, so
the intervening time is tense with her efforts to hide the loss and retrieve the skirt,
a feat she manages just in time for a rather ironic surprise ending. This is light,
easy reading, the dialogue natural and the Mexican-American cultural setting un-
affected. Miata's family and friends are typical without becoming stereotypical,
offering readers a cast and situation with which to identify, whatever their own
ethnic origins. BH
Stanley, Jerry 
Children ofthe Dust Bowl: The True Story ofthe School at Weedpatch
Camp. Crown, 1992 
86 p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-58782-3 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-58781-5 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Illustrated with some classic black-and-white photographs, this is an equitable blend
of background information on the Depression and specifics of a singular school
for migrant children in California. Starting with the controversy raised by
Steinbeck's Grapes of Wrath--which was being banned even as a visionary educa-
tor, Leo Hart, was helping "Okies" build and organize their own school-Stanley
describes the conditions that turned the Panhandle into a dustbowl, the migrant
workers' trials traveling west, their hostile reception in agricultural towns, the preju-
dice "Okie" children faced in schools that didn't want them, and the work Hart
did to educate children from farm-labor camps. Stanley's writing is sturdy but
informal, and a bibliographic note attests to the sources he used to research the
subject. Short, selective, and readable, positive but not unrealistic, this will bring
a bitter phase of U. S. history into clearer focus for young readers. BH
56 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Taylor, Theodore 
Maria: A Christmas Story. 
Harcourt, 1992 
[112p]
ISBN 0-15-217763-9 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Maria Gonzaga lives in a small town in California, where every
Christmas is celebrated with a parade of gorgeous and elaborate floats. No Mexican-
American family or business has ever entered a float in the parade, but Maria,
envious and tired of the prattlings of the Anglo girls about their families' floats
(" . . . hundreds of white and yellow mums, white and red roses, and hundreds of
poinsettias. Everything flowers. Everything. We're calling it 'Winter Garden,'"
gushes one of the girls) announces that her family too will be entering a float. Her
family is poor and her father strict, so although Maria succeeds in getting her
family entered, their meager funds keep them to a simple Nativity scene on an old
wooden wagon. In the parade, however, the biblical simplicity unsurprisingly
wins out over the gaudier entries, and "it was evident the humble had swept away
the grand." This is enough of a fable (it's set "many years ago") that the absence of
serious characterization isn't a problem, and Taylor doesn't make villains of the
rich folks in order to make heroes of the poor. The San Joaquin Valley location
makes for an unusual backdrop to this old-fashioned but still sweet true-meaning-
of-Christmas story. DS
Trivas, Irene Annie ... Anya: A Month in Moscow; written and illus. by Irene
Trivas. Jackson/Orchard, 1992 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08602-X $14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05452-7 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
"Russia is a big fat NYET," grumbles five-year-old Annie, unhappy and homesick
while her family spends a month in Moscow. Nobody speaks English, lines are
long, and Annie misses her familiar peanut butter and banana sandwiches. But the
circus and the subway are fun, and when Annie makes a friend, Anya, in day care,
she soon feels right at home, growing proud of her increasing skill in basic Russian.
Annie's initial resentments and eventual adjustments are neatly rendered, the for-
eign setting a good foil for an at-home dilemma. Line-and-watercolor illustrations
are scrawled with friendly grace, cozy in their depiction of Annie's new friends and
new horizons. RS
Van Allsburg, Chris 
The Widow's Broom; written and illus. by Chris Van
Allsburg. 
Houghton, 1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-64051-2 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 5-8 yrs
An appropriately tallbook, this is the sly story of a broom abandoned after it loses
power midflight and falls with its witch into the garden of a widow named Minna
Shaw. After finding the broom sweeping obsessively by itself, Minna Shaw teaches
it to carry water, feed the chickens, chop wood, and bring the cows in from pas-
ture. "It could even pick out simple tunes on the piano." Shaw and most of the
neighboring women find the broom innocently helpful, but one farmer calls it an
instrument of the devil and eventually stirs people up to burn it. But what have
they burned? A ghostly white broom returns for its revenge; a contented (and
clever) Minna Shaw gets to keep her magic companion. In addition to being a
OCTOBER 1992 
* 57
neatly understated piece of storytelling, this fuels Van Allsburg's best kind of illus-
tration--darkly rounded, speckle-textured art with eerie effects. The broom has
an extra-expressive handle that goes about its business without ever getting cute.
The doubling of the unexpectedly beautiful young witch and the sensible heroine
delivers a healthy dose of female power, which kids can subconsciously digest while
enjoying the slightly scary images tempered with a text given to straight-faced
humor. Great for Halloween-Van Allsburg has a sense of the deep mystery that
holiday rituals hold for children, witness Polar Express (BCCB 10/85)-but you
won't be able to put this broom away any more than Minna Shaw could. It will
sweep the boards twelve months of the year. BH
Vigna, Judith 
Black Like Kyra, White Like Me; written and illus. by Judith
Vigna. 
Whitman, 1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-0778-4 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
With the same direct delicacy that characterized her story Nobody Wants a Nuclear
War (BCCB 10/86), Vigna develops an explosive social situation: a neighborhood's
racist response to the young narrator's best friend, Kyra Kirk, who is black and
who moves in next door with her family. Christy, knowing Kyra from their youth
center, first notices her own mother's reluctance to invite Mrs. Kirk for coffee,
then worries about several kids' refusal to play with Kyra ("It's because I'm black,"
Kyra tells her), and finally is shocked when a block party turns ugly after the Kirks'
arrival ("What's next, firebombs?" asks Mr. Kirk after he finds his van with flat-
tened tires). Although this is clearly a story generated to address a problem, it is,
nevertheless, a story with well-defined action and two involving characters; the
purposeful doesn't become generic. Unframed watercolor illustrations are light
enough to balance the heavy theme without opting for any cute effects, and the
ending is both natural and hopeful-some of Christy's friends move away, but her
best friend, Kyra, stays. Just as natural and hopeful would be the inclusion of this
book in primary-grade discussion groups: tomorrow's neighborhood starts in the
classroom. BH
Whelan, Gloria 
Goodbye, Vietnam. 
Knopf, 1992 
136p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-92263-6 
$13.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-82263-1 
$13.00 
R* Gr. 4-7
Mai, thirteen, and her family have to escape from Vietnam because her grand-
mother has come under suspicion of practicing folk medicine and "the old reli-
gion." The family-including the very reluctant grandmother-goes to the coastal
town of Go Cong, where they board a boat bound for Hong Kong, hoping even-
tually to get to America. Southeast Asian refugees have been the subject of several
novels for children, but this one has a rare simplicity and sharp focus. While the
book has the suspense and appeal of any good escape story, Whelan is neither
melodramatic nor sentimental, and the sometimes horrific details of the scary voy-
age are plain but understated. Mai is a credible and involving narrator; the charac-
terization of the grandmother is particularly fresh, with the crabby old woman
surprising everyone with her resourcefulness. The story ends with Mai's family on
their way to America; a sequel would be welcome but is by no means necessary.
RS
58 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Williams, Sherley Anne 
Working Cotton; illus. by Carole Byard. 
Harcourt,
1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-299624-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
"We get to the fields early, before it's even light. Sometimes I still be asleep. It be
cold, cold, cold." Thus begins an African-American child's description of a day
helping her family pick cotton. Shelan is not yet old enough to have her own sack,
but she piles up cotton for her mother, with a break for cornbread and greens at
lunchtime, till almost dark: "Us all be tired. Daddy take the baby; Mama take the
bundle. Me and Ruise, Jesmarie carry the sacks." The drama here is all in the
double-spread acrylic paintings, which make even the cotton seem action-packed,
the powerful body of the father projecting all the more motion. These are monu-
mentalized figures laboring against a deeply colored but sparely composed back-
ground. The time and place seem deliberately unspecified, though the temperature,
palm trees, and clothing make a contemporary California migrant scene more likely
than an Old South sharecropping situation. Whatever the case, it's a slice of life
that's presented without judgment or story, but the arresting art and brief text-
only two or three lines per page-will bring home an organic experience of work
that few children have known or even imagined. BH
Wurmfeld, Hope Herman 
Baby Blues. Viking, 1992 
74p
ISBN 0-670-84151-X 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
After Annie's father dies, her boyfriend Jimmy virtually becomes her whole world:
her brothers are grown, her mother is long dead, and she's dropped out of high
school. Soon Annie is pregnant, and she denies the fact until it's too late for an
abortion. After connecting with an adoption agency and social worker, Annie
decides, with difficulty and regret but with Jimmy's support, to place the baby for
adoption. Annie's subdued and touching narration is conversationally colloquial
in style, and her confusion and ambivalence are realistically depicted. Wurmfeld,
who notes that the story comes from thinking about her own biological parents,
wisely avoids depicting any characters as bad guys or saints; Annie's older brother
is grieved but staunchly loyal, Jimmy's friends, an Outsiders-ish gang of sorts, re-
main close, and Annie herself is sad and a touch waif-like without being a down-
trodden victim. Novels depicting teen pregnancy usually don't deal so explicitly
with the placement process, and this readable book is especially perceptive about
the subtle day to day emotions of one important time in a young girl's life. DS
Zak, Monica 
Save My Rainforest; illus. by Bengt-Arne Runnerstrom; tr. by
Nancy Schimmel. 
Volcano, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-912078-94-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Based on a true story, this tells of one little boy's determination to save the one
remaining rain forest in his native Mexico. Omar has always dreamed about visit-
ing the Lacandon Rainforest, and when he hears on the news that the rainforest is
being gradually destroyed, he determines to do something about it. A letter to the
President accomplishes nothing, so Omar decides to walk to Chiapas-870 miles
away-and plead with the state governor. A suprise ally turns up in Omar's father,
who goes along on the walk. This picture book, originally published in Sweden
and illustrated with literal, sometimes naive watercolors, can't help but be didac-
OCTOBER 1992 
* 
59
tic; nevertheless, the cause, the father-and-son bond, and the pilgrimage will all
have great appeal for story hour crusaders. There's some confusion in a scene
where Omar visits a rainforest that does not appear to be the rainforest he means to
save; this could have been cleared up in the concluding note. As both the note and
the story indicate, neither Omar's walk nor a subsequent meeting with Mexico's
president stops the destruction of the forest, but his persistence is both admirable
and apparently indefatigable. RS
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
The genesis of a publishing trend can be mysterious in blending economic, social,
aesthetic, and accidental factors. During the late 1960s and early 1970s, federal
money to buy children's books converged with an active civil rights movement, an
artistic African-American renaissance, and some chance meetings between new
talents and newly aware editors to produce the first wave of children's literature
about the black experience. When money got tight and the country went conser-
vative, the wave diminished to a trickle, and for nearly a decade librarians and
teachers-fearing, perhaps, a return to the lily-white world of pre-sixties children's
literature-legitimately decried the lack of books by and about African Americans.
Now another high tide has surged with cyclical inevitability, partly due to new
educational markets opened up by the whole language movement, partly by the
sturdy efforts of a few determined creators and consumers, and partly by a public
preference for handsome picture books relying on brief poetic or folkloric texts.
All of these factors and more have contributed to an exciting new wave of
African-American, African, Caribbean, and black British picture books for children.
Of course, there's the usual backwash of titles more trendy than trend-setting, and
both parents and professionals need to bear in mind that political correctness is no
substitute for good storytelling and story art. (I recently overheard a book discussion
group praise a book for the sole qualification that it was "multi-cultural.") The
importance of the African-American experience does not make black nostalgia any
better than white, when nostalgia is used as a substitute for plot. One of the
brutally honest ways of wading through this trend is to ask whether the story or art
would be considered strong enough to sustain the book-and energetic young
listeners' attention-if it were about middle-class white kids.
Happily, the answer is yes in many cases of recent picture book literature
(as well as fiction for older readers, as we shall see in The Big Picture of an upcom-
60 
* THE BULLETIN
ing issue). A random sampling in the September and October issues of The Bulle-
tin includes Mary Hoffman's Amazing Grace, Virginia Hamilton's Drylongso, Lloyd
Alexander's The Fortune Tellers, Donald Crews' Shortcut, Mary-Joan Gerson's
Why the Sky is Far Away, Sherley Anne Williams' Working Cotton, Judith Vigna's
Black Like Kyra, White Like Me, and Ashley Bryan's Sing to the Sun. Some of
these are written by black writers, some by white; some are illustrated by black
artists, some by white; some are by "mixed" teams; the color of a creator is touchy
stuff in the U.S. The question of whether whites can write about blacks and vice
versa is too complicated for the scope of this column, but carried to extremes, it
leads to the question of whether any human being can write about another. Is
Trina Schart Hyman, who is white and whose grandson is half African, qualified
to paint a story about Cameroon, where she has traveled extensively? Fortunately,
people are more complex than the politics that separate them. People fall in love,
and their colors get mixed up; or they learn to love, and their colors enhance each
other. There's no better way to start that process than with stories: reading aloud,
booktalking, and storytelling in a library or classroom. Multicultural literacy starts
with the selective acquisition and imaginative use of the multicultural array of
books you see reviewed.
Betsy Hearne, Editor
We have recently received two new multicultural resources for teachers and librar-
ians. Margaret Read MacDonald has compiled Peace Tales: World Folktales to
Talk About, a collection of thirty-four tales with themes of conflict and peace,
argument and community. The publisher is Linnet/Shoe String; the hardcover
edition is $22.50 (ISBN 0-208-02328-3), the paperback is $13.95 (ISBN 0-208-
02329-1). The retellings are crisp; notes and suggestions for telling are appended;
a multicultural index gives access to the stories. 116p.
The New York Public Library Office of Young Adult Services offers Global Beat:
A List of Multi-Cultural Books for Teenagers. The thirty-four page pamphlet is
organized by regions("India and Pakistan," "Africa, South of the Sahara"), and is
annotated with an eye toward teenaged browsers. Copies are $5.00 dollars each
with a mailing charge of $1.00. Order from the Office of Branch Libraries, The
New York Public Library, 455 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10016.
OCTOBER 1992 
* 61
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this new index, which
will appear in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-
CAPS refer to genres and appeals. In no way meant to be a cataloging aid, this
rather idiosyncratic index is instead intended to lead readers to those books re-
viewed that could fill a particular gap in a collection; to help teachers and librarians
find books that might be useful in various school or recreational settings; and to
help in those requests for a "love story" or a "scary story." In the case of subject
headings, the subhead "stories" refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fic-
tion," to those books intended for independent reading. Although subscriber re-
sponse to The Bulletin 's format, features, and reviews is always welcome, we would
especially like to hear your comments about the usefulness of this new index and
your advice for ways it could be expanded or improved. Please direct your sugges-
tions to executive editor Roger Sutton at the editorial office address found on page
32.
Acrobats-stories: McCully
Adoption-fiction: Wurmfeld
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Macken
Africa, ancient-fiction: Bradshaw
African-Americans-biography:
Porter
African-Americans-fiction:
Hamilton; Seabrooke
African-Americans-poetry: Bryan
African-Americans-stories:
Crews; Vigna; Williams
Antarctica: Pringle
Arctic regions-poetry: Carlstrom
Australia: Darling
BEDTIME STORIES: Barasch;
Carlstrom
BIOGRAPHIES: Porter;
Sender
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Macken
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Le Guin
California: Brimner
Camps-stories: Cummings
Cancer-fiction: Krisher
Caribbean Islands-poetry: Bryan
Cats-stories: Killilea
Chickens-stories: King-Smith
CHRISTMAS STORIES:
dePaola; Taylor
Civil War-fiction: Beatty
Clowns and circuses-stories:
dePaola
Columbus Day: Dorris
CONCEPT BOOKS: Miller
Coyotes-stories: Begay
Death-fiction: Bechard
Depression, The: Stanley
Depression, The-fiction: Myers
Desert islands-stories: Conrad
Dogs-stories: Killilea; Osofsky
Drought-fiction: Hamilton
Earth Science: Pringle
Ecology: Pringle; Zak
Ellis Island-fiction: Hesse
Emotional problems-fiction:
Anderson
Ethics and values: Sender; Vigna;
Zak
EVERYDAY LIFE STORIES:
Hughes; Shreve; Soto
FAIRYTALES AND
FOLKTALES: Begay; Gerson;
Le Guin; San Souci; Scieszka
Family reading: Krull; Miller;
Scieszka
FANTASY: Bradshaw
Farming-fiction: Hamilton
Food and eating: Darling; Robbins
Food and eating-fiction: Buller
62 
* THE BULLETIN
Food and eating-stories: Barasch;
Gerson
Friends-fiction: Avi; Bechard;
Shreve
FUNNY STORIES: Buller;
Cummings; Sachar
Gold Rush: Lourie
Grandparents-fiction: Seabrooke
Grandparents-stories: Houghton
Growing up-fiction: Bauer; Lee
Halloween: Littlewood;
Van Allsburg
HISTORICAL FICTION: Avi;
Beatty; Dorris; Myers
History, American: Dorris
History, U. S.: Beatty; Myers;
Stanley
Holocaust, The-Sender
Homelessness-stories: Gottlieb
Horses and riding: Beirne
Hurston, Zora Neale: Porter
Immigration-fiction: Hesse
Ireland-fiction: Macken
Jews: Sender
Jews-fiction: Hesse
Korean-Americans-fiction: Lee
Language arts: Agee; Scieszka
Mental retardation-fiction:
Anderson
Mexican-Americans-fiction:
Soto; Taylor
Mexico-stories: Zak
Migrant workers: Brimner
Music: Hausherr; Krull
Native Americans-fiction: Dorris
Native Americans-folklore:
Begay
Native Americans-poetry:
Carlstrom
Nature study: Lerner; Petit
Nigeria-folklore: Gerson
Nutrition: Robbins
Paris-stories: McCully
Pets-stories: King-Smith
Physical disabilities: Krementz
Physical disabilities-fiction:
Anderson
Physical disabilities-stories:
Osofsky
Plants: Lerner
Pregnancy, teen-fiction:
Wurmfeld
Pumpkins-fiction: Bauer
Quakers-fiction: Beatty
Rabbits-stories: Barasch
Radio-fiction: Avi
Rainforests-stories: Zak
Reading aloud: Bryan; Avi;
Hamilton
Reading, easy: Buller; Sachar;
Fritz
Reading, reluctant: Scieszka;
Whelan
Restaurants-stories: Shasha
Rivers: Lourie
Rural life-fiction: Bauer; Myers
Rural life-stories: Williams
Russia-folklore: San Souci
Safety: Crews
Scarecrows: Littlewood
Schools: Stanley
Ships and sailing-stories: Conrad
Social issues: Brimner; Vigna; Zak
Story hour: Barasch; Bryan;
Carlstrom; Conrad; Crews;
Gerson; Gottlieb; Houghton;
Killilea; Le Guin; McCully;
Miller; Van Allsburg
Summer-stories: Shasha
SUSPENSE STORIES: Rose
Tasmanian devils: Darling
Time travel-stories: Houghton
Toads-stories: Begay
Trains-stories: Crews
Uncles-fiction: Bechard
United States-folksongs: Krull
Vegetables-stories: Barasch
Vietnam-fiction: Whelan
Washington, Mary Ball: Fritz
Wildlife: Darling
Witches-stories: Van Allsburg
Wordplay: Agee
Work-Shasha; Williams
World War II-fiction: Avi
Yukon: Lourie
AUGUST 
Rapunzel
The Top and the Ball 
Illus. by Carol Heyer
By Hans Christian Andersen 
32 pps., 9 x 11, ages 5 to 8
Illus. by Elisabeth Nyman 
Library ISBN: 0-8249-8585-0, $15.00
32 pps., 113/4 x 9 3/4, ages 5 to 8 
Trade Hardcover ISBN:
0-8249-8558-3, 
$14.95
0-8249-8575-3, $11.'
Paper ISBN:
0-8249-8560-5, $3.9
How Do I Move?
Library ISBN:
0-8249-8578-8, $11.1
Paper ISBN:
0-8249-8563-X, $3.9
Where Do I Live?
Library ISBN:
0-8249-8576-1, $11.1
Paper ISBN:
0-8249-8561-3, $3.9'
Whose Baby Am IY
Library ISBN:0-8249
Paper ISBN: 0-8249-
Traditions and Customs from Around the World
By Pamela Kennedy
Art research by F. Lynne Bachleda
32 pps., 10 x 8, ages 7 to 10 
®@1
Library ISBN: 0-8249-8587-7, $12.00
Trade ISBN: 0-8249-8551-6, $11.95
Trade Hardcover ISBN:
0-8249-8552-4, $15.95
Where the Buffalo Roam
Adapted and illus.
by Jacqueline Geis
32 pps., 9 1/2 x 8 1/2
Ages 5 to 8
Library ISBN:
0-8249-8584-2, $14.00
Trade Hardcover ISBN:
0-8249-8470-2, $13.95
On Top
of Old Smoky
A Collection
of Songs and Stories
192, Oxford Scientific Films
from Appalachia
Illus. by Linda Anderson
40 pps., 9 x 9, all ages.
Library ISBN:
0-8249-8586-9, $14.00
Trade Hardcover ISBN:
0-8249-8569-9, $13.95
IDEAL 
CHLRE' 
BOK
P.. ox1030,NAHILETN321.00
1-8 0-27-11
BSIy rarbiL 
N: 
0-8249-8583-4, 
$15.00
Trade 
ISBN: 
0-8249-8547-8, 
$14.95
SEPTEMBER
A Christmas Celeb
OCTOBER
Animals Q & A Series 
Children in Art
By Shirley Greenway 
By Robin Richmond
Photographs by Oxford Scientific 
Illus. with fine art from around
Films, 32 pps., 6 7/8 x 7 1/4 
the world
Ages 4 to 7 
48 pps., 8 1/2 x 11, ages 7 to 10
Can You See Me? 
Library ISBN:
Librarv ISBN: 
08248588Library 
ISBN:
"A satirical parable, buoyed up
by delicious visual whimsy"*
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
li~i~t~t~
New from the Imagine Living Here Series
This Place is CROWDEDJapan
"The impact ofgeography on culture comes across loud and
clear: festivals and lore ofthis island country are explained,
and efforts to conserve resources are highlighted....
Those familiar with this series will recognize Lavallee's art....
luminous, intense, and beautifully designed."
-
School Library Journal
This Place is Crowded: Japan
Written by Vicki Cobb
Illustrations by Barbara Lavallee
Cloth ISBN 0-8027-8145-4 $14.95
Reinf. ISBN 0-8027-8146-2 $15.85
, Walker and Company*720 Fifth Avenue New York, NY 10019 (212) 265-3632
A popular
high fantasy
saga concludes
LAURENCE YEP's
DMI0HN WAR
dragon princess, and her friends join her beleaguered kin as they
fight for their lives. A rare glimpse of Chinese mythic patterns."
-School Library Journal
"Will have a special appeal to buffs of the genre and to Yep
fans who have responded to the drama and suspense of the
previous volumes, which were just as action-packed as this
mission-accomplished volume."
-Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
Ages 12 up. $15.00* (020302-1); $14.89t (020303-X)
S/ 
Laurence Yep's Three
DRAGON OF THE LOST SEA
A 1982 ALA Notable Children's Book
Ages 12 up. Harper Trophy paper ed. $3.95* (440227-4)
SDRAGON STEEL
1985 Ages 12 up. $16.89t (026751-8)
DRAGON CAULDRON
1991 Ages 12 up. $16.95* (026753-4); $16.89t (026754-2)
HarperCollins ISBN prefix 0 06. *Trade ed. tLibrary ed. Publisher's prices only and in no way reflect the prices at
which available from any other source
*HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 E. 53rd St., New York 10022
# Kirkus Reviews pointer
MICHELLE MAGORIAN
During World War II, seventeen-year-old Roe and her two
slightly older sisters spend a summer on their own in a
small English seacoast village. There, as Roe enters her
first love affair, she discovers the diaries of a World War I
unmarried mother who describes events paralleling Roe's
own life.... "With a satisfying dramatic plot, plenty of
likable characters, a vividly evoked setting, and several
contrasting love stories-an unusually engrossing and
memorable novel." -Kirkus Reviews
Ages 12 up. $17.00* (024214-0); $16.89t (024215-9)
A Laura Geringer Book
Nioveis by Michelle Magorian
BACK HOME
1984 ALA Best Book for Young Adults
Ages 12 up. Harper Trophy Paper ed.
$4.95* (440411-0)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
GOOD NIGHT, MR. TOM
wnen -ansei ana uretel try to eat tme witcnhs gingeroread nouse in the
woods, are they indulging their "uncontrolled cravings" and "destructive
desires," or are they simply responding normally to the hunger pangs they
feel after being abandoned by their parents? Challenging Bruno Bettelheim
and other critics who read fairy tales as enactments of children's untamed
urges, Maria Tatar argues that it is time to stop casting the children as
villains. In this provocative book she explores how adults mistreat children
and concludes with meditations on violence, cannibalism, and conflicts
between parents and children.
"... a valuable and immensely readable book .... 
indispensable to
a serious examination of the effect on children of folk tales."
-Boston Globe
Cloth: $24.95 ISBN 0-691-06943-3
Princeton University Press
41 WILLIAM ST., PRINCETON, NJ 08540 * ORDERS: 800-777- 4726 * OR FROM YOUR LOCAL BOOKSTORE
Walk in Peace
Legends and Stories 
sionoo
.
Illustrated by
of the Michigan Indians 
Kaylecrampton
A storyteller and Odawa
elder, Simon Otto offers
from his own heritage a
selection of legends and
stories in the Anishnabe
(Odawa/Ojibway) oral
tradition. They feature
Nanaboozhoo, hero and
prankster with magical
powers, and tell of the time
when Mother Earth was yet
growing and all the animals
could talk and understand
SS
C)
2
.4. -**
z;. 
.,....
C 
.. 
.-
At bookstores or from University of Nebraska Press
901 N 17. Lincoln 68588-0520 -(800)755-1105 publishers since 1941
W-HO'S WHO IN ABEARICA
Univers
54 Est
Chanp
U.SA
n,
IRrTUn 
PoSTAmE GuANzto
___~ ;
Cawn by dv New York Public Library
for its 1991 Books for the Ten Age List
Seed of Sarah
Memoirs of a Survivor
Second edition
Judith Magyar Isaacson
This gripping and highly acclaimed
account of a young woman's experiences
in concentration camps includes a new
final chapter, "A Time to Forgive?" detail-
ing the author's recent trips back to her
former forced labor camp in Germany.
ary, the author dreamed of studying litera-
er reality was forced labor in the notorious
rs ir 
t alive, as her own was, through humor
"As a teenager in Kaposvar, Hungary, the author dreamed of studying litera-
ture at the Sorbonne. At age 19, her reality was forced labor in the notorious
camp of Auschwitz. Her memoir of that experience is a testament to the
reilince of the human spirit, kept alive, as her own was, through humor
and creativity. Isaacson tells of evading selection by the feared Dr. Mengele
for transport with other young women to the Russian front; of her transfer to
Lichtenau; and, after the Allied liberation, meeting the American intelligence
offer who became her husband. Based on indelible recollections, a return
trip to Hungary and research into the Hungarian Holocaust, this is an
eloquent picture of a life before and after." - P/Wshers Wak y
Cloth, $18.95; also in paper, $12.95
Ocdmr tof A c 80wt5454703 froH
University of Illinois Press
54 E. Gregory Drive * Champaign, IL 61820
f *
Uityo
Gre
9n54 
E 
G
' Chamain
;
U.SA.
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAP•AGN, IL
University of Illinois Prms 
SECOND ClASS
54 East Gregoty Drive 
POSTAGE
ChaznpaignIL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
C1v.dPiuc~, IL
f Ilinois Prem 
Sico
gory Drive 
POSTAGE
IL 61820 
pgu
