I LLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
028.05
CH
52:8
1999 Ant
LSX
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
r 
: 
I:
+ Kirkus Reviews pointer
gloss over the devastation and savagery of war; the battle
scenes are brutal but captivating . . . Readers will devour
this powerful, stirring novel in one sitting."
-Pointer review/Kirkus Reviews
"The novel is well researched and exciting, the action is fast
paced and engrossing. History lessons have never been so
much fun." -ALA Booklist
Ages 12 up. $16.95 TR (0-06-027186-8)
Also by Carnegie Medal Winner Mollie Hunter
A STRANGER CAME ASHORE 
THE MERMAID SUMMER
Ages 10 up 
Ages 8-12
$4.95 PB (0-06-440082-4) 
$14.89 LB (0-06-022628-5)
$4.95 PB (0-06-440344-0)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
S HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022 * http://www.harperchildrens.com
I
'Seven years in the life
of a boy's service to
Robert the Bruce, King
of Scots, are chronicled
in this enthralling,
action-packed historical
novel about the
trumping of English
forces in 14th-century
Scotland. Martin
Crawford is a clever
young man of 16 when
the Bruce accepts [him]
as his page, and from
there, Martin learns how
to contribute to the fight
for his homeland,
maturing from a wide-
eyed youth to a
seasoned and astute
spy. Hunter doesn't
Save 15% as a new subscriber to The Bulletin, published by the University of Illinois Press in
cooperation with the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science.
[ Please enter my subscription to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, beginning
with the current issue, at the rate checked below. Published monthly except August.
Q Individuals
l Institutions
Introductory
J $29.75
J $34.00
City
Renewal
o $35.00
0 $40.00
Outside U.S.A., add $7.00 for postage
Please mail form to the University of Illinois Press, BCCB, 1325 South Oak Street, Champaign,
IL 61820. Credit card orders may be placed by phone- 
call 217-333-8935. 
BI
Payment options
O Charge my 0 MasterCard 0 
VISA
Exp. Date_____ Account No.
;
Niame
Name
I 3 
_I
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
April 1999
Vol. 52 No. 8
cr/4i
r4
A LOOK INSIDE
269 THE BIG PICTURE
Come On, Rain! by Karen Hesse; illus. by Jon J Muth
270 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
271 
* William Shakespeare & the Globe written and illus. by Aliki
272 * When Sophie Gets Angry-Really, Really Angry ... written and illus. by
Molly Bang
280 * In Search of the Spirit: The Living National Treasures ofJapan written
and illus. by Sheila Hamanaka and Ayano Ohmi and with photographs
286 * Whitechurch by Chris Lynch
298 * Lena by Jacqueline Woodson
299 CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 1999
301 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Janice N. Harrington, Reviewer (JNH)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1999 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Jon J Muth from Come On, Rain!©1999. Used by permission of Scholastic
Press.
APRIL 1999 
* 269
THE BIG PICTURE
Come On, Rain!
by Karen Hesse; illustrated by Jon J Muth
One of the occasional saving graces of working several months ahead of ourselves,
as we do here, is that we get treated to reminders of the oncoming spring and
summer while we're still trudging through the snow and wondering if warmer
days are ever coming. And for sheer sense memory of life in the city under the
implacable summer sun, it's hard to beat Come On, Rain!
In it, three weeks of city heat are taking their toll on the plants ("Mamma
lifts a listless vine and sighs") and on the people: young narrator Tessie laments
that she is "sizzling like a hot potato." "Cats pant" and "heat wavers off tar patches
in the broiling alleyway," but Tessie is hopefully eyeing the big gray clouds in the
distance. She nips down the block to alert her friend Jackie-Joyce to the possibility
of sweet, rewarding rain ("Put on your suit and come straight over"). Jackie-Joyce
pulls in the other girls from the block, and the neighborhood ofswimsuited kids is
soon dancing through the streets under the blessed relief of a sudden downpour-
and they're then joined by their "barelegged mammas," themselves frolicking
through the refreshing shower, all revivified by the benediction of rain.
Hesse's measured prose is evocative without weighing itself down out of
childish perception: the phraseology is freshly apt (gardening Mamma kneels "over
the hot rump of a melon") and the understated details of Tessie's neighborhood
reconnoiterings ("I cross the crackling-dry path past Miz Glick's window... glancing
inside as I hurry by") give a sense of community. Particularly superlative is the
book's natural inclusion of all the telling details of weather, summer, and city.
The smells of hot tar and summer garbage float through the pages, every move is
labored with sweat, Tessie kindly makes her mother a glass of iced tea but takes a
predictable commission ("I aim a spoonful of sugar into my mouth, then a second
into the drink"), and the rain's advance breeze alternates between fluttering and
snatching at the curtains. The excitement of the rain itself is poetically expressed
("tromping through puddles, romping and reeling in the moisty green air") but
never distanced by artistry, revealing the recognized joy of this familiar experience
in a new but still authentic way.
In a stunning and worthy counterpart to Hesse's evocative text, Muth's
watercolors bring the oppressive temperatures to life. Scenes of heat employ ap-
propriately complementary ochre washes over the city and lilac and indigo shad-
ows; specifics ranging from the haze over the city rooftops to the sheen of sweat on
Mamma's brown arms speak volumes about the relentlessness of the heat wave.
The art makes the most of perky Tessie's considerable charm, capturing the wiry
litheness of so many young girls as she gallops across the neighborhood and cavorts
in the street (a particularly endearing image is a Kilroy-esque view of her peering,
270 
* THE BULLETIN
pigtails at a quizzical angle, over the windowsill into Miz Glick's apartment); grown-
ups get a fair shake too, with Mamma's harder time with the heat coming across
clearly in the tilt of her body as she presses the cool iced-tea glass to her neck.
Compositions are consistently imaginative without resorting to distracting flashi-
ness: one page foregrounds the girls' conversation with a shadowed alley stairwell
that jealously guards its cool spot; the spreads introducing the rain itself switch
from a hands-only shot (as the girls reach up to the ripening skies), to a feet-only
picture (as the drops hit the dust and begin to make patterns in the alley pave-
ment); the view then looks down on the gaggle of girls as the rain comes in earnest
and balances that perspective out a few spreads later by gazing up at the girls'
rejoicing mothers leaning out over their balcony railings. Come the rain, however,
all is changed-Muth's decorous draftsmanship gives way to high-action squiggles
and washes of liquid color for the frolicking mother-daughter pairs, culminating
in a final opalescent spread of the reawakened and rain-cleansed city in which
Mamma and Tessie walk hand-in-hand along a shimmering sidewalk.
This has, perhaps deliberately, a timeless feel-there's an absence of air-
conditioning and the appearance of a gramophone, but the shoes look fairly
sneakerish and the sweat and heat are, of course, eternal. It will therefore imme-
diately nudge the audience into recollections of the previous summer while re-
minding readers aloud of summers long gone, perhaps even providing a bridge
between those recollections. (And if you're looking for a gentle way to break the
news about summer to a child from a more forgiving clime, this will let them
know what they're in for.) Textually and illustratively, this is unerring and vivid,
needing only the smell of rain on hot concrete and waterproof pages to be com-
plete. Come on, summer. Come on, rain. Let's dance. (Imprint information
appears on p. 281.)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR ~HILDREN AND YOUNG IEOPLE
ALEXANDER, LLOYD 
Gypsy Rizka. 
Dutton, 1999 
[176p]
ISBN 0-525-46121-3 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Rizka has a knack for deflating pompous bureaucrats, and that's just one of the
reasons the town council of Greater Dunitsa (a fantasy city in a fantasy nation that
is sort of an Eastern European Spanish Rumania) wants her run out of town. But,
as Fibich the city clerk points out, Rizka doesn't live in town, she lives in a wagon,
a gypsy vardo, on the edge of town, where she awaits the return of her gypsy father
who left some years ago. With the help of her agile mind and her not-inconsider-
able allies Big Franco, the blacksmith and Sofiya, the mayor's rapscallion daugh-
ter, Rizka makes fools look like bigger fools, unites the lovers of warring houses,
haunts the town hall, and even (briefly) becomes the mayor of greater Dunitsa. In
'lLt 
v\ 
'1I'1
APRIL 1999 
* 271
the end Rizka has the chance to leave Dunitsa but chooses instead to remain with
those she has come to love. The pace of Alexander's latest title rises and falls, one
chapter setting up the joke (the rise), and the next chapter bringing it to fruition
(the fall). It is clear from the outset that Rizka is unbeatable, but that is part of her
charm. She is a combination of sly trickster, benevolent witch, and lonely adoles-
cent, and her adventures bubble with slapstick humor and even a little bittersweet
pathos. The good guys are good, and the bad guys are, well, stupid-and that
makes for a very funny story. One could almost see this as a sort of "Perils of
Pauline" type serial, if Pauline were clever, funny, and too smart to wind up on the
railroad tracks in the first place. The episodic nature of the chapters will make this
a successful readaloud with a heroine to applaud and to admire. JMD
ALIKI 
William Shakespeare 6e the Globe; written and illus. by
Aliki. 
HarperCollins, 1999 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027821-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027820-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-7
Not merely another biography of the Bard, this visually eclectic book makes Shakes-
peare the center of theater history, history being uncovered and recreated now in
London's new/old Globe Theatre. Simple text describes Shakespeare's life, the
Elizabethan world and entertainments, and the ups and downs of the theatrical
industry ("A deadly plague interrupted the Theatre's success. For two years all
playhouses were closed"), including tidbits such as the Burbage brothers' piece-by-
piece theft of the original Globe Theatre. A fast-forward to the twentieth century
then treats Sam Wanamaker's dream of making the Globe rise again, providing
technical insight into the process of building a Tudor theater in the current day
(they "added to the thatched roof what Will's Globe never had-a sprinkler sys-
tem"). In addition to the main text, pages sport views of the period, people (occa-
sionally overburdened with contemporary glamor), or process, complete with
explanatory captions (some of which are rather awkwardly phrased), plus
Shakespearean quotes (of varying degrees of relevance); there is also a multitude of
diagrams, maps, character galleries, and other variants that result in an inviting
exploration of the Wooden O and the world that attended it. End matter includes
a list of Shakespeare's plays and poems and a chronology of theatrical events, both
Tudor/Stuart and contemporary, plus a spread of Shakespeare-originated words
and expressions (which is a bit overgenerous in credit, but nonetheless informative
and entertaining). As well as making a lively companion to Stanley's Bard ofAvon
(BCCB 12/92), this could lend a Shakespearean sparkle to explorations of drama
or literary history. DS
ANDERSON, LAURIE HALSE 
No Time for Mother's Day; illus. by Dorothy
Donohue. Whitman, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-4955-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
Charity Chatfield is in a quandary: Mother's Day is only two days away, and she
has no present for her beloved, overly busy mom. Suggestions from her class-
mates, her father, and even her cousin Fred (whose mom gave him a list and the
money to buy her presents) don't inspire her. In the middle of the night, after
spending the day watching her mom juggle errands, job, faxes, and cell phone,
272 
* THE BULLETIN
Charity comes up with the perfect gift-a peaceful day. She tells her mom, "I
unplugged the little clocks and stopped the big ones. Everything that beeps or
bleeps or buzzes is turned off. Your Mother's Day present is time to do whatever
you want. Just for fun." Anderson's message may be a tad heavy, but the story
doesn't sink under the weight, mainly because of the light, humorous text.
Donohue's watercolor, ink, and pencil illustrations add additional buoyancy to
this holiday story with a flashy, cartoony style that intensifies the available humor
for maximum effect. Characters burst out of energetically crowded compositions,
their neon-colored clothes and exuberant body language adding a lively counter-
point to Anderson's tale. JMD
ATWATER-RHODES, AMELIA 
In the Forests ofthe Night. 
Delacorte, 1999 
[144p]
ISBN 0-385-32674-2 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Risika used to be Rachel three hundred years ago, when she died and was made a
vampire. Now she prowls the night, shapeshifting at will and hunting when she
needs to, until she realizes that she's encroaching on the territory of her old vam-
pire nemesis Aubrey, and she determines that it's finally time for her to challenge
him in payback for his killing of her beloved brother. Though mannered, the
prose has style and flow ("This human's blood was thick and hot, boiling with pure
life and energy. It wet my parched mouth and brought down my fever, and I
drank it like a healing ambrosia"), and the visuals ofvampirish existence are evoked
with appealing detail. Unfortunately, the structure beneath the surface is often
shoddily constructed: the dialogue is flat and overextended, the emotional reso-
nance sometimes lacking when it's most needed (Risika's putative attachment to a
caged tiger seems merely a device), and the vampire powers simultaneously over-
broad and underexplained, which muddles the great showdown. The style and the
world are inviting, however, and readers will relish them as well as appreciating
some of Risika's moral struggles (after turning vampire, she feeds on and nearly
kills her father's new wife). This doesn't have the tang of Thirsty (BCCB 4/97) or
its illustrious and bloody kin, but vampire fans, especially those intrigued by the
youth of the author (her bio states she's fourteen), may still find their mouths
watering. DS
BANG, MOLLY 
When Sophie Gets Angry-Really, Really Angry ... ; written and
illus. by Molly Bang. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-18979-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
Sophie loses a tug-of-war altercation with her sister over a stuffed monkey, and her
anger propels her out of the house and into an anger-reducing run. After running,
crying, climbing a tree, and being soothed by the breeze, Sophie feels better and
goes home, where everyone is happy to see her. Bang has captured a young child's
uncontrollable eruption of anger in both language ("She kicks. She screams. She
wants to smash the world to smithereens") and images (when Sophie "roars a red,
red roar," she really does). In the scenes where Sophie's rage is the impetus, the
objects in the hotly colored illustrations are outlined in a flaming orange red; as
Sophie calms down, the outline changes to a soothing pink, then to cool blues and
greens, and finally to the cheerful yellow outlines of the domestic scenes. The
double-page spreads are colored in a fiesta palette of warm yellows, saturated blues,
APRIL 1999 
* 
273
and acid greens. In the closing spreads the yellow floors, orange walls, and pink
woodwork combine to create a cozy home and hearth, where "everything is back
together again and Sophie isn't angry anymore." Simple but effective, this title has
a cohesive narrative of both words and images that could well be used in storytime
programming or to start a discussion of what to do when you're MAD. JMD
BANKS, SARA HARRELL 
Abraham's Battle: A Novel of Gettysburg. 
Schwartz/Ath-
eneum, 1999 
[96p]
ISBN 0-689-81779-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Upon the eve of dedication of the national cemetery at Gettysburg, freeman
Abraham Small recalls the event which prompted his involvement in the Battle of
Gettysburg. 
A chance encounter with a teenage Rebel soldier, Lamar Cooper,
results in the unlikely pair's sharing nostalgia for their home state of Georgia, and
discussing their views on the reasons for the present war. Cooper moves on to
rejoin his company, leaving Small feeling guilty about letting others fight against
slavery while he stays safe in the shadow of the abolitionist family that helped him
escape to Pennsylvania. Small joins the Union army for a stint as an ambulance
driver, finds Cooper injured, and brings him to the Union field hospital where, as
Small later learns, he succumbs to his wounds. Action moves sluggishly, stalled by
lengthy conversations of obviously pedagogical intent, couched in folksy idiom:
"'Tell me again what that word [secesh] means.'... 'Somebody wants to leave the
Union, the United States of America ... 'cause they hate Yankees or they'd scairt
that President Lincoln's gon' take their right away from 'em.'" Although the char-
acter of a young girl named Ladysmith makes an appearance on the cover and in
the text (presumably as a child connection to these events), she has precious little
to do. Banks offers no historical note, so there's no verification or refutation of
Small's meeting and conversation with Lincoln at Gettysburg. EB
BEIL, KAREN MAGNUSON 
Fire in Their Eyes: Wildfires and the People Who Fight
Them. 
Harcourt, 1999 
[6 4p] 
illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-201043-2 
$18.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-201042-4 
$10.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
Readers who were captivated by Joy Masoffs account of urban firefighters and the
blazes they battle in populated areas (Fire!, BCCB 4/98) will certainly want to take
a look at the hotshots and smokejumpers who extinguish-and sometimes set-
fires in the most remote regions of the country. Beil leads off by following Tracy
Dunford and his Flame-n-Go Hotshots at a devastating fire in Idaho's Salmon
National Forest: "Ferocious winds whipped at Tracy's crew from every direction
and blew sparks underneath Tracy's [fire] shelter. Some men were lifted clear off
the ground as their shelters filled, like sails, with wind." She then turns her atten-
tion to the training requirements for firefighting's elite corps of smokejumpers,
who parachute into conflagrations, tackle fires for days on end, and finally pack
out on foot. Forest fires, canyon fires that threaten upscale residential areas, and
prescribed burns that control wildfires or maintain ecosystems are discussed as
well. Plenty of crisp color photos of firefighters taking on exploding trees, wind-
driven flames, and "fire whirls" are a sure draw for browsers, and the glossary of
terms will be useful to readers taking a studious approach to the topic. EB
274 
* THE BULLETIN
BLACKSTONE, MARGARET 
This Is Soccer; illus. by John O'Brien. 
Holt,
1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-8050-2801-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-7 yrs
The jargon and the moves, the rules and the proud parental cheers are geared here
to draw the youngest spectators into the melee on the soccer field: "Soccer is a
game of long runs and short stops,/ quick turns, even grass burns./ When the
ball's too high/ for the fleetest of feet,/ heads join the dance,/ butting the ball/ with
a leap/ and a soar." Wild-eyed teams disgorge from cars and minivans on the title
page and take to the turf for a rousing match, which O'Brien captures in line and
watercolor close-ups, aerial views, and sideline shots, several of which are tipped at
precarious angles to accelerate the action. Blackstone tosses in a bit of brutal hon-
esty (which will probably ring true with younger siblings relegated to the side-
lines)-"In soccer there's always more shooting than scoring./ At the end of the
game the score may be so low/ that it's still zero to zero." Regardless of what
happens on the field, this title is bound to make points. EB
BUTLER, SUSAN 
The Hermit Thrush Sings. 
Kroupa/DK Ink, 1999 
[288p]
ISBN 0-7894-2489-4 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Leora has always been warned that the world beyond the village gates and guarded
fields is fraught with dangers-man-eating "birmbas" who killed her father and
sister, and an inhospitable forest filled with poisonous mutant plants. When Leora
learns for herself that the birmbas can be quite harmless if kindly treated, she
begins to doubt other "truths" handed down by the Rulers, their guards, and her
own stepfamily. Guided by her webbed hand (a genetic mutation with extrasen-
sory powers), she treks through the wilds of Maynor (once the state of Maine, now
devastated in the aftermath of a comet strike) in search of her sister Reba, whom
she believes to be alive and in charge of a rebel outpost. Perils may surround
Leora, but the author insulates her from any real danger with a host of stock de-
vices and guides, including a protective family of furry birmbas, chunks of re-
gained memory, friendly servants, a set of lockets bequeathed to the two sisters, an
infallible sixth sense, a disguise, and a host of rebel sympathizers who always ap-
pear at the right moment. Good guys and bad guys are easy to spot; count on
Latino and Native American descendants to fight on the side of the angels, while
male guards are inevitably treacherous. Readers who enjoyed the dark futurism of
Lowry's The Giver won't find much intellectual challenge here, but newcomers
just venturing into the genre might be diverted by this offering of Post-Apocalypse
Lite. EB
CALABRO, MARIAN 
The Perilous Journey of the Donner Party. Clarion,
1999 
[192p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-86610-3 
$20.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Before bidding farewell to winter, middle graders may want to take a look at the
misadventures of the famed emigrant band whose winter of 1846 in the Sierra
Nevadas makes our outgoing season look like a day at the beach. Calabro offers a
clearly told account of the events which brought the Donners, Reeds, and their
APRIL 1999 
* 
275
traveling companions to such a, well, sad pass. Readers familiar with David
Lavender's version of the story (Snowbound, BCCB 6/96) will find a slightly dif-
ferent emphasis here, particularly Calabro's attention to the host of interpersonal
problems among the party members, the later lives of the survivors, and the physi-
cal and psychological vulnerabilities or defenses that may have meant life or death
throughout the ordeal. Maps, period photos, reproductions of letters, an extensive
bibliography, an index, and a complete list (by wagon family) of all Donner party
members make this a fine resource for researchers, as well as a hypnotically engag-
ing adventure for recreational readers. EB
COOPER, ELISHA 
Building; written and illus. by Elisha Cooper. 
Greenwillow,
1999 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-688-16494-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
The planning and toil involved in converting a trash-strewn vacant lot into a snazzy,
white sided building are retraced in Cooper's cunning watercolor lines, blots, dashes,
and squiggles, and in text lines that rise, stretch, and bend to the actions and
rhythm of laborers and the tools of their trade. The burden of description is
carried by the often humorous text ("A worker tightens pipes to the toilets and
sinks, then checks his work with a level. Another worker consults plans, shakes his
head, then turns the plan right side up"), and browsers in search of visual details
will find only the sketchiest suggestions of backhoes and generators, scaffolding
and circular saws. Evoking the sounds, smells, and energy of a site, though, is what
Cooper does best (see Country Fair, BCCB 3/98, and Ballpark, 9/97), and the
sweaty activity comes through in spades as workers haul garbage and push brooms
and hoist up their sagging pants, while "hot sawdust fills the air and changes
everyone's skin color," and a nail "pulled out with the claw of a hammer... screeches
as if it were happy right where it was." Children ready to step up from simpler
truck and tool books can report directly to this work site. EB
COWLEY, JOY Agapanthus Hum and the Eyeglasses; illus. by Jennifer
Plecas. 
Philomel, 1999 
[48p]
ISBN 0-399-23211-7 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
Agapanthus Hum has new eyeglasses, and she's having a bit of a problem keeping
them on her nose. "Good little Mommy" and "good little Daddy" both under-
stand Agapanthus' need to hum, whirl, twirl, and stand on her hands, but even if
she is an acrobat in training they still want her to be careful. At a tent show
Agapanthus is overwhelmed by the sights and sounds of the acrobats: "Agapan-
thus forgot her ice cream. She even forgot to hum. She was a famous acrobat. She
had acrobat arms and acrobat legs and they were getting all whizzy wanting to do
acrobat things." When Agapanthus and parents go in search of some water to
clean up the ice-cream covered Agapanthus, they meet one of the show's acrobats,
the "beautiful lady on the swing," wrapped in a bathrobe and with reading glasses
firmly fixed on her nose. The lady acrobat laughingly tells Agapanthus that "all
the best acrobats" give their glasses to their mothers to hold, whereupon the happy
Agapanthus stands on her hands, her glasses caught by the fast-moving acrobat.
Plecas' watercolor and ink illustrations feature a dancy Agapanthus, with stick-out
red pigtails and slightly bent glasses cavortine under the lovinP eves nfa henican wt
276 
* THE BULLETIN
of good little parents. This seven-chapter easy reader introduces a happily ener-
getic character in the irrepressible Agapanthus Hum, and beginning readers will
find her thoroughly engaging. JMD
CUMMINGS, PAT, ed. 
Talking with Artists, Volume Three. 
Clarion,
1999 
[96p] 
illus. and with photographs
ISBN 0-395-89132-9 
$20.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
Cummings has a friendly knack for drawing people out and for asking the kinds of
questions that matter to young readers. In this third volume of interviews (see
BCCB 10/95 and 4/92 for the first two), Cummings talks to Lisa Desimini, G.
Brian Karas, Keiko Narahashi, Betsy Lewin, Peter Sis, and Paul O. Zelinsky, among
others, and their responses are as varied as the art they produce. Artists answer
queries about work habits, creative sparks, home life, and even the inclusion of real
people in their illustrations. Photographs of the artists, illustrations from their
books, and samples of their childhood drawings and paintings are included. What
stand out in Cummings' interviews are the candid, encouraging words of the art-
ists to the children reading these books, from the illustrators who knew art was
their destiny from early childhood to the others who found their vocation later in
life. Karas says reassuringly, "No work is so dismal that you have to throw it out
and start over again. Try to fix it, or paint over it, or cut it in shreds and glue those
together to make a great collage," and Anna Rich, more pragmatically, says, "If
you like to do this kind of thing, do it, because it can't hurt you and it probably
helps your brain develop." The intended audience is never forgotten, and that
results in a certain humorous ease of expression that young readers should find
most diverting. A closing section on "Secret Techniques" (first seen in Volume
Two of this series) includes some artistic tricks of the trade; a selective bibliogra-
phy of each artist's works and an index are included. JMD
DURBIN, WILLIAM 
Wintering. Delacorte, 1999 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-32598-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Having survived his first summer as a voyageur (The Broken Blade, BCCB 2/97),
fourteen-year-old Pierre is back to meet the challenge of hivernant with the North
West Company in the French Canadian wilderness. As the company establishes a
trading post during the winter months on the shores of Lake Vermilion, with the
approval of the Vermilion band of Indians, former schoolboy Pierre learns to hold
his own in the motley crew. He discovers, through the help of Commander McKay,
that his interest in books and learning does not necessarily make him ill-fitted for
the rigors of voyageur life and may even prepare him well for life beyond the
paddle. The deaths of Pierre's former mentor La Londe and his Indian friend
Kennewah haunt him, prompting him to contemplate the injustice of their deaths
while irritant crew member Jean Beloit is allowed to live. Though Pierre's resent-
ment of this unfairness is understandable, his righteousness distances the reader
from his honest struggle, and his esoteric ruminations on love fall equally flat. The
book hints at some complexities in Beloit's character but never explains his sudden
turnabout in behavior from relentless sadist to tender guardian of an orphaned
bear cub. Durbin's failure to develop the interactions among the characters, in-
cluding the friendship between Pierre and his Indian friend Red Loon, does a
APRIL 1999 
* 277
disservice to his material and brings him dangerously close to relying on stereo-
types to carry his story. Wintering will be difficult to sell alone, but fans of The
Broken Blade will want to paddle along. A map will be included. EAB
DURRANT, LYNDA 
Turtle Clan Journey. Clarion, 1999 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-90369-6 $15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
This sequel to Echohawk (BCCB 10/96) finds Echohawk and his father and brother
trekking west toward the Ohio River to make a new home away from the en-
croachment of New York colonists. The arduous journey is particularly treacher-
ous for Echohawk-a white boy, captured and adopted by his Mohican
father-because the colonial government now offers ransom payments to anyone
who "frees" a captive. Waylaid by soldiers and forced back to Albany, Echohawk
is reunited with his paternal aunt, but after a brief flirtation with the luxuries of the
colonists' life, he makes an escape and rejoins his Indian family. Worse is in store
for them all, as they are captured by Mohawks who intend to enslave Echohawk,
adopt his younger brother, and execute his father. Durrant convincingly conveys
the perils and numbing exhaustion of the family's journey but merely pays lip
service to Echohawk's purported internal conflict over his dual heritage; other
than doughnuts, bed linens, and such creature comforts, she throws little in her
hero's way to tempt him back to white society, and he and his aunt discover no real
affection to help them reestablish a family bond. Readers who have followed the
Turtle Clan's adventures and travails will naturally be relieved to see them safely
rafting downstream at last toward a new home, but those in search of a more
thoughtful probe of a "captive's" life will prefer Durrant's BeadedMoccasins (BCCB
5/98). A detailed historical afterword and a list of sources are included. EB
EBOCH, CHRIS 
The Well of Sacrifice; illus. by Bryn Barnard. 
Clarion,
1999 
[240p]
ISBN 0-395-90374-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Eveningstar, a Mayan preteen girl, tips off older brother Smoke Shell to the pres-
ence of an enemy band lurking nearby; he leads fellow warriors to rout the party,
thereby gaining personal honor and launching his family into the ranks of the
nobility. But his fame and popularity eventually spell his own doom and imperil
his family when the evil high priest Great Skull Zero appoints Smoke Shell for
human sacrifice upon the death of the present king. Eveningstar is on to Great
Skull Zero's malicious plot to make himself ruler, and soon she, too, earns a place
on his hit list; after a series of escapes and chases, she is tossed into a well, whence
she must bring back a message from the gods-should she survive the ordeal. She
does, of course, and upon her own authority advises her people to disband their
urban civilization and move into the country. Eboch has done enough homework
to fashion elaborately detailed costumes and trappings for his characters, but sloppy
plotting (how does Eveningstar know so much about the layout of the dead king's
tomb in which she's trapped?), and ludicrously modern dialogue ("Wait until I get
to the bottom of the steps, then make some noise. Yell, or throw something. Get
them to chase you for a while. But don't get caught!") demonstrate that the Mayan
setting is little more than a soundstage for a tired old melodrama. A concluding
note discusses speculation on the sudden disappearance of classical Mayan city
278 
* THE BULLETIN
culture and limply excuses the fictional protagonist's history-altering heroics with
"Every culture produces a few rare people like Eveningstar, whose courage and
determination change society." EB
ECHEWA, T. OBINKARAM, ad. 
The Magic Tree: A Folktale from Nigeria; illus. by
E. B. Lewis. 
Morrow, 1999 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16232-0 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16231-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Everyone knows orphan boy Mbi's name when they have work to be done, but no
one remembers it when they have games to play or food to share. Mbi goes to sit
under a udara tree, thinking that "maybe if he did not watch other people as they
ate, he would not feel so hungry." Even though it is not the season for udara, "as
Mbi was sitting under a tree, all of a sudden a large ripe fruit fell from it, pom!"
The fruit not only tastes delicious to the hungry boy, but it speaks to him, telling
him to sing to the seeds. Mbi sings, and a udara tree grows from shoot to shrub to
bush to tree. When the villagers investigate, they discover that no one but Mbi can
retrieve fruit from the tree; when the meanest boy in the whole village tries to steal
some of the fruit, Mbi makes the tree, mean boy attached, grow taller until its top
disappears into the clouds. The villagers promise Mbi gifts, affection, and a place
of honor in the village if he will return the would-be thief to Earth. He does so,
"and from that day on, everyone was kind to Mbi." The ending is a bit abrupt, but
the ride to get there is worth it. Echewa's melodic storytelling voice rises and falls
in rhythmic language that effectively uses repetition and refrains to create flowing
and seemingly effortless prose. Lewis' watercolors have a light-filled luminosity
that reaches out from the pages to arrest the viewer's eye. The character's faces are
beautifully articulated, their expressions faultlessly capturing emotion and action.
No source notes are included. JMD
ENGLISH, KAREN 
Nadia's Hands; illus. by Jonathan Weiner. 
Boyds Mills,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56397-667-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
Here comes yet another nervous flower girl down the aisle-this time, in a cousin's
Pakistani wedding. Warned by past flower girls of the perils that accompany the
honor, Nadia is assured by adult relatives and the bride herself that she'll do just
fine. Most troubling to Nadia, however, is the fact that her aunt will dye her
hands with henna in traditional patterns (mehndi), and she will have to appear in
school on Monday and face her classmates' comments and questions about this
exotic body art. Although Nadia's concerns are genuine and will surely be appre-
ciated by young listeners, disappointingly little is mentioned or shown about the
wedding itself. Two brief glimpses of the lavishly garbed and bejeweled bride (and
Nadia in her traditional shalwar pants and tunic) will have viewers yearning for
detail that neither artist nor author supplies. Weiner's brilliantly tinted pastels
evoke the strong bonds among members of this extended family, while rendering
the star attractions-Nadia's intricately patterned hands-ill-formed and unat-
tractive. While neither as visually or emotionally appealing as Johnson's The Wed-
ding (BCCB 3/99), this title will nonetheless be useful as a cultural variation on a
popular theme. EB
APRIL 1999 
* 279
FISHER, LEONARD EVERETT 
To Bigotry No Sanction: The Story of the Oldest Syna-
gogue in America. 
Holiday House, 1999 
64p 
illus. with photographs.
ISBN 0-8234-1401-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Fisher opens with a methodical recounting of the persecution of the Jews in Eu-
rope, particularly Spain, and their search for a safe haven in which to practice their
faith. After a brief history of the Jewish immigration to the Americas starting in
the sixteenth century, he discusses the establishment in 1658 of the first Jewish
congregation in religiously tolerant Newport, Rhode Island, the history of the
Jewish presence there, their support of the American Revolutionary forces, and the
eventual establishment of the Touro Synagogue, the oldest synagogue in America
and the first historic building to be supported by endowment. Sparked by 1990's
two hundredth anniversary of the correspondence between the synagogue and
General George Washington, this history is illustrated with a generous number of
captioned black-and-white photographs and reproductions of period material, in-
cluding facsimiles of the historic letters. Inclusion of the portraits of those indi-
viduals important to the establishment of the synagogue adds to the immediacy of
Fisher's account. Fisher touches on the larger issues of religious freedom and per-
secution in this history, opening a door to discussion of the founding fathers and
the Bill of Rights. A list of sources and an index are included. JMD
FLORIAN, 
DOUGLAS 
Laugh-eteria; written and illus. by Douglas
Florian. 
Harcourt, 1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-15-202084-5 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Reminiscent of Bing Bang Boing (BCCB 11/94) in its generous collection of hu-
morous short verse decorated with offbeat drawings in thick lines, this roundup of
poetry treats subjects near and dear to the grade-school heart. There are monsters
("Hello, my name is Dracula./ My clothing is all blackula./ I drive a Cadillacula/ I
am a maniacula . . ."-from "Hello, My Name Is Dracula"), food ("Here's the
latest news from Mars:/ Mars is made of candy bars ... "-"Plan-eat-ery"), pantsing
("One was a black belt./ One was a brown./ One had a loose belt;/ His pants fell
down"-"Karate Kids"), and sibling repugnance (". .. Your teeth are green./ Your
hair is blue./ Your brother's underwear-P.U.!"-"Brush Rush"). The occasional
bobbles in precision mean that this isn't quite up to the dazzling display of Bing
Bang Boing but it's an effervescent collection nonetheless. Florian's pithy poems
echo playground chants (and sometimes, better yet, jeers) in their rhythmic
recitability (so don't overlook readaloud possibilities for younger audiences as well),
and his focus on orality and absurdity makes them thematically irresistible. The
line drawings have a sophisticated quirkiness that will make the book legal tender
for older kids, and they might get a particular kick out of teaching their innocent
younger siblings some of the more raucous rhymes-encourage them if you dare.
Indices of first lines and of titles are included. DS
GIBBONS, GAIL 
Exploring the Deep, Dark Sea; written and illus. by Gail
Gibbons. 
Little, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-30945-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-5
A solid primer on the undersea world and its exploration, this begins by following
a fictional trip below in a submersible, noting the different conditions and resi-
280 
* 
THE BULLETIN
dents as the vehicle goes through the "sunlight zone" and the "twilight zone" to the
"dark zone," stopping when it hits this ocean section's bottom at 7,500 feet. The
book goes on to discuss the abyss and the trenches, even deeper parts of the ocean,
and the history of ocean exploration. Gibbons' step-by-step approach works ex-
tremely well here, offering a personally immediate perspective that, paradoxically,
some of the photodocumentary treatments of the subject don't manage. Critters
floating around the submersible are identified and sometimes annotated with in-
triguing tidbits, giving the spreads a pleasing touch of treasure hunt. The water-
colors effectively depict the otherworldly milieu, with the submersible's headlight
sending rays into the murk and strange life forms effortlessly gliding by. An evoca-
tive and fact-filled entree to oceanography, this'll whet kids' appetites for more
technical and detailed approaches. DS
GOLDIN, BARBARA DIAMOND, ad. 
Journeys with Elijah: Eight Tales ofthe Prophet;
illus. by Jerry Pinkney. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1999 
[77p]
ISBN 0-15-200445-9 
$20.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Miracle worker, seer, moral guide, emissary from the Almighty-the Biblical prophet
Elijah plays many roles in the body of lore passed down through the millennia and
among several religious cultures. Goldin radically recasts her tales over space and
time to demonstrate how Jewish communities have been dispersed throughout the
world and to suggest how the elements of the Elijah stories may have been grafted
onto different cultural traditions. "Elijah and the Three Brothers," in which three
young men respectively claim from Elijah rewards of wealth, wisdom, and a good
wife, is set in Curaqao; "The Blessing," in which a greedy older brother gets a
tragicomic comeuppance, takes place in a tiny seventeenth-century Jewish com-
munity in China. The retellings are engaging and accessible, though not necessar-
ily as rich in detail or poesy as Nina Jaffe's offerings in The Mysterious Visitor (BCCB
6/97). Pinkney's watercolors are alluringly lush, and his craggy-faced Elijah makes
himself equally at home as a beggar squatting among the moonlit temple ruins in
Persia and as a tattered and patched traveler dropping in on a family of twentieth-
century Yemenite Jews. A substantial bibliography is included, but specific source
notes for each tale, unfortunately, are not. EB
HAMANAKA, SHEILA 
In Search of the Spirit: The Living National Treasures of a-
pan; written and illus. by Sheila Hamanaka and Ayano Ohmi and with
photographs. 
Morrow, 1999 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14608-2 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14607-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
In the 1950s the Japanese government began to identify elder craftspeople skilled
in artistic traditions such as yuzen (dyeing kimonos), sword making, potting, etc.
and encouraging them to take on apprentices to ensure that the traditional ways
would not die out. In this combination of photoessay and collective biography,
readers encounter six artist-elders, men who represent some of the ancient artistic
traditions of Japan. (Although the introduction states, "Today more than one
hundred men and women have been given the special title of Bearers of Important
Intangible Cultural Assets," no women artisans are featured.) Each artist is intro-
duced with brief biographical information that tells how he became involved in his
APRIL 1999 
* 
281
chosen path, but the bulk of each essay focuses on the origin of the art and the craft
of the featured individual. The opening verso page for each essay features a color
photograph of a piece of art, thinly outlined in red, with the Japanese character(s)
for the name of the art form; a photograph of the artist (accompanied by text)
appears on the facing recto. Each essay is illustrated with exceptionally well-repro-
duced, captioned color photographs; each concludes with a section (numbered
frames, some with illustrations, some with photographs) that leads the reader
through the basic steps in the artistic process. Conversational without being ca-
sual, the writing includes quotes from each artist that give a sense of the men
behind the art and their feelings about individual artistic creation and the impor-
tance of tradition. This is an illuminating look at one culture's attempt to preserve
its artistic past. An opening map of Japan is accompanied by a geographic over-
view, and a brief index is included. JMD
HEIDE, FLORENCE PARRY 
It'sAbout Time!; written by Florence Parry Heide, Judith
Heide Gilliland, and Roxanne Heide Pierce; illus. by Cathryn Falwell. 
Clarion,
1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-395-86612-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Unlike the contributors to Lee Bennett Hopkins' anthology of the same name,
who offer poems about daily activities around the clock, the Heide clan takes a
larger view, examining the concept of time and attitudes toward its passage. "Tell-
ing Time" pokes gentle fun at our enthrallment to the clock: "Do this, do that,/
just do, do, do!/ Hey-you're not telling time-/ it's telling you!" A concrete
poem in the shape of an hourglass reduces "EONS" to a narrow "NOW," which
accrues again into "EONS." "Time Zones" addresses the confusion of pinpoint-
ing the hours around the globe; "Wasn't It Fun Tomorrow?" wildly scrambles
tenses to produce some deliciously silly party plans. Falwell's mixed-media collage
features a jumpsuited, pointy-eared sprite who, with his pet dog, reacts with de-
light, dismay, mirth, or confusion to the symbols and scenes that the poems con-
jure; the kids'-cereal palette and the figure's cuteness sometimes confer a slightly
babyish air. Although Y2K is never overtly mentioned, confetti colors set just the
celebratory mood to kick off festivities as the millennium rounds the bend. EB
HESSE, KAREN 
Come On, Rain!; illus. by Jon J Muth. 
Scholastic, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-33125-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 269, for review.
JENKINS, STEVE 
The Top ofthe World: Climbing Mount Everest; written and illus.
by Steve Jenkins. 
Houghton, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-94218-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
After some quick historical/geographical background, Jenkins gets to the action,
pulling readers in with a strategic use of the second person ("When you arrive in
the bustling capital city of Nepal, you'll collect your gear, meet your guides, and
pay for your climbing permit") as he describes the major steps of an Everest ascent.
Details about weather, equipment, and hazards provide a sense of drama as well as
immediacy; other information about Sherpas, waste problems, and mountain life
282 
* 
THE BULLETIN
at various levels fills in the picture. The book jumps around a bit, which under-
mines the effect of the fictional journey, and the absence of a glossary will leave
youngsters scratching their head over "col" and perhaps even "summit." The in-
ventively presented information and the lure of the trail, however, make this an
enticing package indeed. Jenkins' collage art demonstrates some impressive flex-
ibility here; the textured paper's solidity suits the physical obstacles, but it still
manages to convey the motion of avalanche and wind. Despite some glitches, this
is an invigorating and fact-filled look at the great peak with much of the you-are-
there appeal of Mark Pfetzer's Within Reach (BCCB 11/99); you might even use
this as a vivid introduction to a readaloud of the Pfetzer. A bibliography and list of
Everest records (as well as pointers to some fascinating websites) are included. DS
JOHNSON, STEPHEN T. 
City by Numbers; illus. by Stephen T. Johnson. 
Viking,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-670-87251-2 
$15.99 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
In Alphabet City (BCCB 11/95), Johnson's paintings depicted aspects of the urban
landscape that constituted letters of the alphabet, and now he turns to numerals up
to 21 (for the 21st century). As in his previous book, figures are formed by the
spaces between buildings, by ironwork, by abraded pavement markings, by pat-
terns in brick, all painted photorealistically and all authentic items one might re-
ally find in the urban landscape. He often tips into the obscure here, however,
with numerals that are evident only because one knows their place in the order
(and even then it takes some doing to figure them out); the shadow of branches on
the wall could as easily count as an eight or a seven as the five he uses it for, and the
nineteen in archway ironwork is more in the eye of the beholder than anywhere
else. Still, there's an interesting subtlety to the demonstration of how you couldsee
the images, even if it's not how you can't avoid seeing the images; though it feels a
bit like reading the bottom line in the eye chart, there's a pleasure in seeing familiar
forms anew that might well inspire some lively field trips and projects. DS
JONELL, LYNNE 
It's My Birthday, Too!; illus. by Petra Mathers. 
Putnam,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-23323-7 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Christopher (from Mommy Go Away!, BCCB 12/97) is eagerly anticipating his
birthday celebration, and he's making sure his little brother, Robbie, doesn't horn
in on the action: "You are not the birthday boy," says Christopher sternly. "You
are just the brother." Robbie finds a loophole in Christopher's exclusion policy
and attends his brother's party as a puppy, which tickles Christopher's guests but
begins to wear thin on Christopher after its initial novelty. Though the ending
that has Christopher preferring a brother to a puppy seems likelier to indicate
parental eavesdropping than honest sentiment, the brotherly dialogue and the
struggle for birthday supremacy have an authentic edge, and the brother-as-puppy
theme (reminiscent of a chapter in Betsy Byars' Ant Plays Bear, BCCB 9/97) pro-
vides an engaging twist on the sibling drama. Mathers uses the same childish
stick-figure and crayon style as in the previous volume, with the characters' dot-
and-line faces expressive despite their simplicity. An entertaining tale of hard-won
brotherly love, this will doubtless prompt a few kids to brandish leashes at pesti-
lential younger siblings. DS
APRIL 1999 
* 283
KEHRET, PEG 
Shelter Dogs: Amazing Stories ofAdopted Strays; illus. with photo-
graphs by Greg Farrar. 
Whitman, 1999 
[13 4p]
ISBN 0-8075-7334-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-7
A canine collective biography of eight dogs, this tells of critters adopted from the
Seattle/King County Humane Association that have gone onto happier, some-
times even heroic lives. The breadth of dogdom and of eventual roles is effective:
Tyler, who cured his young mistress of her fear of dogs after a traumatic childhood
incident gets as much attention as Bridgette, who is a seizure-alert dog for her
epileptic master; the underlying point is that dogs obtained from animal shelters
are no slouches in the worthwhile-companion department regardless of what it is
they're actually doing for their humans. Though the accounts sometimes lose
some drama amid setup and explanatory details, this is an engaging collection of
puppy tales. Kehret intersperses the chapters with quick facts on relevant mat-
ters-a brief history of flyball, information about the American Humane
Association's film guidance and their website, suggestions for helping at your local
shelter-that give the anecdotes some useful context. Youngsters will wish there
were more photographs than the one black-and-white portrait per chapter, but
they'll still want to collar this for an undemanding doggy read. DS
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
Sword of the Samurai: Adventure Stories from
Japan. Browndeer/Harcourt, 1999 
[80p]
ISBN 0-15-201985-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
A rousing tall tale probing the comic possibilities of a severed head launches this
collection, sure to satisfy every taste, of eleven tidbits from samurai lore. "Tomoe
Gozen," with its bloody battle scene and noble warrior protagonist, is the tale
likeliest to meet most readers' initial expectations of samurai exploits (except, of
course, that its samurai hero happens to be a woman). But Kimmel explores more
subtle, equally vital, aspects of samurai life as well-the rigorous psychic discipline
of a reluctant warrior in "The Ronin and the Tea Master"; the cunning strategizing
of "The Battle of Chihaya Castle," in which the emperor's stronghold is defended
by twenty-four dolls; the problematic heroism of the governor in "The Burglar,"
whose steely coldheartedness rather than compassion saves a girl's life; the pacifist
message of "No Sword," in which wits triumph over warfare. The brevity and
concision of the stories make the collection accessible even to early middle grade
readers; masterly pacing and pithy endings will be especially attractive to adults in
search of readalouds or material for oral tellings. Notes supply historical back-
ground or context for each tale; source information and a glossary/pronunciation
guide are included. EB
KROLL, STEVEN 
Robert Fulton: From Submarine to Steamboat; illus. by Bill
Farnsworth. 
Holiday House, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1433-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The life of an American artist/engineer/inventor is retraced in this serviceable, if
unfocused, account. Report writers will find most of what they need to know
about Fulton's early career as a painter of miniatures and panoramas, his later
284 
* 
THE BULLETIN
business ventures into marine engineering, and his eventual perfection of the com-
mercially viable steamship which plied the Hudson River. Farnsworth's hazy spreads
underscore the romance of this era of invention in the young Republic, and add
considerable allure to the arid text, which rushes through an eventful life with little
opportunity to pause and reflect on its milestones. A list of "Important Dates"
and a brief note on James Watts' earlier steam engine are included. EB
LALLY, SOINBHE 
A Hive for the Honeybee. 
Scholastic, 1999 
[224p]
ISBN 0-590-51038-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Alfred and Mo are two honeybee drones, a poet and a philosopher, respectively,
who think differently from the other drones. Bella and Thora are worker bees,
bemused by the fast talk of Alfred and Mo. Alfred becomes disenchanted by the
carnality of the Queen's mating flights; Mo decides the bees have to make friends
with their natural enemies, the wasps and the ants, and believes that the worker-
women bees need to be emancipated. The drones think they're masters of the
hive, but in the end it is the workers who force them out to die of starvation and
cold in order to maintain the hive through the winter. The drones are male, the
workers are female, and cliched parallels between the bees' roles and the gender
roles of human men and women are easily drawn. The overfed, lazy drones meet
their destiny and their doom; Bella dies in battle defending the hive from wasps,
and Thora dies of old age. If the point of this allegory is that we are all fated by our
inner natures and positions in life, it is forcefully brought home. Lally is a capable
writer, and can certainly put language and plot together to form a coherent whole.
Unfortunately, this novel never coalesces into anything more than an allegory with-
out a center, a detailed anthropomorphization of honeybees. Spot art of bees with
human faces a la the Flower Fairies adds little to this mix of natural science and
fantasy. JMD
LAMSTEIN, SARAH MARWIL 
ILike Your Buttons!; illus. by Nancy Cote. 
Whitman,
1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-8075-3510-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
After primary-grader Cassandra compliments the buttons on her teacher's blouse,
the teacher then praises the school custodian. Good words, good feelings, and
random acts of kindness trigger more of the same through the community until
they circle back and culminate in Cassandra's father's bringing her a new kitten.
Everyday language conveys a straightforward plot, and while the repetition of the
word "so" gives the narrative an uninspired sameness-Sharon is "so tickled,"
Rhonda kicks the ball "so hard," Philip was "so proud," and the cats eyes are "so
big and bright"-it also adds a certain rhythm. Flat acrylic, gouache, and water-
color pencil illustrations depict appealingly comical characters, but the faces all
have the same googly eyes and cartoonishly smiling expressions. Cheerful hues
and the lack of pronounced shadows or shading emphasize the story's upbeat tone.
The message-our smallest acts have large repercussions-may resonate for read-
ers familiar with folklore traditions that reward good deeds, and this title will cer-
tainly hit the mark with teachers seeking a painless way to communicate this lesson.
JNH
APRIL 1999 
* 
285
LAYTON, NEAL 
Smile ifYou're Human; written and illus. by Neal Layton. 
Dial,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8037-2381-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-7 yrs
From the title page art depicting an eager young extraterrestrial playing with his
telescope and a book entitled Animals of the Universe, the audience will rightly
suspect they're in for an alien adventure with a twist ("Here we are landing at a
place I've wanted to visit my whole life. It's a planet called 'Earth"'). Viewers
won't take long to figure out that the alien family has landed its bulbous craft in an
atypical spot on the globe-a zoo. In front of each cage, the ET questions his
parents whether they have finally spotted a sought-after human ("What about
these? They walk on two feet and they seem very smart") and, after consulting the
guidebook, the parents inevitably reply to the contrary (" . .. they're penguins.
Humans don't have wings or webbed feet"). At last they locate the creature that
fits the correct description, and the ET takes a snapshot of a "human" to tape in
his album-a grinning ape with a banana. Layton creates a congenial clan with
cubist-style bodies, friendly and alert eyeballs atop slender stalks, and those neces-
sities of every vacationer-handbag, car keys, sunglasses, and baseball cap; large
figures and bright colors will easily reach children at the farthest edge of the story-
time rug. These bizarre adventurers should prove welcome visitors in just about
any pre- or primary school setting. EB
LEE, JEANNE M., ad. 
I Once Was a Monkey: Stories Buddha Told; written and
illus. by Jeanne M. Lee. 
Farrar, 1999 
[40p]
ISBN 0-374-33548-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
When animals take shelter from the monsoon deep within an abandoned temple,
a haloed statue of Buddha calms them with stories from his past lives and gently
leads them to discover ways to live in harmony. Two of the six ensuing Jatakas
have recently received picture book treatment in Demi's Buddha Stories (BCCB 4/
97); however, the simple Aesop-styled moral appended to Demi's tales are re-
placed here with the stranded animals' contrived reactions to each offering. The
turtle realizes, for instance, that his fear of thunder is much like hare's fear of noise
in "The Flight of the Beasts," and the lion admires the bravery of the lion who
traced the beasts' panic to a fallen mango. While this intellectual give-and-take
may come closer to the pedagogical intent of Buddha's teachings than a simple bon
mot, it interjects a preachy tone into otherwise lively (and largely self-explanatory)
tales and makes a strained and clumsy segue between entries. Thick ink drawings
with muted earthtone washes illuminate the Jatakas themselves, while black, white,
and graytone illustrations punctuate the temple scenes. An afterword on Buddha's
life and two recommended sources for Jataka tales are included. EB
LESTER, JULIUS 
When the Beginning Began: Stories about God, the Creatures, and
Us; illus. by Emily Lisker. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 1999 
[100p]
ISBN 0-15-201238-9 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
In a moving synthesis of folktale, Bible story, legend, and language, Julius Lester
retells the story of God's creation of the earth and all that dwell within it. Basing
286 
* THE BULLETIN
his retelling of the divine creation on Judaic midrashim, the Torah, and world
folklore, Lester offers a nontraditional rendition of the creation story, underscored
with mythological motifs and illuminated by flashes of poetic language. God ap-
pears in the guise of "ribbons of soft red light undulating ... in circles as wide as
the future," "a woman with skin as brilliantly black as the backside of lightning
and hair as green as a flower's heart," and "a golden band [that] encircled the
heavens like a wedding song," just to mention a few of Lester's divine evocations.
All that is created by God has a voice to praise and thank him (or her, or it, de-
pending on the mood God happens to be in at the moment). Eleven of seventeen
chapters open with a traditional verse from Genesis, followed by Lester's retelling
of the Biblical event described. In between new takes on old tales of the creation,
Lester retells and recasts some traditional folktales in a Biblical mode, using a po-
etic and yet accessible voice. Each chapter is illustrated with a full-page, full-color
painting in a naive style that provides a softer edge to Lester's text. A pronuncia-
tion guide, bibliography, and source notes are included, as is an extensive intro-
duction and afterword in which Lester discusses his process and motivation. JMD
LOURIE, PETER 
Rio Grande: From the Rocky Mountains to the Gulf of Mexico;
written and illus. with photographs by Peter Lourie. 
Boyds Mills, 1999 
[4 8p]
ISBN 1-56397-706-0 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Lourie recounts his trek along the course of the Rio Grande-via car, rafts, and
rowboats-from the Colorado town of Creede near the headwaters, to the Gulf of
Mexico, where it joins the ocean "no wider than it had been in Creede, almost two
thousand miles upriver." Although he discusses some of the agricultural practices
and demographic forces that impact (and in places endanger) the river, descrip-
tions of the towns, wild terrain, and eccentric characters he encounters along the
route dominate the narrative. At Creede, Lourie considers its Wild West heyday,
when gunslinger Bob Ford shot up the town; he explores and photographs New
Mexico pueblos, but honors the Indians' request not to take pictures at their ritual
Cochita dance; at El Paso, he joins a U.S. agent on her border patrol rounds;
further downriver he crosses into Mexico to meet the single remaining resident of
the ghost town Guerrero Vieja. Crisp color photographs and some well-chosen
black and white historical photos of the region are closely coordinated with the
text, and although Lourie occasionally indulges in the breathless prose of an old-
fashioned travelogue ("The sun blasted out of the clouds. All around me the surf
and sea wind sang their ancient songs"), his traveler's tale will appeal to readers
whose imaginations wander toward distant horizons. EB
LYNCH, CHRIS 
Whitechurch. HarperCollins, 1999 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028331-9 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028330-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 9-12
Oakley, the narrator, is the requisite levelheaded sidekick to his manic friend Pauly,
in a friendship so close that town gossip occasionally paints them as lovers. It
might be simpler if that were true: Pauly's girlfriend, Lilly, will soon leave town
for college, which sends Pauly into deep denial and desperate plans to entice her to
stay; Oakley has loved Lilly even longer than Pauly but has accepted the role of her
friend, and he knows that her departure is necessary and inevitable. Part of why
APRIL 1999 
* 287
her departure is necessary is that Whitechurch is a small and circumscribed town
of little opportunity, but a bigger part is Pauly, whose inclination towards the
grandiose, the extreme, and the dramatic makes him not just frustratingly imprac-
tical but genuinely dangerous. The blurb refers to this as a short-story collection,
and readers will recognize the first chapter here from Harry Mazer's anthology
Twelve Shots (BCCB 10/97), but the flavor is more that of a sequential novel, with
tension building and with Oakley's poems providing links between chapters as
well as hints at the pressures he contains within him. Lynch masterfully depicts
the small town and its inhabitants. Pauly, the boy heading for what can only be
disaster, is heartbreakingly credible and as unstoppable as a meteor. Oakley is a
characterization tour de force in that he is effectively evoked yet defined by what
he doesn't have, his will (" ... most of the time 'Yes' is my word. Acquiescence my
mode"), until finally his passivity changes to action, the one action sure to result in
terrible tragedy. The book crackles with intensity and often with hilarity (the
thoroughbred rat derby, in which one of Pauly's schemes of course goes horribly
awry, is raucously funny); ultimately, this is a taut and unforgettable portrayal of
friendship and its sometimes terrible price. DS
MARCHETTA, MELINA 
LookingforAlibrandi. Orchard, 1999 
[256p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33142-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30142-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Seventeen-year old Josephine Alibrandi is on scholarship at a relatively posh Catholic
all-girls high school. She and her girlfriends, Anna, Lee, and Sera, are a nun's
nightmare-irreverent, smart-mouthed, and just plain smart, they exert more in-
fluence over the student body than they realize. Senior year is a year of revelation
for Josephine: she meets her father (absent since before her illegitimate birth),
discovers a secret about her strict Italian grandmother's past, weathers the rocky
beginning and ending of her first real romance, and suffers through the suicide of
an old friend. Marchetta skirts the many possibilities for melodramatic overstate-
ment and holds this eventful plot together with strong characterization and the
dryly funny narrative voice of Josie Alibrandi. The Australian setting is sharply
but not intrusively realized, and the few colloquialisms tossed about by the charac-
ters are easily understood in context. Josie fights to discover her place in the world
and denies the right of class, privilege, and tradition to tell her what that place is;
her struggle is laced with humor and a dawning self-awareness that young adults
maywell recognize and appreciate. JMD
MEISTER, CARI 
Tiny's Bath; illus. by Rich Davis. 
Viking, 1999 
[32p] 
(Viking
Easy-to-Read)
Library ed. ISBN 0-670-87962-2 
$13.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-14-130267-4 
$3.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. K-2
What could be better than a huge, goofy, lovable hound, unless it's being able to
read about him independently? Tiny, whose wholly inadequate doghouse perches
precariously on his rear end, is simply too big for standard dog washing tactics:
"He is dirty. He needs a bath. The pail is too small. The sink is too small. The
bathtub is too small." But the bespectacled narrator has a winning idea and man-
ages to "scrub, scrub, scrub" Tiny in his plastic wading pool. His pet is so elated at
288 
* 
THE BULLETIN
his newfound cleanliness, though, that he splashes joyously in a mud wallow, and
now "Tiny is dirty. I am dirty. Back to the pool." The comic exaggeration of
Davis' richly hued paintings (which gain an unusual solidity from the textured
brushstrokes and the figures' sharp contrast with the white space behind them)
lends some useful prompts to the bare-bones, repetitive text and thereby aids young-
sters with their decoding. Even the predictability of the bubble-thin plot should
prove a welcome advantage to readers struggling for their sea legs in an ocean of
printed vocabulary. EB
MERRIAM, EVE 
Ten Rosy Roses; illus. by Julia Gorton. 
HarperCollins,
1999 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027888-9 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027887-0 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-4 yrs
Ten smiling children pick ten roses on their way to school: "Ten rosy roses stand-
ing in a line,/ Jan picks one and now there are nine./ Nine rosy roses near the
garden gate,/ Nina picks one and now there are eight." This simple countdown
has the attractive cadence of a nursery rhyme. Gorton's graphics have a computer-
enhanced look with their geometric shapes and symmetrical shading, and they're
rendered in digi-friendly techno-color, with a bright blue sky interrupted by white
clouds, and splashes of red red roses brightening up each page. Each double-page
spread has a large black numeral isolated in a white box and accompanied by the
appropriate number of red blossoms. The multicultural cast of children is surpris-
ingly emotive despite the stylized draftsmanship, with varied facial expressions and
other nuances. The figures are somewhat flat, but the perspectives are modulated
by careful insertion of shadow that softens the sharper edges and adds a collagic
depth to the scenes. Use this in a springtime lapsit, and let the sun shine in. JMD
MICHELSON, RICHARD 
Grandpa's Gamble; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Cavendish,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7614-5034-3 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-5
Grandpa Sam spends a lot of time davening (praying), and his grandchildren think
it's boring: "He never does anything but pray./ Esther's grandpa owns a movie
theater/. Yetta's grandpa played for the Yankees./ Molly's grandpa is a million-
aire!" A credenza gets bumped by the entertainment-seeking grandchildren and
"the door swings open, and photographs/ are flying like a swarm of locusts." One
photograph is of a handsome man whose "hat is tilted, just so, on top of his head/
like the hat of a millionaire"-a youthful Grandpa Sam. Prompted by the photo,
the old man tells his grandchildren how he came to America, became a successful
professional gambler, a good husband, and proud father, only to nearly lose it all
when his daughter, their mother, became gravely ill. Everyone told him the child
needed a miracle, but Sam said, "I'm a gamblin' man.... I'll bet all my money on
God's mercy." So Sam gave up his fancy hat for a plain black yarmulke, and
prayed, "as stubborn as Moses standing before the Pharaoh, and miracle of miracles/
the Angel of Death passed over." Complex issues are simply and poetically dealt
with in Michelson's family tale cum free-verse poem. The form lets him tell this
story of faith in elegantly streamlined language, without excess explanation and
APRIL 1999 
* 
289
without interfering with the flow of the plot. Moser's portraits enhance but never
overwhelm the story. He uses an understated, soft approach in these graphite and
sepia-wash illustrations, eschewing his usual flashily capable style. Full-page illus-
trations highlighted with white chalk and paint look like old leaves of a diary,
brown and curling at the edges, set against crisp white pages. Based on a true
story, this effective family narrative joins a growing body of successful work in this
genre. An author's note and a glossary are included. JMD
MONTGOMERY, SY 
The Snake Scientist; illus. with photographs by Nic
Bishop. 
Houghton, 1999 
48p
ISBN 0-395-87169-7 
$16.00 
R* 
Gr. 3-7
Those who reveled in Bianca Lavies' A Gathering of Garter Snakes (BCCB 2/94)
will remember the red-sided garter snakes in question, which convene in amazing
numbers in Manitoba; what's new here is Bob Mason, "snake scientist" (really a
zoologist at Oregon State University), who studies the Manitoban motherlode to
uncover snake secrets. Montgomery's zippy text gives an engaging portrait of the
scientific work, with assistants weighing snakes in margarine tubs and putting them
by the handful into pillow cases, as well as the specific discoveries that Mason's
group has made (the female-snake pheromone that signals male snakes, for in-
stance); Mason's general and unstudied enthusiasm for science in general will also
galvanize many young readers. The layout and reproduction doesn't always show
the photographs to their best advantage (and the captions are sometimes lame),
but the images themselves are arresting, whether of a snake cheerfully sucking
down a huge tadpole or of schoolchildren draped with dangling garter snakes.
The liveliness of the text and the synthesis of narrative and science make this a
particularly stellar entry; another excellent and imaginative touch is the page list-
ing "Unsolved Mysteries" about the snakes that research is addressing-and bud-
ding scientists may wish to contemplate. Other end matter includes information
about the location of the snake dens, a brief bibliography, and a note about snake-
human interaction. DS
Moss, MARISSA 
True Heart; illus. by C. F. Payne. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt,
1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-15-201344-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Bee, orphaned as a teenager in 1893, recalls how she began to work on the railroad
as a loader to support her younger brothers and sisters, assembled an all-women
crew of loaders, and eventually studied, pestered, and connived her way into her
dream job, driving the steam engine True Heart along its Wyoming run. Moss
bases her fictional heroine on a photo of a women's freight-loading crew from the
turn of the century and accounts of women engineers from a slightly later period.
It requires quite a bit of wishful thinking to accept all of Bee's lucky breaks and
helpful male mentors in an era when, as Moss admits, there is no evidence that
women had yet risen to the rank of engineer. Payne's earthtoned paintings, tex-
tured with gritty flecks, are convincingly realistic, however; these young women
are sinewy and work-hardened, with long noses, straggly hair, and countenances
alight with determination and a measure of joy in their work. Keep this tale of
might-have-been in mind for discussions of women undertaking "men's work."
EB
290 
* THE BULLETIN
NIELSEN, VIRGINIA 
Baty Hattie. Cavendish, 1999 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-7614-5047-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Hattie is left with her mother's brother Mike while her mom, a gifted clarinet
player, goes on a year-long European tour with a jazz band. Uncle Mike is a pretty
cool guy, and Hattie even learns to love the bats her biologist uncle researches, but
the small town of Nugget, with its tiny school and insulated lifestyle, only intensi-
fies her lonely feelings of abandonment. Her rescue of a young bat (which she
picks up despite the express wishes of her rabies-conscious uncle) and her decision
to bring the bat to school result in disaster, discovery, and a return of the bat to its
natural habitat. The bat-infobites interspersed throughout are minimally intru-
sive, and the depiction of the relationship between Hattie and her possible new
friend, Brady, is both sincere and realistic. Hattie's abrupt change of heart, how-
ever, is not credible. In a tearful telephone conversation with her mother, Hattie
has a sudden revelation: "Hard as it had been, she had returned Smoky [the bat] to
his home in the wild, to be free. Now she must do something even more difficult.
She must let her mother go ... to be happy... to be free." Seen primarily through
a few overwrought long-distance phone calls, the relationship between Hattie and
her mother is underdeveloped and unsatisfyingly shallow; it is Hattie's interaction
with the bats that will hold readers until the end. Information on the bat's life
cycle is appended. JMD
OLSON, ARIELLE NORTH, ad. 
Ask the Bones: Scary Stories from Around the World;
ad. by Arielle North Olson and Howard Schwartz; illus. by David Linn. 
Viking,
1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-670-87581-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-8
Twenty-two traditional tales of vengeful ghosts, murderous magicians, and evil
witches are presented here with the sensational air of modern urban legend. The
stories come from Russia, China, the United States, Iraq, Germany, and Eastern
Europe, but they have an unfortunate sameness of language and style. They are
also structurally repetitive in that, with the exception of a simplified version of
Lafcadio Hearn's "The Boy Who Drew Cats," each ends in death or living horror
for the protagonists or with the promise of more horror to come. Olson and
Schwartz's retellings are sometimes abrupt and often unsubtle, but they are sure to
grab the attention of middle grade and reluctant readers and enjoy the same suc-
cess as Alvin Schwartz's Scary Stories to Tell in the Dark (BCCB 6/82) et al. With a
cover design featuring a shrouded, grinning skeleton holding an open box appar-
ently filled only with darkness, you'll have trouble keeping this one on the shelf.
Detailed source notes are appended. JMD
PENDZIWOL, JEAN 
No Dragons for Tea: Fire Safety for Kids (and Dragons); illus.
by Martine Gourbault. 
Kids Can, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 1-55074-569-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
In rhymed verse, a little girl narrates her adventure/near-tragedy with a dragon she
meets on a beach and invites home to tea. Pepper sends the dragon into a sneezing
fit, and "Our tablecloth sparked and then burst into flame./ And the curtains that
hung right beside did the same!/ The smoke alarm rang. What a loud, piercing
APRIL 1999 
* 291
sound!/ It meant 'Get out fast!' so I dropped to the ground." The little girl knows
just what to do. 
She quickly crawls to the nearest door, and meets her mother
beside a designated tree; Mom then summons the fire brigade from the safety of a
neighbor's house. Dragon has not been so smart, though, and along the route to
the door, the girl must yank the panic-stricken beast from his hiding place under
the rug and direct him to the exit. Although two pages of appended notes clearly
present commonly accepted rules for fire safety and emergency evacuation, these
rules are not as readily evident within the fictionalized situation at hand. Viewers
may not perceive from the few wisps of smoke wafting near the ceiling the urgency
of crawling to an exit. Nor do the (female) firefighter's consoling words to the
guilt-ridden dragon make much sense: "Don't be sad./ You knew what to do, and
of that we're quite glad." It will be obvious to even the most safety-oblivious
listeners that he didn't know what to do at all. Gourbault's colored pencil illustra-
tions do bubble with energy, and the tousle-haired heroine who befriends fantasy
creatures shines as a paragon of self-assurance and common sense in the emer-
gency. A bit of adult reader intervention may make this a useful introduction to
fire safety. EB
POWELL, RANDY 
Tribute to Another Dead Rock Star. Farrar, 1999 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-374-37748-0 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Grady is going to a rock-concert tribute to his mother, heavy-
metal queen Debbie Grennan, three years after her death. He is temporarily staying
with Mitch, his mother's ex-lover and father of Grady's twelve-year-old, mentally
retarded half-brother Louie. Mitch is a born-again Christian, now married to
born-again supermom Vicki, nemesis of Grady and his loyal if confused memories
of his mother. Grady's already adversarial relationship with Vicki is strained further
when she forbids him to take Louie to the concert; it is additionally complicated
by the possibility that Grady will be moving in with the family permanently. There
are two conflicts here: the obvious external conflict between Grady and Vicki, and
Grady's internal conflict about how he feels about a mother who abandoned him
for her music and then died. Narrator Grady is an emotionally complex character
who grows and changes while he tries to figure out what's going on in his heart and
his life. Vicki grows, too, and it's a tribute to Powell's strong sense of characterization
that she never becomes a one-dimensional Bible-thumper. She moves from
struggling against Grady's presence to believing that he belongs with them. The
revelatory conclusion, where Vicki realizes that Grady has feelings for them as a
family ("My goodness," she says. "My goodness. You want us") is touching not
only because she has taken steps toward Grady but because he has taken steps out
of his grief and toward his future. JMD
PROIMOS, JAMES 
The Loudness of Sam; written and illus. by James
Proimos. 
Harcourt, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-202087-X 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
On the day he was born, "Sam cried loudly. Because that is what babies do." But
the emotionally charged little guy has never learned to let up, and his parents
simply find this part of his great charm. "'Did someone throw nuts and bolts into
the blender and turn it on?' 'No, Honey, that's just our boy.' 'I'm so proud.'"
292 
* THE BULLETIN
When Sam and his vociferous pet duck visit Aunt Tillie in the big city, they find a
host of amazing sights to command their laughter and tears-from hilarious fuzzy
bunny slippers in a store window and a dog with gas, to a dolorous lost and hungry
kitty and garbage in the streets. Sam's reactions garner shushes from the urbanites,
and even kindly Aunt Tillie can't quite see what all the fuss is about, until the day
"she looked up and saw a cloud that looked like a funny nose and glasses" and
becomes Sam's true (and loud) kindred spirit. The pacing begins to lag somewhat
at the slightly overdrawn conclusion, and the message that it's good to be in touch
with your feelings isn't half as much fun as Sam out of emotional control. Proimos'
cast of cavernous-mouthed cartoons-best described, perhaps, as mutant Rugrats
on amphetamines-are hip and entertaining, however, and Sam's brashness and
his parents' adoration should provoke fits of laughter. Do not attempt this at
bedtime. EB
RASCHKA, CHRIS 
Like L 
LikeLiLike; written and illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Jackson/
DK Ink, 1999 
[40p]
ISBN 0-7894-2564-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4 -7 yrs
An unadorned free-verse text tells the tale of a lonely white cat left without a part-
ner after the unexplained pairing off of a variety of animals who "Two by two,/ he
and she,/ curly and/ straight, fancy/ and plain,/ different and same/ go." The
unlucky cat wanders off, observing "flowers and fliers," "round mounds" and "heaps
of stones" and finally finds a mate. The white and brown cats hug, groom, and
romp, "not alone now,/ two together,/ in rows and rows of roses." Raschka's text
has a distinct rhythm that will carry readers along, and the energy of his pastel and
watercolor illustrations is nearly palpable. The strong curving lines of his felines
have a solidity that invigorates compositions already enlivened by compelling color
choices. Across flat, colored-paper backgrounds the expressive white cat engages
in a quest for love that leads him through a garden of red roses, to the edge of a
dark blue sea, to the scene of recognition where white cat and brown cat reach out
to one another across sunny yellow space, then meet in a hug set against valentine
pink next to the words "like likes like." The approach leans toward the cute and
messagy, but adults and older children will seek (and probably find) layers of in-
tended meaning in Raschka's deceptively simple tale; younger children will appre-
ciate the vibrancy of the visuals and the happy ending. JMD
ROTNER, SHELLEY 
About Twins; by Shelley Rotner and Sheila M. Kelly; illus.
with photographs by Shelley Rotner. 
DK Ink, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2556-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Exuberant color photographs of over forty sets of twins grace the pages of Rotner
and Kelly's book exploring the concept of twinship. Whether it is capturing a
moment of quiet understanding or sudden surprise, Rotner's photographs succeed
in communicating the ups and downs of being and having a twin. Accompanying
text answers basic questions about twins, such as similarities and differences, whether
or not they like to dress alike, and whether they fight. Unfortunately, the text and
pictures are sometimes out of synchrony, the words failing to answer questions in
the order the photographs raise them. Included quotations would seem to be from
the twins on the page, but a small-print note at the end of the book explains that
APRIL 1999 
* 
293
they're not from the pictured twins at all. An introduction for parents begins the
book. The disarming diversity of photographs makes this ripe for sharing with
your favorite set of twins, especially if you supplement it with Elaine Scott and
Margaret Miller's Twins! for some good discussion for twins and singletons alike.
EAB
RYDEN, HOPE 
WildHorses IHave Known; written and illus. with photographs by
Hope Ryden. 
Clarion, 1999 
[90p]
ISBN 0-395-77520-5 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
Ryden is the primary documentarian of the contemporary mustang, and here she
returns to the subject, focusing particularly on aspects of equine behavior she's
observed. Chapters include "Young Males," "Stallions," "Stallions with Harems,"
and "Mares," going on to discuss the ferals' situation more generally in "The Re-
turn of the Native." The first-person observations make the events dramatic as
well as informational, with the author nervously talking down challenging stal-
lions and cheerfully personifying her subjects. The real draw here, however, is the
collection of elegantly displayed color photographs depicting the mustangs ob-
served in the text; between twilit pictures of gamboling youngsters and sun-drenched
views of thundering herds, the book effectively testifies to Ryden's longterm advo-
cacy for the protection of the mustang. The title recalls Ernest Thompson Seton's
WildAnimals I Have Known, but the recollective flavor is particularly relevant-
though the text only briefly alludes to the fact in passing, several of these pictures
originally appeared in Ryden's landmark 1971 National Geographic article on these
same horses, and the herd observations are therefore mostly of horses probably
long gone. That doesn't detract from the worth of this particular literary experi-
ence, however, which combines visual appeal with an unusual behavioral twist to
make a useful counterpoint to more staid how-to-ride books. An appendix on
"The Colors of Horses" has a factual hiccup or two but offers a luscious color-
photography gallery; a list of sources, including Ryden's previous publications on
the subject, is included. DS
SACHAR, Louis 
Marvin Redpost: 
Class President; illus. by Amy
Wummer. 
Random House, 1999 
[80p] 
(Stepping Stone Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98999-4 
$11.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-88999-X 
$3.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
The title is misleading and the real subject's ironic topicality hard to get around:
the president of the United States visits Marvin's classroom and discusses citizen-
ship with the kids. Once you put current affairs aside, however, this is a bouncily
entertaining tale of a classroom suddenly thrust into the spotlight (and on "hole
day," yet, when kids, teachers, and even the principal are wearing clothes with
holes in them). Even Marvin's normally unflappable teacher, Mrs. North, is reel-
ing from the gravity of the occasion: "'Now, I know I don't have to tell everybody
how to behave when the president gets here,' she said. Then she told everybody
how to behave." Sachar doesn't completely eschew the civics lesson at the expense
of the jokes here, but it all fits together satisfactorily and with surprising realism.
The end's a bit abrupt, but the easygoing and humorous adventure confirms Marvin
as a staunch friend of the intermediate reader. Illustrations not seen. DS
294 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SAN SouCI, DANIEL, ad. 
In the Moonlight Mist: A Korean Tale; illus. by Eujin
Kim Neilan. 
Boyds Mills, 1999 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-754-0 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-6
A kindly woodcutter wins a heavenly wife by concealing her garments while she
bathes, which, in the best folkloric tradition, keeps her earthbound. Desiring his
wife's happiness, the woodcutter returns the clothes, at which point his wife
promptly returns to heaven. The good-hearted hero then gives up his place on a
transport to heaven to his aged mother, and loses his chance to join his wife. His
kindness and self-sacrifice are rewarded when a dragon-horse, sent by the heavenly
king, comes to reunite the woodcutter with his family. The lengthy narrative
opens with an extended introductory subplot, but the pace is fairly rapid, and
patient readers will be carried along by the magical and romantic elements. Neilan's
acrylic paintings are a strong inducement for readers. The subtle tension between
warm and cool colors and the balanced choreography of double-, two-thirds, and
single-page spreads combine with eyecatching points of view and compelling com-
positions to provide a strong sense of movement and drama. Human and animal
figures are well-drafted and realistically expressive; brush strokes, almost scraped
across the illustrations, add texture and depth. Jacket notes refer to the story as
ancient and "one of Korea's most beloved," but no specific sources are provided.
JNH
SATHRE, VIVIAN 
Slender Ella and Her Fairy Hogfather; illus. by Sally Anne
Lambert. 
Yearling, 1999 
48p (First Choice Chapter Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-32516-9 
$13.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-440-41397-4 
$4.50 
R 
Gr. 2-4
You'll get the drift from the title: Ella is a "sweet little pig" afflicted by stepmother
and stepsisters, who cruelly suggest she lacks beautiful porcine fatness ("She was
just a skinny runt in ragged clothes"). When the Goldsnoots of Diamond Snout
Hay Ranch have a fancy shindig, Slender Ella's hogfather appears and gives her a
boost, making her Harley Joe Goldsnoot's prime dancing partner; the separated
lovers are reunited when the lost cowboy boot fits Ella's little pink trotter. Sathre
has a chipper and breezy style that keeps this oinking along. Ella's trials with her
"steppies" and her emergence into hoedown stardom, especially her flirtatious dia-
logue with Harley Joe, are wittily depicted and subtly perfumed with pork.
Lambert's illustrations have some of the vigor of Ann Schweninger's Oliver and
Amanda Pig creations, but these fairy-tale pigs are more frou-frou and lighthearted
(the scene of Ella reveling in the mudspray as she ploughs the field on her tractor is
a glorious interlude) without being excessively whimsical. Though this is textual
enough to be a semi-beginning reader rather than a beginning reader, kids' famil-
iarity with the underlying story will clue them in enough to enable a longer read
than they realize they're ready for, and they'll get a giggle out of this country/
western slice of ham. DS
SEYMOUR, TREs Jake Johnson: The Story of a Mule; illus. by Marsha Gray
Carrington. 
Jackson/DK Ink, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2563-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Farmer Puckett loves the Fourth ofJuly, because he gets to haul the fireworks to
town in his wagon for the Independence Day Social. Unfortunately, his new
APRIL 1999 
* 295
mule, Jake Johnson, is not amenable to the plan: instead, Jake sits down and
won't get up, and though "Farmer Puckett pulled for all he was worth, and pushed
for all he was worth ... he still couldn't lift up that mule, not even the bottom
half." Mrs. Puckett agitates for a strong approach, but Mr. Puckett is reluctant to
hurt the "poor, sweet animal" and continues to feed and water the firmly en-
sconced mule. Finally, in desperation on the Fourth of July with the firework-full
wagon hitched to the mule, Mrs. Puckett literally lights a fire under Jake-who
promptly gets up, leads the wagon over the fire, and sits right down again, with the
predictable and literal resultant fireworks. Seymour's countrified tone has an easy
rhythm and bucolic flavor to it that keeps the tall tale taling along (if some wince
at the motivational use of fire, it may help to demonstrate the book's fictionality
by noting that in real life, mules rarely sit down at all, let alone for months).
Carrington's acrylic art brings the ridiculousness to its peak, however, with whis-
kery-faced Jake a bug-eyed, bucktoothed cartoon who manages somehow to be
lively despite his recalcitrant immobility and the gaudy colors of the townspeople's
garb outshining the fireworks for sheer sparkle. Youngsters, particularly longears
fans, will get a kick out of this. DS
SIMON, SEYMOUR 
Tornadoes. Morrow, 1999 
[32p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14647-3 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14646-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
As long as they're safely distant, tornadoes are one of the most fascinating and
dramatic phenomena weather has to offer. Simon provides a succinct yet vivid
introduction to twisters, filling his text with memorable accounts of flattened cit-
ies and unusual tornadic effects ("A tornado once sucked up a pond full of frogs
and rained them down on a nearby town"); he also offers technical information
about tornado formation and measurement and explodes some tornado myths.
The photographs of tornadoes in situ and the devastating aftereffects are memo-
rable indeed; often the images are bleeds on full pages or double spreads, providing
a stormy backdrop for the text that describes them. The diagrams are less success-
ful, unfortunately, with their features poorly differentiated and explained; the book
also makes a startlingly large error in its description of a tornado watch (the text
confuses a watch with a warning, stating that a watch indicates that a tornado "has
already been spotted either on the ground or on radar"). The combination of
technical information and spectacular storm scenes, however, will suck readers
right in. DS
SLOAT, TERI 
Farmer Brown Goes Round and Round; illus. by Nadine Bernard
Westcott. 
Kroupa/DK Ink, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2512-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Farmer Brown lives a cheerful bucolic life that contains "pigs that oinked,/ Cows
that moo'd,/ Sheep that baa'd/ Doves that coo'd,/ Hens that clucked/ While don-
key brayed" and other sundry barnyard inhabitants offering their traditional utter-
ances. When a twister roars through the farm, everybody is tossed topsy-turvy
with problematic results: "His cows oinked,/ The pigs moo'd,/ His sheep clucked,i
The cat coo'd,"-in short, things are wrong, wrong, wrong, including the COCK-
A-DOODLE-Doo-ing farmer. After a nightmarish day of milking sows and slop-
296 
* THE BULLETIN
ping cows, Farmer Brown is relieved when a second tornado whirls through the
farm and returns everything to its original state. The rhyme is inviting, the inver-
sions ripple like toppling dominoes through the inventory of animals, and young
audiences will find the resultant chaos irresistible. Westcott's palette, as usual, has
the translucent and colorful cheer of lollipops, and her transposed animals hur-
tling through the air are gleefully loony and cartoony. Use this to create a barn-
yard ruckus and it'll be hard to return to the tidy world of "Old MacDonald." DS
SWINBURNE, STEPHEN R. 
Guess Whose Shadow?; written and illus. with photo-
graphs by Stephen R. Swinburne. 
Boyds Mills, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56397-724-9 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4 -7 yrs
Beginning with a detailed author's note on shadows and shadow creation, Swinburne
then introduces shadows found everywhere: on the edge of cliffs, under horses,
and behind you on a sunny day. Photographs, generally crisp and clear, illustrate
Swinburne's simple narrative as he finds shadows on the schoolyard, under bugs,
and at the beach. Midway through the book begins a "Guess whose shadow?"
game, which uses shadows from kids, critters, inanimate objects, and combina-
tions thereof. The child subjects will particularly appeal to young viewers, but the
scenes' busy backgrounds sometimes interfere with the shadows' visibility. Scale
problems hamper the comparison of big and small shadows, as the shadow of a
pine tree appears smaller than the shadow of a spider. This lacks the draw and
polish of Margaret Miller's guessing games, but few shadow books offer the lure of
photography, and kids will appreciate the visual puzzles here. Pair it with Clyde
Robert Bulla's What Makes a Shadow? (BCCB 11/63) for a more detailed intro-
duction to shadows and a prelude to shadow hunting. EAB
VANASSE, DEB 
Out of the Wilderness. Clarion, 1999 
[176p]
ISBN 0-395-91421-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Josh is tired of living out in the Alaskan wilderness with no access to more com-
mon teen pleasures, and he's tired of his father's indulgence of Nathan, Josh's
idealistic older half-brother. Nathan is a Thoreau devotee, increasingly disapprov-
ing of his family's reliance on trapping and hunting and intent on finding a differ-
ent way to relate to nature. He finds a fan in Shannon, the vegetarian daughter of
a neighboring family, who has been at loggerheads with Josh since her arrival in
the wilderness; when Nathan disappears during a dangerous cold spell, however,
it's Shannon and Josh who find him and save him after he's attacked by a bear.
The writing is fairly pedestrian, but there's a great deal of originality in the mate-
rial here. The book offers a vivid entree into the Alaskan winter world, where the
snow machine is standard transport, trips to the outhouse are fraught with danger,
and visiting a town of 4,000 is a culture shock; the beauty and danger of the
wilderness are both given their due. There's also representation of several different
points of view about wilderness use, ranging from Nathan's spiritual impulses to
Josh's more pragmatic approach; though the deck is somewhat stacked, since
Nathan's view veers into romanticism that leads directly to his downfall, there's
still a thoughtful airing of the divergent opinions and a strong implication that
everybody's motives are a little more complicated than they realize. Paulsen and
Hobbs fans looking for accessible wilderness adventure with a philosophical pi-
quancy will find this a worthwhile frontier to explore. DS
APRIL 1999 
* 297
VANDE VELDE, VIVIAN 
Never Trust a Dead Man. Harcourt, 1999 
[192 p]
ISBN 0-15-201899-9 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Selwyn, jilted by the beautiful Anora for the less ethical but richer Farold, finds
himself accused of Farold's untimely death, convicted on circumstantial evidence,
and sentenced to a horrible death-entombment alive with the dead man's de-
composing body in the town burial vault. And that's just in the first twenty-five
pages of this suspenseful page-turner. Vande Velde's wildly careening yet admira-
bly controlled plot includes a witch who can raise the dead (sort of), magical dis-
guises, mistaken identity, and a search for the real killer of the dead Farold (who
has been brought back to life as a talking bat. .. okay, it sounds strange, but it
works fine). Vande Velde never sacrifices characterization for plot: Selwyn is an
innocent who becomes a bit wiser, Farold is a ne'er-do-well when alive but rather
endearing when dead (okay, it sounds strange, but... ), and the lovely Anora-
well, let's just say handsome is as handsome does. Characterization and plot are
supported by a strong sense of place (the burial vault is especially gruesome) and
the pace never lets up, not even on the last page. This is a fantasy-mystery-com-
edy-romance with something for everyone, including the lucky booktalker. JMD
WALLACE, IAN 
Boy of the Deeps; written and illus. by Ian Wallace. 
DK Ink,
1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-7894-2569-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
James is no stranger to work, having been a "breaker boy, sorting sharp slate from
coal with his bare hands," but now he joins his father in men's work, a thousand
feet down in a Nova Scotia coal mine. Readers follow James through his day in the
tunnels beneath the Atlantic Ocean as he tests the air for toxic gases, learns to blast
the coal from the tunnel walls, loads the pony carts, and eats his lunch with greedy
rats looking on. Just as his unconditioned body nears its limit of soreness and
weariness, "the soft coal floor swelled beneath his boots and snapping timber cracked
like gunfire in his ears." He and Da survive the cave in, clearing piles of rubble
with their bare hands to reach the rescue party; father and son then exchange a
joke and a few words of encouragement, and head for home: "Tomorrow they
would go down into the deeps again, for they were miners and that was their job."
The matter-of-fact tone in which Wallace recounts the day's tasks allows the sud-
denness of the tunnel collapse to take the readers by surprise, and more imagina-
tive readers will recognize that the stoicism with which the characters meet disaster
thinly masks fear and fatalism. Rigid, literal acrylic paintings manage to capture
the looming oppression of the dank tunnel walls, fragile under the ocean's weight
and eerily lit by hand-held lanterns. EB
WILLNER-PARDO, GINA Jumping into Nothing; illus. by Heidi Chang. 
Clarion,
1999 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-395-84130-5 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Sophie's looking forward to summer by the pool hanging out with her best friend
Annalise, but there are a few clouds on the horizon: super-cool classmates Maggie
and Jennifer, to be specific. The popular pair has apparently taken a shine to
Annalise, inviting her to join them in jumping off the high dive--of which Sophie
298 
* 
THE BULLETIN
is deathly afraid. Tired of being sneered at as a chicken, Sophie decides to work
her way up to the high dive by performing, with Annalise's encouragement, other
fearsome acts such as doing a math problem on the blackboard, telling the boy she
likes that she thinks he's cute, and eating some bugs; ultimately, however, a little
fatherly encouragement helps her off the board. Sophie's travails are sympatheti-
cally depicted, and Willner-Pardo has a knack for conveying realistic human dy-
namics in simple phrasing; Annalise's quiet ambivalence between her affection for
Sophie and her flattered response to the cool girls' attention adds authenticity and
nuance. The warmly drawn relationships, insight into preteen fears, and some
enticingly squirmy moments (ranging from ant-eating to boy-girl conversation)
make this a satisfying and accessible read. Chang's illustrations are a little overly
dimpled and darling, but there's an appealing sturdiness to them that matches the
text. DS
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
Lena. 
Delacorte, 1999 
[12 6 p]
ISBN 0-385-32308-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
In I Hadn't Meant to Tell You This (BCCB 3/94), Marie narrated the story of her
friendship with Lena, who took her little sister Dion and fled their sexually abusive
father at the end of the book. Now Lena tells of life on the road as she and Dion
hitch rides (they say they're trying to get to their mother who's in the hospital
having a baby), miss Marie bitterly, and try to figure out where they can go that
won't result in the sisters being split up. Woodson capably paints the portrait of a
devoted but desperate Lena, determined to protect her little sister but unsure of
just how to manage it. The book is particularly vivid in its limning of life on the
road and its depiction of the people Lena and Dion meet in a world filled with
passing kindnesses: a truck driver buys them sandwiches, a waitress, formerly a
runaway herself, guesses their secret and comps their breakfast, and Miz Lily, who
takes them in for the night, lavishes warmth on them and finally connects them
back to Marie's family, where the girls find a home. Though the girls' journey is a
sad one, occasioned by the behavior of their father and haunted by the indifference
of their late mother's family, the book is ultimately a tender and loving story of
their encountering much goodness in the world as well as ultimately a place to
belong in it. DS
I 
°>:
APRIL 1999 
* 299
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 1999
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Louis Sachar for Holes (Foster/Farrar).
The Newbery Honor Book is A Long Way to Chicago by Richard Peck (Dial).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to Mary Azarian for Snowflake Bentley, writ-
ten by Jacqueline Briggs Martin (Houghton). The Caldecott Honor Books are
Duke Ellington, illus. by Brian Pinkney, text by Andrea Davis Pinkney (Hype-
rion); No, David, written and illus. by David Shannon (Blue Sky/Scholastic); Snow,
written and illus. by Uri Shulevitz (Farrar); and Tibet: Through the Red Box, writ-
ten and illus. by Peter Sis (Foster/Farrar).
The Coretta Scott King Award for writing will be presented to Angela Johnson,
author of Heaven (Simon), and the award for illustration goes to Michelle Wood
for I See the Rhythm, text by Toyomi Igus (Children's Book Press). The King
Honor Books for writing areJazmin's Notebook, by Nikki Grimes (Dial); Breaking
Ground, Breaking Silence, by Joyce Hansen (Henry Holt); and The Other Side:
Shorter Poems, by Angela Johnson (Orchard). King Honor Books for illustration
are I Have Heard ofa Land, illustrated by Floyd Cooper, written by Joyce Carol
Thomas (HarperCollins); The Batboy ed His Violin, illustrated by E. B. Lewis,
written by Gavin Curtis; and Duke Ellington, illus. by Brian Pinkney, written by
Andrea Davis Pinkney (Hyperion)
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is Dial
Books for Schoschana Rabinovici's Thanks to My Mother; honors go to Viking for
Secret Letters from 0 to 10, by Susie Hoch Morgenstern.
The 2000 May Hill Arbuthnot Honor Lecture will be delivered by Hazel Rochman.
Anne McCaffrey is the 1999 winner of the Margaret A. Edwards Award for Out-
standing Literature For Young Adults honoring an author's lifetime contribution
in writing books for teenagers.
The ALSC Distinguished Service Award goes to Lillian N. Gerhardt.
The Scott O'Dell Award for Historical Fiction goes to Harriette Gillem Robinet's
Forty Acres and Maybe a Mule (Karl/Atheneum).
The Canadian Library Association's Best Book of the Year for children is Kenneth
Oppel's Silverwing (Simon). The Best Book of the Year for Young Adults is Bone
300 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Dance by Martha Brooks (Orchard). The Amelia Frances Howard-Gibbon
Illustrator's Award goes to Barbara Reid for The Party (North Winds Press).
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Tim Bowler for River Boy (Oxford University
Press).
The Kate Greenaway Medal was awarded to P. J. Lynch for When Jessie Came
Across the Sea, text by Amy Hest (Candlewick).
The Hans Christian Andersen Medal for writing goes to Katherine Paterson of the
United States; the illustration medal goes to Tomi Ungerer of France.
NCTE's Orbis Pictus Award for Outstanding Nonfiction for Children goes to
Shipwreck at the Bottom of the World: The Extraordinary True Story of Shackleton
and the Endurance by Jennifer Armstrong (Atheneum); Honor Books are Black
Whiteness: Admiral Byrd Alone in the Antarctic by Robert Burleigh and illus. by
Walter Lyon Krudop (Atheneum), Fossil Feud: The Rivalry of the First American
Dinosaur Hunters by Thom Holmes (Messner), Hottest, Coldest, Highest, Deepest
written and illus. by Steve Jenkins (Houghton), and No Pretty Pictures: A Child of
War by Anita Lobel (Greenwillow).
1^3
APRIL 1999 
* 301
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Butler;
Kimmel
Africa-folklore: Echewa
Aliens-stories: Layton
American Indians-fiction:
Durrant
Anger-stories: Bang
Architecture: Aliki; Cooper
Art and artists: Cummings;
Hamanaka
Art appreciation: Johnson
Aunts-stories: Proimos
Baths-fiction: Meister
Bats-fiction: Nielsen
Bees-fiction: Lally
BIBLE STORIES: Lester
BIOGRAPHIES: Aliki;
Cummings; Hamanaka; Kroll
Birthdays-stories: Jonell
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Atwater-Rhodes; Eboch
Brothers-stories: Jonell
Cats-stories: Raschka
Child labor-fiction: Howard
Civics: Sachar
Civil War-fiction: Banks
Community helpers: Beil
CONCEPT BOOKS: Swinburne
COUNTING BOOKS: Johnson;
Merriam
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Vande Velde
Dogs-fiction: Meister
Dogs: Kehret
Dragons-stories: Pendziwol
Ethics and values: Lamstein
Eyeglasses-stories: Cowley
Families-fiction: Powell
FANTASY: Alexander; Atwater-
Rhodes; Butler; Lally; Vande
Velde
Farms-stories: Sloat
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Marchetta; Willner-Pardo;
Woodson
Fathers and sons-fiction: Durrant
Fathers and sons-stories: Wallace
Fear-fiction: Willner-Pardo
Firefighting: Beil
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY
TALES: Echewa; Goldin;
Kimmel; Lee; Lester; Olson; San
Souci; Sathre
Friendship-fiction: Lynch;
Marchetta; Willner-Pardo;
Woodson
Friendship-stories: Raschka
FUNNY STORIES: Layton;
Sathre; Seymour
Geography: Jenkins; Lourie
Grandfathers-fiction: Michelson
Gypsies-fiction: Alexander
HISTORICAL FICTION: Banks;
Durbin; Durrant; Eboch
History, U.S.: Calabro; Fisher
History, world: Aliki
Holidays: Anderson
Horses: Ryden
Inventors and inventions: Kroll
Japan: Hamanaka
Japan-folklore: Kimmel
Jews: Fisher
Jews-folklore: Goldin
Korea-folklore: San Souci
Literature, English: Aliki
Marine life: Gibbons
302 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Mining-stories: Wallace
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Brooks; Marchetta; Nielsen
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Anderson; Hesse
Mothers and sons-fiction: Powell
Mountain climbing: Jenkins
Mules-stories: Seymour
MYSTERIES: Vande Velde
Nature study: Montgomery
Oceans: Gibbons
Pets-fiction: Meister
Pigs-fiction: Sathre
POETRY: Florian; Heide
Reading aloud: Florian; Goldin;
Kehret; Kimmel; Lee; Lester;
Olson; San Souci
Reading, beginning: Cowley;
Meister; Sathre
Reading, reluctant: Florian;
Jenkins; Kehret
Religious education: Fisher;
Goldin; Lester; Michelson
Runaways-fiction: Woodson
Safety education: Pendziwol
School-fiction: Sachar
School-stories: Lamstein
Science: Montgomery; Simon
Shadows: Swinburne
SHORT STORIES: Kimmel;
Lynch; Olson
Sisters-fiction: Woodson
Sisters-stories: Bang
Slavery-fiction: Banks
Snakes: Montgomery
Social studies: Lourie
Sports: Blackstone
Storytelling: Echewa; Goldin; Kimmel;
Lee; Lester; Olson; San Souci
Storytime: Hesse; Layton; Proimos;
Sloat
Suicide-fiction: Marchetta
Summer-stories: Hesse
SUPERNATURAL TALES: Olson
SURVIVAL STORIES: Calabro;
Durrant; Vanasse
Theater: Aliki
Time-poetry: Heide
Trains-stories: Moss
Transportation: Moss
Twins: Rotner
Uncles-fiction: Nielsen
Vampires-fiction: Atwater-Rhodes
Voyages and travel: Durbin; Lourie
Voyages and travel-fiction: Woodson
Warriors: Kimmel
Weather: Simon
Weather-stories: Hesse
Weddings-stories: English
Women's studies: Moss
World cultures: English
IRI 
AUGIUS 
HOU SIUE 
PII 
UB 
S11H1R S
CELESTIAL RIVER
Creation Tales of the Milky Way
Andrea Stenn Stryer
Traditional stories from Native
America, Africa, Japan, Polynesia,
Australia, South America, and
Greece convey wisdom and
understanding of the natural world
while also entertaining.
For ages 8+
96 pages, 53/8" x 8/8"
Hardback $14.95/ISBN 0-87483-529-1
Paperback $7.95/ISBN 0-87483-528-3
ASIAN TALES
AND TELLERS
Traditional stories from sixteen
Asian countries from India to Japan.
Asian themes such as harmony,
friendsnip, simplicity, and hard
work are emphasized. Includes
information about traditional
storytellers at work in Asia today.
For ages 12+
224 pages, 53/" x 8 3/8"
Hardback $24.95/ISBN 0-87483-527-5
Paperback $14.95/ISBN 0-87483-526-7
AVAILABLE FOR IMMEDIATE SHIPMENT
AUGUST August House Publishers, Inc.
H 
201 E. 
Markham Street * Little Rock, AR 72201
H 
( U 
Phone 1-800-284-8784 * Fax 501-372-5579
email: order@augusthouse.com
Teaching
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
Every issue of Teaching K-8
-
m 
mvides Informativh 
article 
on
he cutting edge of education.
You'll also find insightful
ohumns and thoughtful
leviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
eaching K8 Is filled with
hundreds ofunique deas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching In the Lbrary
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plu, Interviews with children's book authors and Illustrators
'_». 
_t 
_ _ 
« 
_ «* « 
_ « .
« !
Don 
t 
miss ou on uus vaiuaole
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
Teaching#8
x 54808, Boulder, CO 803224808
W8793
* Outside US. add $5.00 postage per subscription
I 
I
IF
readers to a foreign land, but the truths they uncover will
surely hit home." -Publishers Weekly (starred review)*
"Lyrical"
-The 
Horn Book
Magazine
"Compelling"
-Kirkus Reviews
"Astonishing"
-The 
New York Times
SNOWFLAKE BENTLEY
written 
JACQUELINE BRIGGS MARTIN
.
illustrated by MARY AZARIAN
Ages 4-8' 32 pages * $16.00 * ISBN 0-395-86162-4
Winner ofd e 1999 Caldecott Medal
An ALA Notable Children's Book
v- ;' 
A BookiAst Editors' Choice
A Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books Blue Ribbon
An NSTAICBC Opttanding Science Trade Book for Children
' "There will be so many uses for this book -
not the
least of which is simply handintg it t a child and letting
his or her imagination soar like Benteyss" -BooklRtt,
starred review
"Thisis picture-book biography at its ery best: written
likea prose poem and beautifully illustrated."
-New 
York Times Book Review
* 'Aariais 
-hand-colored 
Woodcuts ait jusft he right
complement to Martins text." ---ýBullin oft 
enter
for Children's Books4, stared review
Houghton Mifflin Company * 222 Berkeley Street * Boston, MA
.·-.~.;.-r 
-
-..-
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
I Il/Il ~II 
H
0008 9036(1~9904~52 8* 1 0
I
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/pubofflbccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1998
* the Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more ... updated monthly!
--- ~~ ~~~~~~~~ 
~~~~~~~- 
~--~- ~-
;"
