ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
ii $~ 
_iYt;-I -Z
91',
"
i
r~;
MYSISTER., 
AND 
I
YOKO KAWASHIMA WATKINS
* 
"A continuation of So FAR FROM THE BAMBOO GROVE (1986), which
described the author's harrowing escape from Korea at the end of WW II.
It is 1947 and Yoko, now 13 ... her older sister Ko and brother Hideyo ...
[survive] on the most meager of diets. . . . From its gripping first pages,
where the hungry trio is plunged into danger, the immediacy and
translucent simplicity of Watkins's narrative are compelling. The
_ ' 
,
nentc portrayal ot postwar Japan
is fascinating." -Pointer, Kirkus Revieos
"This sequel has ... quiet honesty
about ordinary people caught in
terrible times." 
-Booklist
"Watkins's work attests to the
fact that vivid autobiography is
one of the most forceful forms of
history."
-Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books
Ages 11 up / $16.95 SBE / 0-02-792526-9
SBE indicates a reinforced hardcover edition.
MACMILLAN BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
AN IMPRINT OF SIMON & SCHUSTER
CHILDREN'S PUBLISHING DIVISION
866 THIRD AVENUE
NEW YORK, NY 10022
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
September 1994
Vol. 48 No. 1
A LOOK INSIDE
3 
THE BIG PICTURE
Broken Umbrellas written and illus. by Kate Spohn
4 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
6 
* The Hanged Man by Francesca Lia Block
16 
* The Librarian Who Measured the Earth written by Kathryn Lasky;
illus. by Kevin Hawkes
19 
* Martha Calling written and illus. by Susan Meddaugh
24 
* Pink and Say written and illus. by Patricia Polacco
25 
* The Book that Jack Wrote written by Jon Scieszka; illus. by Daniel Adel
29 
REVIEW POLICY
31 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1994 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Kate Spohn, from Broken Umbrellas ©1994 and used by permission of Viking
Children's Books.
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 3
THE BIG PICTURE
Broken Umbrellas
written and illus. by Kate Spohn
SpR-"Recommended for the special few who will read it"-is a code always avail-
able to, but rarely employed by, Bulletin reviewers. We're a bit leery of it: it
signals "hard book" for kids and hard work for teachers and librarians. Although
we've primarily used it for worthwhile but exceptionally knotty fiction (such as
Bruce Brooks' Everywhere, BCCB 10/90), every once in a while you'll see a picture
book that demands a different-not better, not harder-level of attention.
Kate Spohn's picture book Broken Umbrellas seems an exact fit for an
SpR label, but you would probably want to amend "special reader" to special read-
ing, because it's a book that is going to depend quite a bit upon adult interpreta-
tion. The spare, quiet text and expressionist paintings create a biography of a
nameless bag lady who came as a child to America, later taught at a university, and
"liked wearing stylish clothes and owning lovely things." "But gradually her life
changed. She dreamed about money. She hid it under her mattress. She had
conversations with herself"-and now she wanders the streets collecting things,
including her favorites, broken umbrellas.
The story-portrait, really-is simple enough, written with a poignancy
that is honest and unsentimental: "You may cross over to avoid her smell. Or you
may stop and listen to what she has to say." We are light-years away from Leah
Komaiko's foolish Leonora O'Grady (BCCB 5/92), in which a dancing, bouncy
text taught us that it's fun to be a bag lady. Kids know better. Spohn's book is
wholly sad, especially in its presentation of the woman's cheerful embrace of her
situation. When she notices that it's going to rain, the woman is happy, because
rain one day means lots of broken, discarded umbrellas the next. "She would find
her favorites, the black ones, the ones that resemble the bats that are supposed to
bring good luck. She walked along feeling lucky. Tomorrow would be a good
day." She's happy, but we're not. Is this an irony that young children can under-
stand?
The pictures will help, in fact, it's the counterpoint of text (portraying
the woman's sympathies) and paintings (portraying ours) that gives the book its
integrity. Tones are muted, often tinged with gray, and shapes are gently geom-
etrized, with the woman usually painted from behind as an almost abstract tower
of softened squares and rectangles, capped with a black baseball hat. We never
quite see her face, which rather than rendering her anonymous or blandly "univer-
sal," makes us think about our urban instinct to not see troubled people. The
portrait of the woman, still young, when her "life changed" shows intense despair
in the turned-away figure, curved and huddled in a straight-back chair against a
background of institutional green wall and brown floor. Another picture of the
4 
* 
THE BULLETIN
woman watering plants on what's presumably a rooftop garden is cheerier, but
viewed from a slanted, precarious angle.
In sharing picture books, we teach children to find the words in the pic-
tures and the pictures in the words; teaching them to appreciate intentional disso-
nance between the two is more difficult. The last picture, of the "good day," is
almost abstract and not easy to quickly interpret but ultimately reveals itself to be
a painting of the woman bending and reaching into a trash can while broken
umbrellas lie in the gutter. The irony comes clear to the adult eye and heart; the
woman's search for "things she likes" is paralleled by our search for answers to her
plight. Kids, though, might just want to give her another umbrella, a generous
impulse that misses the point even while it finds another. This is a hard book both
in the world it projects and in the demands it makes of readers, who, if they don't
get it, won't get that they don't get it. Thus the SpR rating: an exceptionally
worthy addition to a picture book collection, but be prepared to work.
Roger Sutton, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANDRES, KATHARINE 
Humphrey &r Ralph; illus. by Brant Day. 
Simon,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-671-88129-9 
$14.00 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Along comes another variation on the new-baby-in-the-family blues. The charms
of baby Humphrey, manifest to adoring adults, elude older brother Ralph, who
knows who the truly accomplished sibling is in the family and is piqued by the
injustice of it all: "Humphrey learned to wave, clap, and pat the cat. Ralph learned
the alphabet, how to zip his own jacket, and how to breathe underwater. Everyone
applauded Humphrey." After valiant efforts to amuse Humphrey, solicit parental
attention, and turn the baby into a fish end in failure, Ralph finally comes to terms
with his little brother through the simple act of retrieving the wailing baby from
his crib and is rewarded with Humphrey's first word, "Alph." Most of Ralph's
myriad outbursts are individually amusing and convincing, but taken as a whole
they are overdrawn and a bit tedious. Zingy pastel pictures dominated by hot
temper-tantrum reds and orange are energetic and engaging, but Ralph, who is
clearly a preschooler in the story, looks too old for his petulant behavior and naive
scheming. EB
BARBOZA, STEVEN 
Door of No Return: The Legend of Goree Island; written and
illus. with photographs by Steven Barboza. 
Cobblehill, 1994 
48p
ISBN 0-525-65188-8 
$14.99 
R Gr. 4-8
Goree Island off the coast of Senegal was a major consolidation and embarkation
point for slaves taken to America and Europe from the fifteenth through the nine-
teenth centuries, and Barboza traces its complicated, sometimes paradoxical his-
tory in this spacious photo-essay. While the text is somewhat repetitive and
disorganized (one chapter ends, "Its [Gor&e's] geography helped determine its des-
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 
5
tiny," but the chapter hasn't discussed geography at all, and the next moves on to
slave revolts) it is still a valuable complement to accounts of slave life in the Ameri-
cas, and Barboza is honest about black African complicity in the trade: "She [Anne
Pepin] owned thirty-five slaves, and yet African blood flowed in her veins." The
book is also poignant on the subject of African-American tourists (when one was
being prodded to buy a souvenir, he replied "Iam a souvenir!") and Barboza writes
well about his return to his own roots in the nearby Seychelle Islands. Contempo-
rary color photos and historical prints capture much of the history and all of the
beauty of Gor6e; while there are unfortunately no source notes, there is an index.
RS
BAYLOR, BYRD 
The Table Where Rich People Sit; illus. by Peter Parnall. 
Scribners,
1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-684-19653-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
The young narrator nicknamed Mountain Girl has just called a family meeting:
"The subject is money; and I say we don't have enough of it." She is fed up with
looking worse than her classmates and eating at a homemade kitchen table built
from discarded lumber, and so she challenges her parents, "It would help if you
both had a little more ambition." The startled parents agree to review the family
income with her, so pencil and paper in hand, Mountain Girl makes bookkeeping
entries as her parents assign dollar values to all the intangible benefits of their life
in the mountains: twenty thousand dollars is father's valuation of working out-
doors; add another ten thousand to hear the coyotes sing. Mountain Girl gets the
message, offers entries of her own, and of course they all end up "millionaires."
The flow of Mountain Girl's cheeky narration is so frequently broken by asides
that the intended informality becomes heavy-handed; still, the clash of child-par-
ent priorities is faced with honesty, and the difference between a freely chosen
simple lifestyle and real poverty is skillfully delineated. Parnall's stylized and shape-
shifting line-and-wash pictures conceal form within form as they wed humans to
their environment. It is likely that many listeners will empathize with Mountain
Girl's powerlessness to effect the family's material fortunes; however it is just as
likely some will feel bamboozled by adult fast-talk that rationalizes parental priori-
ties and protest that they've been tricked. EB
BINCH, CAROLINE 
Gregory Cool; written and illus. by Caroline Binch. 
Dial,
1994 
[2 8p]
ISBN 0-8037-1577-3 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Gregory's cool-too cool for Tobago, where his parents have sent him to stay with
his grandparents for a month. It's hot, the food is strange, there's no TV, and
Gregory disdains the friendship of his cousin Lennox, who can't seem to offer
anything better to do than feeding the goats or swimming in the river. Binch's
verdant, sun-drenched watercolors show us all along what Gregory only comes
eventually to realize: this is a beautiful place with plenty to offer. Most kids will
recognize the place as paradise from the start, but they will surely also be able to
share Gregory's discomfort in a new situation, and rejoice in the pleasures he finds,
such as swimming along with the dolphins, cracking a coconut for milk, and warm-
ing to the steady, good-humored encouragement of his loving grandparents. RS
6 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BLOCK, FRANCESCA LIA 
The Hanged Man. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
[12 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024537-9 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024536-0 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
In a departure from the chronicles of Weetzie Bat (BCCB 2/89) and her family,
Block weaves a dark and dreamlike tale of another California girl. Laurel, named
for Laurel Canyon, meets Jack, in the hospital waiting room as her father lies dy-
ing. Between attending parties, reminiscing, and grappling with the demons that
seem to beset the world, she encounters Jack again and they become lovers, which
brings out her own haunting: her late father had for years sexually abused her,
resulting in a terminated pregnancy and, now, anorexia. In her inimitable style,
however, Block pieces these details into a far-from-clinical, slightly surreal fable of
power and pain, using the framework of a tarot-card reading, one card per chapter,
to reveal Laurel's own past and destiny. Block invests this world with glamor, but
it's a glamor of decay as well as delight (Laurel's best friend, for instance, shoots up
heroin, and a neighbor's child dear to Laurel seems to be left to herself when her
mother goes on a romantic escapade). Kids may not pick up the clues to the source
of Laurel's pain-Cynthia Grant's Uncle Vampire (BCCB 11/93) is a more effec-
tive but still creative treatment of the topic-but the poetic style and mystical
narration will hold the attention of Block fans and those with a taste for shadows.
DS
BODE, JANET 
Heartbreak and Roses: Real Life Stories of Troubled Love; written by
Janet Bode and Stan Mack. 
Delacorte, 1994 
16 1p
ISBN 0-385-32068-X 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-12
"To protect their identities," Bode says of the tellers of these accounts, "the names
have been changed and a few details altered, but the tales they recount are all true."
These speakers are earnest and believable: Bonnie, who spent a long time loving
her abusive and controlling boyfriend ("I imagined following him everywhere, beg-
ging him, 'Please forgive me. I'll do everything you want'"); Louis, the class flirt,
who falls for an even greater flirt; Seth, who struggles with his emerging gay sexu-
ality; Suki, abused by her mother and raped by an acquaintance, who tries to main-
tain her relationship with her boyfriend without sleeping with him; and eight others.
The teens are intense, frequently inconsistent, and occasionally self-deluding, which
makes their narratives seem particularly authentic. The book's layout is varied:
two stories are told in comic strip form (for no apparent reason), and newspaper
clippings relating facts about teen sex and romance appear between the stories.
Will it make readers more careful about their own romances? Who knows-real-
izing the problematic nature of their relationships often doesn't help the kids tell-
ing the stories. The book is great sturm und drangsoap opera, though, and it's an
easy read, with more drama per word than in most novels. Kids' reactions may
range from "I had a girlfriend like that" to, heaven help them, "I wish I had a
boyfriend like that," but they'll eat it up. DS
BRADLEY, VIRGINIA 
Wait and See. 
Cobblehill, 1994 
162p
ISBN 0-525-65158-6 
$14.99 
R Gr. 4-6
Amy's parents died soon after she was born, and the only family she's known is her
grandfather, the Judge, and her housekeeper/caretaker, Doff. It's a shock, then,
when Doff announces that she's returning to England to take care of her own
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 
7
mother, and Amy tries to find a way to keep Doff with her. Her family struggle is
counterpointed by her growing friendship with Violetta, who has just moved to
town, yet another stop on Violetta's mother's fruitless quest to find Violetta's long-
gone father. Amy's growing understanding of Violetta's family problems and con-
sequent maturity helps her come to terms with her own changing family as well as
assist Violetta and her mother in finally settling down. The Eudora Welty-ish
small-town atmosphere is appealing and the characterization honest and clever
(Amy's hypochondriac default friend, Sukie, is a classic portrayal). While it's not
entirely clear why Violetta's mother gives up her search, her flighty devotion makes
her an unusual and interesting figure. Subtle but simply told, this is an engaging
story of adjustment and growth. DS
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH, ad. 
The Great Ball Game: A Muskogee Story; illus. by Susan L.
Roth. 
Dial, 1994 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1540-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1539-0 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Animals and sports, two winning themes among the primary set, make this title
valuable for classroom and home readalouds, and among early independent read-
ers. Birds and Animals agree to settle a quarrel over the relative merits of wings
and teeth by a ball game rather than by a war, but Bat, with both teeth and wings,
can't decide which team to join. Rejected by the Birds because of his small size,
Bat is finally invited onto the Animal side on the condition that he must "hold
back and let the bigger Animals play first." In a game of stickball the airborne
Birds have the advantage, and as twilight approaches the Animals are all but worn
out defending their goal when Bat, easily navigating across the darkened field,
steals the ball from Crane to score the decisive point. He names the Birds' pen-
alty-they must leave the land for half of each year-and he still comes out daily at
dusk "to see if the Animals need him to play ball." Straightforward telling that
moves swiftly through the game's action is just right for young listeners, and the
paper-collage critters, limbs and wings waving wildly, capture the energy of the
contest. In a children's-book market rapidly flooding with cut-paper illustration,
Roth's array of carefully selected papers stands out, as she coaxes her medium into
yielding fur and feathers, grainy earth, deep shadows, and bright, blue-streaked
sky. In a succinct introductory essay which will be welcomed by teachers, Bruchac
cites his sources and comments on the role of ball games in Native American cul-
tures. EB
BURGESS, BARBARA HOOD 
The Fred Field. Delacorte, 1994 
180p
ISBN 0-385-31070-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Oren Bell (BCCB 7/91) is determined to do something in memory of his mur-
dered friend Fred, so after the rotting house Fred was killed in is torn down, Oren
and his sisters and friends make the Fred Field. It's a playground with room for a
baseball diamond, basketball court, and band practice area as well as a place for
Oren's precocious little sister Brenda's budding impatiens. As all the activities on
the Field might suggest, there's a little too much going on in this sequel: sports
rivalry, a band getting ready to perform the 1812 Overture for the Fourth of July,
a community art project, the incipient wedding of Oren's mother, and the kids'
decision to solve Fred's murder all bubble along even while they never quite come
8 
* 
THE BULLETIN
together to form a satisfactory whole. Since so much depends upon events from
Oren Bell, kids not versed in the characters and events of the first book will be lost,
but those who enjoyed the first book-which also had a little too much plot for its
own good-will appreciate the chance again to meet stalwart Oren, his bossy,
brainy sister Latonya, and eccentric Brenda, each of whom gets fair time, and all of
whom are vividly individualized. RS
BUSENBERG, BONNIE 
Vanilla, Chocolate, &Strawberry: The Story of Your Favorite
Flavors. Lerner, 1994 
112p 
illus. and with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-1573-3 
$17.21 
R Gr. 5-8
Vanilla, chocolate, and strawberry are sort of the holy trinity of desserts, but how
did they get that way? After an introduction discussing the physiology and chem-
istry of gustation, Busenberg takes on one taste at a time. Each flavor merits an
account of its history, a description of the process and technology that make it
available to us today, and botanical information about the plant that provides the
raw material. Aside from photographs of the edibles at various stages of produc-
tion and packaging (cacao trees, cacao pods, candy bars, cake, etc.), there are his-
torical illustrations, diagrams of various parts of the plants and the molecular
structure of some taste components, and helpful maps showing where the crop
grows today. The book's subject is delectable and the text informative; the blend
of culture and science is particularly appealing and most appropriate to the culi-
nary topic. The sidebars, pictures, and shaded boxes of special text are not always
gracefully laid out, but they give the book a cheerful horn-of-plenty feel enhanced
by several pages of recipes for each flavor. It's a pity there's no bibliography,
because this would be a good encouragement to read more in botany, cooking, or
culinary history. A sizeable glossary, a metric conversion chart, and an index are
included. DS
CARLSON, LOIu M., ed. 
Cool Salsa: Bilingual Poems on Growing Up Latino in the
United States. Holt, 1994 
123p
ISBN 0-8050-3135-9 
$14.95 
R* 
Gr. 7 up
"We would like you to know/ we are not all/ docile/ nor revolutionaries/ but we
are all survivors," says Ana Castillo in her poem "We Would Like You to Know,"
and the poems collected here chronicle the joys and pains, successes and failures,
of that survival. The book has six sections: School Days, Home and Homelands,
Memories, Hard Times, A Time to Party, and A Promising Future; the poems
range from the quirkily humorous ("Why Do Men Wear Earrings in One Ear?" by
Trinidad Sinchez, Jr.) to the hortatory ("Love Poem for My People," by Pedro
Pietri) to the sad ("'Race' Politics," by Luis J. Rodriguez) to the wry ("English con
Salsa," by Gina Vald6s). Each poem in English is followed by its Spanish transla-
tion or original; poems written in a mix of both stand alone, with notes in the back
of the book explaining terms and references. The poets trace their roots to various
countries, including the U.S., and their voices have an immediacy often lacking in
poetry collections. The subtle but singing lyrics frequently have a colloquial tone
that will speak to many young readers ("When I made it to school/ they thought I
didn't/ have a mind in English and if/ you don't have a mind in English/ you have
a mind in nothing"-from Pablo Medina's "The Secret"); many would also make
piquant readalouds for younger grades. A foreword by Oscar Hijuelos accompa-
nies the introduction by the editor, and brief biographies of the poets and transla-
tors are included. DS
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 
9
CARMODY, ISOBELLE 
The Gathering. Dial, 1994 
280p
ISBN 0-8037-1716-4 
$15.99 
M 
Gr. 7-12
Nathaniel hates his creepy new home town, Cheshunt, and he hates his menac-
ingly authoritarian new secondary school, Three North. Soon he discovers that
the school's youth club, The Gathering, is merely a cover for a virtual cult of
Cheshunt youth controlled by the school principal, Mr. Karle, and Nathaniel is
called to join The Chain, an opposing group of students whose combined powers
are the only hope for fighting the evil in Cheshunt. Each member of the Chain
must find his or her symbol, a particular talisman, which they will then bring
together to "heal the sorrowing earth" and chain "the dark." As they struggle to
complete their mission, Nat learns more about the history of the town and a school
tragedy that turns out to have been a failed attempt at controlling the dark by an
earlier Chain. Carmody's good with atmosphere and the story starts off promis-
ingly, but the plot has more detail than action. It's also never clear what exactly
the evil is or where it initially comes from, so that the thematic struggle of light
and dark (reminiscent of Susan Cooper's superior Dark Is Rising series) never
seems to have higher stakes than control of a high school; one needs a greater
cosmic justification for certain events in the book, such as the malicious burning
alive of Nat's beloved dog. Nor is it sufficiently explained why the rituals have
their particular form-since more time is spent on what is said than why, the
ceremonies and phraseology begin to appear silly rather than significant. Despite
the promising setting and some classic ingredients, this is ultimately cliched in its
fantasy motifs and derivative plot development. DS
COLLIER, JAMES LINCOLN 
With Every Drop of Blood: A Novel of the Civil War;
written by James Lincoln Collier and Christopher Collier. 
Delacorte,
1994 
[228p]
ISBN 0-385-32028-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Johnny's family is in dire straits when his father, a Confederate
soldier in the Civil War, dies of his wounds. Partly to help his mother and two
young siblings and partly for the excitement, he joins a wagon train that's trying to
get out of his war-torn area of Virginia to sell and buy supplies, but he's caught by
Union soldiers. His chief captor is Private Cush Turner, an ex-slave about Johnny's
age, and after initial suspicion the two young men form a friendly alliance ("We'd
got to be friends by mistake"). Cush helps Johnny when the latter is caught in a
Union uniform and considered to be a spy, and later Johnny keeps Cush from
execution by the Confederates just as the war ends. Johnny's narration includes
telling descriptions of the poverty of the besieged South and the brutality of the
battle as well as demonstrating his struggle with the ideology of the war: is it about
states' rights or slavery? Is it right or wrong? Has anybody actually read the Bibli-
cal or constitutional passages they keep insisting support their position? Johnny
himself is capable of meanness (at first he deliberately teaches Cush to read wrong,
resulting in a Gettysburg Address more suited to Johnny's Confederate tastes) but
also of thoughtfulness and change. The relationship of Cush and Johnny and the
convincingly conversational tone of Johnny's voice make this book an effectively
immediate evocation of a distant and sometimes difficult-to-understand time. An
introductory note explains the rationale for the book's historically accurate use of
the word "nigger"; appended is a note about the authors' slight liberties with their
10 
* THE BULLETIN
characters' speech, another note about the historical basis for the book, and the
text of the Gettysburg Address. DS
COONEY, CAROLINE B. 
Driver's Ed. Delacorte, 1994 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-32087-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
A flashy cover and an opening that crackles with sharp-edged humor should draw
young teens straight into this tale of two attractive, "above-average" students who
go joy-riding one night on a street-sign-swiping spree. Remy and Morgan are too
wrapped up in launching a romance to consider the implications of removing
these souvenirs from their posts, and the next evening's news discloses that a young
mother has been killed by an oncoming truck at the intersection from which they
removed the stop sign. The novel explores the panic, denial, transference of blame,
and self-recrimination the pair experience before they admit their role in the trag-
edy and try, with their parents, to cope with their guilt. The teens' angst is cred-
ibly, if lengthily, portrayed; the parents' responses, which range from sarcastic fury
to shame and guilt, are equally believable. The loving-spirit-of-Christmas ending,
in which both sets of parents finally extend their unconditional love to the errant
offspring, is somewhat manipulative, yet the importance of Christmas ritual in
Morgan's family has been sufficiently developed within the novel to make this
ending more logical than maudlin. There's clearly a message for readers, which is
explicitly delivered by the Driver's Ed instructor; "Choosing to control a car is life
and death." In a response that is at once ironic and realistic, the class dismisses this
pedantry as "yet another safety lecture. ... It was nothing to do with them." EB
COOPER, ILENE 
Trick or Trouble? Viking, 1994 
154p 
(The Holiday Five)
ISBN 0-670-85057-8 
$13.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Launching a series about five girls who determine to continue their summer camp
friendship by meeting during the holidays back home near Chicago, this starts out
with a formulaic setup but acquires depth with the development of the leading
character's painful difficulties at school. Lia Greene had been awarded an all-
around-camper trophy for popularity and participation in group activities, but she
is lonely in junior high because of a dominating classmate who seems to have
frozen her out of seventh-grade social life. The tension between Lia and her mother,
the dynamics between Lia and her next-door friend Scott, and Lia's relationship
with the nearest of the "Holiday Five" (who happens to be African American, a
subplot unto itself) are realized with natural dialogue and internal energy that
make the flatter writing in the first half of the book seem generic by contrast. It's
hard not to superficialize this large a cast of kids, and stock phrases sometimes
explain what readers have already been led to experience, but the author of The
New, ImprovedGretchen Hubbard(BCCB 11/92) and other books in the Kennedy
Middle School series sustains scenes of genuine humor and pathos in what could
have settled at a level of conventional sitcom drama. BH
DISALVO-RYAN, DYANNE 
City Green; written and illus. by DyAnne DiSalvo-
Ryan. 
Morrow, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12787-8 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12786-X 
$15.00 
R 4-8 yrs
Marcy lives on a city street that "looks like a big smile with one tooth missing"
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 
11
after three blows with a wrecking ball leveled the old apartment building where
several neighbors once lived. Old Man Hammer bitterly complains, "Once that
building could've been saved. But nobody even tried." But an offhand remark by
Hammer, a bit of advice from an ex-city employee, some signatures on a petition,
and a trip to city hall give the neighbors the lease to the vacant lot and, with
contributions of materials and labor, they transform it into an urban garden so
inviting that even the curmudgeonly Old Man Hammer secretly plants sunflower
seeds. DiSalvo-Ryan portrays the garden project not as a quick fix for urban de-
cay, but as a path toward neighborhood pride and cooperation. Watercolor and
crayon pictures are cheery even while retaining a gray and brown backdrop of city
shabbiness. The neighbors (a more demographically diverse group would be hard
to find) are nicely individualized; alert viewers will even find clues among the
illustrations to account for Old Man Hammer's crustiness. The author includes
tips on launching a similar neighborhood project which, she notes, will necessarily
vary according to community governance and property ownership. EB
GARLAND, 
SHERRY 
I Never Knew Your Name; illus. by Sheldon
Greenberg. 
Ticknor, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-69686-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
NR 
6-9 yrs
A boy has been noticing a neighboring teenager who doesn't have any friends, who
is teased by the other kids about his clothes, who plays basketball by himself ("Man,
you were really good"), who pitches pebbles at the lamppost while the other kids
go to the prom, and whose only companions are the pigeons he feeds on the roof
and the stray dog he befriends. One night the teen jumps off the roof and kills
himself, and the young boy regrets that he never knew his name and wishes they
had been friends. This seems meant to be a lesson about the need to reach out to
others, but the moral is subverted by the entirely dismal world the book portrays.
The narrator is always waiting for a visit from his father, who never shows up; he
thinks about asking the older boy to go fishing in the park pond, but "there prob-
ably weren't any fish in it anyway"; even the stray dog gets taken to the pound.
Why live? Even the final painting, in which the boy joins the basketball players for
a game, holds only an ambiguous promise-has he reached out to others or de-
cided to go along with the heedless crowd? The title and theme of the book be-
come confusing when the boy, wishing he had known the other boy's name, carves
that name into the roof ledge as a memorial. We seem meant to understand that
the boy learned the name from his sister's yearbook, but kids will miss the refer-
ence, particularly since the name is never given. While Greenberg's somber and
well-drawn oil paintings fully capture the lonely atmosphere, the story would have
been better fleshed out as a novel for older readers. RS
GREENFIELD, KAREN RADLER 
The Teardrop Baby; illus. by Sharleen
Collicott. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 1994 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022944-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022943-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
In an original story based on folkloric patterns, a couple longs for a child, a wish
not granted to them until an old "wizard woman" casts a spell-but promises to
come back: "His future is mine." This is a strong and time-honored beginning,
12 
* THE BULLETIN
but the story is crowded with motifs. The couple grows flowers (with eyes, for no
discernible reason) from their tears; fortune-cookie-like baguettes reveal the fu-
ture; the child, after being taken away by the wizard woman, gets back home in a
way that is both confusing and unlikely; the parents make yet more teardrop ba-
bies all on their own after the old woman is vanquished. It's too much, but kids
might enjoy the magical twists and the lavish yet comfy paintings that recall Diane
Goode's work in their lilac-dominated palette and gentle portraiture. RS
HARRIS, JONATHAN 
This Drinking Nation. 
Four Winds, 1994 
196 p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-02-742744-7 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 7-12
In addition to the many valuable books published about teenagers and alcoholism,
most of them therapeutic in bent, it's good to have a book that seeks to shed some
light on historical and social contexts for drinking. After two brief, overlapping
(and somewhat redundant) survey chapters on the history of alcoholic drinking in
the U.S., Harris proceeds chronologically from the pioneers to the present day,
with much attention given to such phenomena as temperance movements of the
nineteenth century, Prohibition, and contemporary issues of targeted advertising
and teenaged drinking. Unfortunately, while the book seems thoroughly researched,
only rarely are surveys and research studies fully cited, and there seems to be little
synthesis of research results, leading the book into some self-contradictions. On
one page, for example, Harris cites "impartial scholars" who accuse the National
Institute on Alcohol and Alcohol Abuse (NIAA) of inflating statistics of the num-
ber of alcoholics in the country; on the next page he cites the NIAA stating that
drinking in the 1980s declined from 1968, and on the next page he says that there
are twice as many alcoholics today as there were in 1978. Later, he states that
African Americans drink less than whites, and on the next page says that while
blacks make up 11 percent of the population, they account for 18 percent of the
people receiving treatment for alcoholism. All of these facts could be true, but
there are enough surface paradoxes among them that some further explanation is
necessary. Additionally, the book, again seemingly unawares, offers two differing
accounts of the founding of Alcoholics Anonymous, and there is no definition
anywhere of what an alcoholic is, or the difference between an alcoholic and an
"abuser" of alcohol, although both terms are used throughout the book. The
sociopolitical history is valuable; readers looking for hard facts about contempo-
rary drinking and alcoholism will need to look further. While there are no source
notes nor bibliography, a suggested reading list and an index are appended. RS
HATHORN, LIBBY 
Way Home; illus. by Gregory Rogers. 
Crown, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-517-59909-0 
$15.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
What begins as a scary but exciting nighttime journey of a boy, Shane, who finds
a stray cat and rescues it (and himself) from a dangerous gang of a boys and a dog,
becomes a parable of homelessness when the boy finally gets the cat "home": a
rough crawlspace in an abandoned building where Shane lives alone. The boy's
narration never mentions his plight; it's up to the impressive dark-pastel illustra-
tions to show the disparity between Shane's windowshopping dreams ("You and
me in a Jaguar. Vroom-vroom. Huh, but they've only got red ... and we want
green") and his desperate reality. It's debatable whether younger listener/lookers
will catch onto the irony, and they may interpret the book as a grand adventure:
the city night-lights are dazzling and that crawlspace looks like a great hideout.
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 
13
The oversized, somewhat glitzy format of the book also tends to subvert its theme
with even the crumpled-paper endpapers ostentatious in their silvery glow. But
Shane's conversations with the cat ring true and brave, as he attempts to find sense
and comfort in a city that has abandoned both boy and cat. RS
HERMES, JULES 
The Children ofMicronesia; written and illus. with photographs
by Jules Hermes. 
Carolrhoda, 1994 
48p 
(The World's Children)
ISBN 0-87614-819-4 
$14.96 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Like other volumes in this series (see review under Goodsmith, 4/94), this one
attempts to portray a foreign culture through its children as they attend everyday
activities of school and play as well as observing culturally specific customs such as,
in this case, the "coming out" rites of soon-to-be-married women on the island of
Palua. The color photos, if not always placed strategically amidst the text, are
plentiful and involving, and the book as a whole gives a comprehensive portrait of
a group of cultures that are generally underrepresented in American social studies
or geography classes. But the problems of the series persist: many children, from
several different islands, are too briefly profiled, and the jumps between them are
abrupt and distracting. Micronesia comprises hundreds of islands (a map, though
unfortunately without scale, is provided) but in the attempt to be as complete as
possible, the book only skips along the surface. As an introduction to Pacific
island life, the book has its moments, which-even while they fail to coalesce into
a satisfying whole-may spark an interest. RS
HI4YILMAZ, GAYE 
The Frozen Waterfall. Farrar, 1994 
[288p]
ISBN 0-374-32482-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
After two years, Selda's father has finally sent the plane tickets for his family to join
him in Switzerland, where he has been working in a factory. While Selda, now
twelve, has not been happy living at her grandmother's home in a small town in
eastern Turkey, she's apprehensive about being a "silent stranger" in Switzerland,
unable to speak the language and, as she discovers, unable to communicate with
her father, who seems a different man, lost in a new country. Selda's adjustment to
both new family dynamics and to a new culture is painful and ever incomplete,
unlike the relative ease with which her older sisters find friends and contentment.
She tries to tell a friendly teacher about her brother Ahmet, who has fought with
their father and moved away, but her halting explanation in German-"We was a
family of seven, we was now a family of six"-is met with a patient grammar
lesson. Selda has more success in a turbulent friendship with classmate Giselle,
and with an illegal Turkish immigrant named Ferhat, whom the two girls teach
German and ultimately save from the authorities. Despite some overexplanation
and occasional shifts in point-of-view, Higyilmaz' second novel (see Against the
Storm, BCCB 4/92) authentically charts and individualizes the "foreign worker"
experience through a tenacious young heroine who stubbornly, quietly, makes a
place for herself. RS
HILL, DAVID 
See Ya, Simon. 
Dutton, 1994 
153p
ISBN 0-525-45247-8 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 6-9
First published in New Zealand, this is the story of fourteen-year-old Simon, skilled
at whizzing around in his wheelchair, comfortable with his classmates, and af-
14 
* THE BULLETIN
flicted with muscular dystrophy that makes his life increasingly difficult. Simon's
best friend, Nathan, narrates the story, telling of his own crush on the class beauty,
his squabbles with his little sister, and his friendship with Simon during what turns
out to be Simon's final year. Simon is funny and smart, sometimes using his illness
to get away with things or to make trouble and sometimes genuinely saddened by
the realization of how little his future holds. Nathan hates pushing Simon's wheel-
chair when the battery dies and sometimes resents the attention others give to
Simon, but he's always accepted his friend's disability and finds it hard to accept
Simon's obvious decline. Hill is a brash and sometimes hilarious writer, and he
employs telling details about Simon's illness (such as Simon's daily rush home to
get to the bathroom, since he can't use the ones at school) and social dynamics (as
when the class beauty flirts with Nathan to make her boyfriend jealous). All in all,
it's a heartbreaking portrayal of a realistic kid, surrounded by other realistic kids,
facing and succumbing to the inevitable. While the book's authenticity enhances
rather than reduces its tearjerking potential, it's got enough boyish life and charm
to appeal to a far wider audience than would a sentimental dying-by-inches drama.
DS
HINDLEY, JUDY 
The Wheeling and Whirling-Around Book; illus. by Margaret
Chamberlain. 
Candlewick, 1994 
[26p] 
(Read and Wonder)
ISBN 1-56402-490-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Ages 4-7 yrs
This could be a cousin to Joanna Cole's Magic School Bus series, with its make-
science-painless approach and its frenetic illustrations punctuated with explana-
tory asides. The subject is circles, and Hindley holds forth with zealous enthusiasm,
attempting to impart not only concepts of sphere, disk, rotation, etc., but also their
mind-boggling occurrence in the universe. Her rhythmic text has a chipper, Dr.
Seuss-styled cadence which reels the audience in by addressing them directly ("But
what if you twirl a thinnish disk until it's a perfect blur? You'll find what you've
made in a ghostly way is the every-way-round of a sphere"). But occasionally,
invented terms trickle in, which may be acceptable in verse, but not in the
explanationof concepts-"When something spins, two opposite things are hap-
pening at once: flying-apartness and holding-togetherness." Holding-togetherness
is much later defined as gravity, while flying-apartness is never defined. Invitations
to "muse and gaze and ponder, and let our thoughts go free," and to "dance and
sing, as we all go around the day again" are a bit affected, and the final challenge,
"How many round and circular and spinning things can you find in this book?" is
overwhelming in scope, given the myriad details in the busy watercolor illustra-
tions. EB
HOLLAND, ISABELLE 
Behind the Lines. 
Scholastic, 1994 
194 p
ISBN 0-590-45113-8 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Katie O'Farrell works as scullery maid for the wealthy Lacey family of Washington
Square to help support her siblings. The Civil War rages, and her underage brother
Brian is anxious to join the Union Army, despite their father's disapproval. Brian's
wish is fueled by the promise of Katie's employers to pay him $300 to enlist in
place of their draft-age son. While the New York blue-bloods buy their way out of
the draft and encourage the Irish to do battle for them, the Irish turn against the
city's free black population who, they suspect, will usurp their jobs while they are
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 
15
at war. Holland paints a very clear picture of the triangle of social suspicions and
jealousies that erupted into the New York Draft Riots of 1863. Mrs. Lacey is
thoughtlessly cruel in her comments about the Irish; Katie is indignant over their
vulnerability; the black stablehand she befriends is an easy target for rioters. But
Katie and her supporting cast deliver their lines as representatives of their respec-
tive classes ("The same lack of mercy we English showed toward the Irish," intones
a broad-minded matriarch, "... they are now showing towards the negroes, who
are the only ones who have less power today in New York than the Irish"), setting
the tone of a carefully scripted history lesson rather than a richly developed novel.
Still, historical fiction buffs will find this topic, which receives little attention in
children's literature, to be of interest. EB
HURWITZ, JOHANNA 
A Llama in the Family; illus. by Mark Graham. 
Morrow,
1994 
[9 6p]
ISBN 0-688-13388-6 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
If you've been waiting for a good llama story, here it is: Adam, a young Ver-
monter, is convinced that he's getting a new mountain bike to transport him over
the hills, but instead what turns up at his house is a llama. "Ethan Allen" is the
center of Adam's mother's new llama-trekking business, where tourists can take a
hike with the picnic-carrying llama and get photographed with the animal, and he
and Adam form a friendship. Adam is also hoping that the llama's profits will get
him his bike, but he soon discovers that would take quite awhile; he sets out to
earn the money himself, but then decides he'd rather get Ethan Allen a llama
friend. Adam's narration is light-hearted but credible, and his relationship with
Ethan Allen builds naturally ("After a bit, I discovered that if I stood real still and
kept my hands at my sides, he'd walk over to me and put his nose right up to my
nose"). Also entertaining are his canny dealing (he finds a valuable old rug in the
attic, then swaps it for a quilt which he finally swaps for the second llama) and
sturdy, individualistic family. A warm and cheerful story with likable characters
and a little exotic-animal spice, this will please a broad range of readers. DS
KIMMEL, ERIC A. 
Bernal & Florinda: A Spanish Tale; illus. by Robert
Rayevsky. 
Holiday House, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1089-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
To win the hand of the daughter of the heartless and miserly mayor of Seville, the
poor but witty Bernal must parlay his one possession, a field of grasshoppers, into
a fortune. Our hero's road to the happy ending is paved with tongue-in-cheek
humor and familiar elements from other tales-trading up wares, transporting a
corpse, and tricking the father-in-law-to-be into bestowing his "reluctant, but no
less valid, blessing." The lovers marry, the corpse coughs up a peach pit and re-
turns to life, but nonetheless his "splendid marble tomb stands in the cathedral of
Seville," no doubt testifying to the "truth" of the tale! Kimmel bases this romp in
the Spanish picaresque tradition, a fact which he notes but, alas for young readers
without a handy dictionary, does not define. Richly detailed and satirically edged
ink-and-watercolor scenes evoke stage settings and costume, with lead roles and
extras alike painted with the almost grotesque hues of stage makeup seen up close.
With its small ornamental type and sophisticated palette, this picture book may
not attract an audience as easily as Kimmel's other tales for the primary set, but the
16 
* THE BULLETIN
good-natured humor should amuse those ready to explore a literary form uncom-
mon in picture books. EB
LASKY, KATHRYN 
The Librarian Who Measured the Earth; illus. by Kevin
Hawkes. 
Little, 1994 
48p
ISBN 0-316-51526-4 
$16.95 
R Gr. 2-5
Is classical Greek geographer Eratosthenes' mathematical prowess too rarefied a
topic for the picture book set? Not when Lasky traces his development from curi-
ous tot to ground-breaking scholar in a fluent narrative packed with intriguing
details of everyday life around the Mediterranean coast and delivered in an engag-
ingly chatty tone. While following his career as tutor to the son of an Egyptian
king, mathematical researcher and librarian of the great collection at Alexandria,
readers effortlessly glean additional information about gymnasium education,
Ptolemy III, classical museums, organization and storage of scrolls, Greek medi-
cine, and even the obstinacy of camels. Lighthearted acrylic paintings, which per-
fectly balance Lasky's informal narrative style, invite leisurely examination: busding
scenes of games, markets, schoolyards, and harbors, peopled with bright-eyed fig-
ures caught in animated involvement, convey the intensity with which the Greeks
are reputed to have pursued life. Since Eratosthenes' chief claim to fame is his
accurate measurement of the Earth's circumference, this book's success ultimately
rests on its lucid explanation of his geometric calculations. Hawkes' clear dia-
grams support Lasky's Earth-as-split-grapefruit analogy (a model which Eratosthenes
could not have devised, as grapefruit had not yet developed) to demonstrate how
the inner angle of a wedge can be measured. Readers will easily follow the steps in
Eratosthenes' calculations from the time he learns of the annual phenomenon of a
shadowless well in Syene, until he employs bematists-"surveyors trained to walk
with equal steps"-to pace the distance between the well and Alexandria. In a
concluding essay Lasky muses on the impact of Eratosthenes' legacy could have
made on world history had Columbus followed the mathematician's calculations.
A bibliography of works consulted by author and artist is included. EB
L'ENGLE, MADELEINE 
Troubling a Star. Farrar, 1994 
[304 p]
ISBN 0-374-37783-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Vicky Austin is excited about her upcoming trip to Antarctica, the gift of an eld-
erly friend, especially because she will be visiting the boy she loves, Adam, who is a
research assistant at a scientific post on the continent. The book, and each subse-
quent chapter, opens with a framing scene of Vicky marooned on an iceberg, so we
know trouble is afoot from the start, and sure enough, Vicky hasn't even left her
Connecticut town when warnings begin, in the form of notes left on her school
locker: "THOSE CONSIDERING FOREIGN TRAVEL HAD BETTER
WATCH THEIR TONGUES." (Readers will spot the note-leaver easily; the
only mystery is why Vicky can't figure it out.) L'Engle is trying to do a lot here;
the book is adventure story, international intrigue, love story, travelogue and envi-
ronmental lesson, all enveloped in the author's characteristic philosophical con-
cerns. The parts, though, never quite come together. The espionage angle relies
upon typecasting and formulaic devices; the ecological concerns are often deliv-
ered via the shipboard lectures Vicky attends en route; even the philosophy/theol-
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 
17
ogy seems layered on via songs and poems Vicky writes rather than being worked
into the book as a whole. Still, there's enough suspense engendered by that wan-
dering iceberg to keep readers going, and the romance is passionate in an above-
the-neck kind of way. Fans of A Ring ofEndless Light (BCCB 9/80) and previous
books about the Austin family won't hesitate. RS
LESSEM, DON 
The Iceman. Crown, 1994 
32p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-59597-4 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-59596-6 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
In a factual, straightforward account, Lessem describes the accidental discovery
and scientific examination of the oldest preserved European body, found half-
submerged in ice by hikers in the mountains between Austria and Italy. The book
also includes archeologists' assessments of what the man looked like, how his tools
functioned, and what type of society he lived in 5,500 years ago. It's a sketchy
overview without the scope or cultural sensitivity of Charlotte Wilcox's Mummies
and their Mysteries (BCCB 7/93), but the (sometimes gory) color photographs
combined with the inherently intriguing subject will provide readers with a step-
ping stone between newspaper articles and more in-depth coverage. Unfortu-
nately, there are no source notes or bibliographic references here, so researching
students will have to look further for journal articles or other books on the subject.
BH
LOBEL, ANITA 
Awayfrom Home; written and illus. by Anita Lobel. 
Greenwillow,
1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10355-3 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10354-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Lobel returns to the alphabet book genre with a work more complex and ambi-
tious than her venerable On Market Street. A diverse cast of children stage an
alphabetical tour of world cities, in which theatrical backdrops feature famous
buildings and landmarks, and young actors pose in tableaux representing the allit-
erative caption that appears just below stage. Some scenes are cleverly conceived:
"Henry hoped in Hollywood" shows a star-struck lad ready to distribute his press
picture around Tinseltown; "Paul painted in Paris" depicts a young artist captur-
ing Notre Dame on canvas. But more often, scenes strain to incorporate a usable
verb: "Oliver oscillated in Odense" (on a gymnast's ring) and "Edward escaped in
Edinburgh"-but why? The readers "sits" in the second row of the theater, look-
ing up at the narrow stage on which each scene is carefully confined by a bold, red
valance, a pair of white columns and thick, black vertical borders, and the front
row of the audience; diagonal spotlight beams direct the viewer's attention upon
the actor and provide visual relief from the heavily rectangular composition, which
must necessarily repeat twenty-six times. These theatrical trappings, although ini-
tially eyecatching, detract from the show's real star-the architecture itself. Had
Lobel placed her buildings in the spotlight and matched the tableaux to the scen-
ery, her ambitions might have been more fully realized. In an appendix Lobel
succinctly explains the significance of each city's landmark structure-a boon to
teachers planning extension activities in art or social studies. Incidentally, readers
fascinated by the perennial "X" problem will not be surprised to learn that "Xavier
xylophoned ... "-but they'll never guess where! EB
18 
* THE BULLETIN
LYON, GEORGE ELLA 
Mama Is a Miner; illus. by Peter Catalanotto. 
Jackson/
Orchard, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08603-4 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06853-6 
$15.95 
M 
6-9 yrs
Here and there, now and then, become a little confusing in this somewhat oblique
picture book about a little girl whose mother is-well, you've read the title. The
narrator describes what her mother does all day in the mine while she herself is in
school; the watercolor paintings, in Catalanotto's trademark light-dappled style,
alternate scenes in the mine with scenes of the family having what at first seems to
be breakfast but what eventually turns out to be dinner. While the mining details
have interest, they're underexplained for the picture-book audience ("Some days
they're sent to the working face to watch the roof or keep cable clear while the
continuous miner roars at the rock and rips coal from the seam") and occasional
sidebar poems ("Firedamp, blackdamp,/ Fire Boss checks the air./ Bad top, kettle
bottom:/ don't go there") distract rather than enhance. The girl's worry for her
mother does provide the book with a strong center, but it's surrounded, in both
words and illustrations, by a vague "evocativeness" that will drift past most kids.
And poor Dad: we see his profile a couple of times in the pictures, but he's never
mentioned in the text. What does he do for a living? RS
MCCULLY, EMILY ARNOLD 
Crossing the New Bridge; written and illus. by Emily
Arnold McCully. 
Putnam, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22618-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
"The old bridge suddenly creaked, cracked, and fell into the water." Luckily, the
Jubilattis are quick to arrive at the scene, and the four sunny-tempered medieval
workaholics immediately set to the task of rebuilding, leaving the crusty old Mayor
to search for the town's happiest person, who must cross the bridge first and ward
off a traditional curse. The rich banker, the beautiful baker, the soulful poet, and
the mother of many healthy children all have their private woes, and it looks as if
the bridge will indeed be cursed, But daughter Jubilatti, standing at the foot of
their completed masterpiece, lays worry to rest: the Jubilattis themselves, who are
overjoyed to have built the best bridge of their lives, have in fact already crossed
the bridge. This gentle lesson about finding happiness in accomplishment is deliv-
ered in a smoothly paced narration with plenty of lively, clipped dialogue. Al-
though this is not McCully's finest artwork-the bright watercolors have a certain
uniformity of tone and composition that grows a bit tiresome-such comic details
as the Mayor's absurd hat and elongated feet, and the bespectacled Scribe who
shadows his every move, enliven the scenes. Glimpses of medieval town life, con-
siderably freshened and romanticized, and of bridge construction, discernible in
the background, extend the audience's interest beyond the plot of the story. EB
MARCUS, LEONARD S., comp. 
Lifelines: A Poetry Anthology Patterned on the Stages
ofLifi. 
Dutton, 1994 
116p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-45164-1 
$16.99 
R Gr. 6-9
Four sections, "Small Traveller," "I Am Old Enough," "On Such a Hill," and "In
the End We Are All Light," each introduced with a black-and-white photo, shape
this poetry anthology around the cycle of human life. Marcus arrays a pretty
variation of tone here, ranging from Shakespeare's "That time of year thou mayst
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 
19
in me behold" to pithy epitaphs (including John Gay's famous "Life is a jest, and
all things show it;/ I thought so once, but now I know it") in the final section, for
instance. His sources are a varied lot too, including staples (Ogden Nash), newer
poets (Katha Pollitt), and authors better known to children's literature for picture
books (Nancy Willard and Liz Rosenberg, both contributing sophisticated and
meritorious entries). Some of the poems are a little dense for many young readers
(Ambrose Phillips' "To Miss Charlotte Pulteney in Her Mother's Arms") and some
poems of childhood are from a distant and adult point of view (Stevie Smith's
"The Conventionalist"), but there are plenty of satisfying ones. Larger trim size
and fewer pages make this a more spacious and measured collection than many,
and kids afraid of big fat poetry books may enjoy dipping in here. Brief biogra-
phies and a title, author, and first line index are included. DS
MEDDAUGH, 
SUSAN 
Martha Calling; written and illus. by Susan
Meddaugh. 
Houghton, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-69825-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Martha's back and Meddaugh's got her-well, Meddaugh actually invented Martha
the talking dog (see Martha Speaks, BCCB 11/92, for an expose of the stunning
scientific breakthrough), and here the conversational canine is back in a sequel.
After a brief recap of Martha's capabilities ("Martha loved letters. She lapped up
consonants, and savored every tender vowel"), the story takes up with Martha's
winning the family a vacation to Martha's Vineyard-but the hotel allows no
dogs. Garbed as the family's grandmother, Martha accompanies them anyway
and then finds herself left alone in the hotel room while the humans go out to play.
When the hotel discovers her, she lets loose with a tirade about man's disloyalty to
dogs ("Ten thousand years we've been by your side, and we still can't go into a
restaurant and order a steak") which causes hotel guests to reconsider and the hotel
to change its ways. Motor-mouth Martha is incapable of being unfunny, and here
she gets some great physical comedy: the best is when she, swathed in a veil as
Grandma, leaps from her wheelchair to catch a frisbee. The dialogue, especially
that in speech balloons, is doggone hilarious ("Bad dog!" Martha's child admon-
ishes the dog after she jumps for the frisbee, causing a bystander to say, "Young
lady! That's no way to speak to your grandmother!"). The colored-pencil and
watercolor art retains the droll expressiveness of the first book, with Martha's moods
practically palpable and some farcical visual touches (check for the guy who flips
his toupee at Martha's hotel appearance). Young fans will long even more for a
Martha of their own, but they'll happily settle for this rollicking followup. DS
MEYER, CAROLYN 
Rio Grande Stories. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1994 
257p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200548-X 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200066-6 
$3.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Determinedly multicultural, this novel relies on the rather calculated conceit of a
group of Albuquerque middle-school students who decide to celebrate their di-
verse heritages by putting together a book about New Mexico history, customs,
and legends. Since the book has a nonfictional purpose despite its fictional con-
text, source notes would have been in order, but some of the stories Meyer tells,
such as that about the "Hidden Jews of New Mexico," have enough inherent in-
trigue to survive the contrivance. Others, such as an internally confused anecdote
20 
* THE BULLETIN
about a girl who learns from her curandera grandmother how to remove the "evil
eye," seem silly, especially when the girl tries it out on her bigoted Anglo teacher.
Was Ms. Kelsey really unaware that Teresa was standing behind her, running an
egg along her head and shoulders? (She does become nicer.) Still, the info-bits
about Estebanico, Georgia O'Keeffe, low-riders, and code-talkers are exotic enough
to sustain interest, and the school setting will have a familiar appeal. RS
MILLER, MARGARET 
Guess Who?; written and illus. with photographs by Marga-
ret Miller. 
Greenwillow, 1994 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12784-3 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12783-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
Who-does-this and who-does-that is the theme for Miller's latest concept book,
which follows the same pattern as her Can You Guess? (BCCB 10/93) and Where
Does it Go? (10/92). A double spread asks a question on the verso ("Who cleans
your teeth?"), gives silly multiple choices on the recto ("A cat? A shoemaker? A
window washer? A rubber duckie?"), and reveals the true answer at the turn of the
page ("A dentist!"). The set-up is toddler-perfect and the color photos are crisp
and exuberant, but the humor is sometimes limp. As the wrong answers to the
question "Who wakes you in the morning?," a lion, a puppet, and a military band
are all absurdly possible enough to be funny, but "a hot-air balloon" flies in from
left field. (The real answer-"your dog!"-is deeply satisfying, at least for those
kids who have or want one.) As a wrong answer to "Who goes to school?," "um-
pires" is off-base: most four-year-olds won't know what an umpire is; the few who
do will probably also know that umpires do in fact go to school. This kind of
concept book needs lots of control if we are not to feel that we are simply looking
at a slide-show of some attractive pictures, and while this entry isn't up to the
series' best, it will still provide lots of opportunity for point-and-giggle. RS
MORA, PAT 
Pablo's Tree; illus. by Cecily Lang. 
Macmillan, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-02-767401-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
It's Pablo's fifth birthday, and he's eager to get to his grandfather's house. Every
year his abuelito decorates a tree in celebration of his grandson's birthday, with the
type of decoration a surprise. After Pablo and his mama arrive at Abuelito's and
find his tree (decorated with bells and windchimes this year), Pablo's grandfather
tells him again the story of the planting of Pablo's tree, which occurred when
Pablo's mother first adopted Pablo. This is a warm and gentle story, the tree-
surprise aspect gives the tale a pleasing sparkle, and the characters provide a nice
complement to all the WASP-y, Norman Rockwell families in adoption books-
the family is Latino, and Mom is a single parent. The cut-paper illustrations are
decorative but unfussy, with abundant flowers and Pablo's tree providing a cheer-
ful liveliness to the compositions. A tale of love and welcome (and neat orna-
ments), this volume has a celebratory aspect that makes it appealing not just to
adoptees but to kids generally. DS
MORGAN, MICHAELA 
Helpful Betty Solves a Mystery, ISBN 0-87614-832-1; Help-
ful Betty to the Rescue; ISBN 0-87614-831-3. 
Each book: illus. by Moira
Kemp. 
Carolrhoda, 1994 
32p 
$11.96 
R Gr. K-2
Betty the hippo wants to be helpful, but she's actually hapless, busily bumbling
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 
21
into situations where everything was going along just fine without her, thank you
very much. In ... Solves a Mystery, Betty finds "a poor lost motherless egg," while
readers will quickly spot, in the illustration, the mother crocodile who has just
turned her back for a moment. In . .. to the Rescue, Betty spies a "poor little
monkey stuck in a tree? This is a job for helpful me!"-never mind that the mon-
key is lounging happily, and that her friend Arthur tries to point out a basic truth:
"'But Betty,' says Arthur, , 'monkeys can . . . .'" Thanks to helpful tips from
friends like Arthur and from the witty counterpoint of text and pictures, kids will
see all that Betty doesn't, and that's half the fun for a learning reader constantly
faced with people-and books-that know more than they do. The texts are as
rhythmically buoyant as Betty herself, and the repetition necessary to a beginning-
reader is used in service to the story. The precise ink-and-watercolor illustrations
splash right along with the fun. RS
MORRIS, JUDDI 
The Harvey Girls: The Women Who Civilized the West. 
Walker,
1994 
101p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8303-1 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8302-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-9
"Don't cut the ham too thin, boys," were Fred Harvey's dying words to his sons,
who inherited Harvey's famous chain of railroad restaurants and hotels staffed by
the "Harvey Girls," Fred's contribution to the feminization of the American West.
According to Harvey himself, "there were no ladies west of Dodge City and no
women west of Albuquerque" before he came in the late nineteenth century, but
his restaurants, paralleling and fueling the expansion of the Atchison, Topeka and
the Santa Fe (start singing, Miss Garland), brought west hundreds of young, single,
white women whose moral character as well as uniforms were to be spotless at all
times. Morris' upbeat account of what it meant to be a Harvey Girl, including
much bubbling reminiscence from the "Girls" themselves, is jolly stuff, but she
does not neglect discussion of wider social considerations, such as what economic
circumstances led women to sign up as well as what conditions led to the eventual
decline of the chain after World War II. If there is a darker side to the Harvey
story, this book doesn't share it, but fans of A League of Their Own, for example,
will enjoy the period atmosphere and anecdotes about the Girls' mild escapades as
well as their apparently boundless dedication. Sample menus, period photos of
the Harvey Girls, notes, a bibliography, and an index are all included. RS
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
When the Water Closes over My Head; illus. by Nancy
Poydar. 
Dutton, 1994 
132p
ISBN 0-525-45083-1 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Mikey, a soon-to-be fourth-grader, is looking forward to his family's summer trip
to his grandparents' Iowa home, but he's dreading another fact of summer: swim-
ming. Mikey's older sister, Victoria, swims "like a frog," and his younger brother
and sister don't seem bothered by water, but Mikey is petrified of pools, lakes,
ponds-anyplace where he might go underwater and never come up. His failure
as a swimmer seems to make him a failure generally, since "it seemed every time he
turned around, someone or something was ruined or lost or dead." Eventually
Mikey finds himself mastering tasks in swimming lessons, and he gains confidence
from his family and from saving a classmate in trouble. Napoli writes a lively and
funny family story but treats Mikey's terror and self-doubt with the respect they
22 
* THE BULLETIN
deserve. Her characterization and emotional dynamics, as with her portrayal of
the cheerful, thoughtless swimming teacher who hurls Mikey into the water and
Mikey's bitter rage afterward, will strike a chord with all sufferers of unreasoning
terror. The book's an easy and entertaining read, and since everybody could use
some confidence-building, the story's point will reassure the wet and dry alike.
Black-and-white illustrations, with lively lines and subtle shading, appear throughout
the book. DS
O'HARA, ELIZABETH 
The Hiring Fair. Dufour, 1994 
162p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-85371-275-2 
$8.95 
R Gr. 4-8
While Dad was alive Sally Gallagher was free to pursue her bookish interests and
leave her share of household chores to her willing and more competent younger
sister Kitty. But when Jack Gallagher drowns while fishing and the rent on the
farm comes due, both girls are forced off to the hiring fair and auctioned off to six
months service to two neighboring families in far off County Tyrone. At the will
and whim of their employers, the girls undertake the work of adults; Sally, in fact,
is left to manage both house and children alone when her mistress is hospitalized
following a difficult childbirth. Under these new responsibilities Sally matures
into a capable and confident young woman, while Kitty, who seemed so domesti-
cally precocious back home in Donegal, reverts to the frightened eleven-year-old
she truly is. Readers gain an understanding of the arduous labor required of chil-
dren in late nineteenth-century Ireland, who were often separated from their fami-
lies to live among strangers of different customs, religion, and politics. A "Glossary
of Folklife and Historical Terms" brings this Irish import novel within easy grasp
of American readers. EB
PARENTEAU, JOHN 
Prisoner for Peace: Aung San Suu Kyi and Burma's Strugglefor
Democracy. Morgan Reynolds, 1994 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-883846-05-6 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
After a brief opening chapter introducing Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese winner
of the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize, this book segues into a lengthy history of her
country, not generally the best way to get a biography going. The information
seems droned out term-paper style, with enough political abstraction to put off
readers eager to find out about the woman whose demands for democracy have
kept her a prisoner in her own house since 1989. To some extent, Aung San Suu
Kyi comes into her own in the second half of the book, but the account seems
more thoroughly researched than transcendent, with the author himself admitting
that Suu's personal qualities have been less publicly in evidence than her political
ideas. This is still a capable synthesis of history and news, and researchers will be
aided by the thorough bibliography, notes, glossary and index. RS
PARTON, DOLLY 
Coat of Many Colors; illus. by Judith Sutton. 
Preiss/
HarperCollins, 1994 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023414-8 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023413-X 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
One thing that generally distinguishes a song is music, and while Parton's country
classic "Coat of Many Colors" has a fine, lilting tune, it's absent from this picture
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 
23
book rendition, and it is sorely missed. Parton's lyrics sans melody do not dance
comfortably from the mouth ("My coat of many colors/ that my mama made for
me,/ made only from rags./ But I wore it so proudly") and are sometimes ungram-
matical ("one is only poor/ if they choose to be"), but the real problem is that pop
songs and picture books require different rhythms, and most often, speak to differ-
ent audiences. (See the picture-book version ofJoni Mitchell's "Both Sides Now,"
BCCB 9/92, for this dissonance at its most egregious.) Parton's lyrics convey
sunny adult nostalgia for a painful childhood incident, and Sutton's paintings are
equally sunny, often contradicting the sense of the scene, as where the schoolmates
tormenting the girl for her odd coat actually appear to be admiring it. The heroine
(who appears to have been modeled on the young Parton) has disproportionately
big blue eyes, and nothing about her wardrobe or surroundings conveys her puta-
tive poverty. Lauren Mills' The Rag Coat (BCCB 1/92) is essentially the same
story and is equally sentimental, but it is more sensitively illustrated and written
with a better instinct for the requirements of the picture book form. RS
PHILIP, NEIL, ad. 
King Midas; illus. by Isabelle Brent. 
Little, 1994 
[28p]
ISBN 0-316-70521-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
No sources are cited for this retelling of the Midas story, which ends not with the
more familiar conclusion of the king turning his daughter to gold but instead with
his wine turning to gold, and Midas' subsequent plea to Dionysus to take the gold-
tapping power away. It's a clean and simple enough retelling, although the all-
capitals text is a bit wearing on the eye. There's plenty of gold in Isabelle Brent's
paintings; in fact, there's too much, particularly in the ornate and heavy borders
that surround the text with more opulence than it can really take. A lavish hand
with the paint is also found in the pictures proper, splashing naturalistic if stiff
watercolors with gold leaf in a way that seems meant to convey the irony of Midas'
greed but instead just seems incongruous. As Midas learned, too much is too
much. RS
PODWALL, 
MARK 
The Book of Tens; written and illus. by Mark
Podwall. 
Greenwillow, 1994 
24p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12995-1 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12994-3 
$15.00 
M 
Gr. 4-6
While he cites no sources for his information, Podwall has evidently culled a vari-
ety of Biblical, Talmudic, and midrashic sources to compile this examination of
the numeral "endowed with many sacred meanings, especially among the Jewish
people." Arranging his entries in order of their appearance in Scriptures, Podwall
demonstrates that "Ten appears ... so frequently... that the story of the Bible can
almost be told by means of its citings," at least, that is, through the Historical
Books. Each page is composed of a large watercolor sketch and a simple sentence
which begins with the numeral 10; a buff-colored outer column of commentary
expands on the number's significance in legend, tradition, or Scripture. While it is
feasible that a quite young reader/listener could enjoy the central images and rec-
ognize their scriptural referents, the weightiest portion of the volume is the com-
mentary, the tone of which is somewhat dry and erudite for a picture book audience.
Although this is not intended as a counting book, the irresistible urge to count
along with the commentator is frequently frustrated by textual inconsistencies-
24 
* THE BULLETIN
the ten plagues that punished Pharoah are clearly enumerated, but Isaac's ten bless-
ings to Jacob could easily be miscounted as four, and Joseph's ten brothers who
sold him into slavery are never named. And if God created the world with ten
words, what were they? The lack of source citations compounds the frustration;
those already familiar with Judaic tradition will find little new here, and novices
whose interests are aroused by the subject matter will find no guidance to further
their explorations. EB
POLACCO, 
PATRICIA 
Pink and Say; written and illus. by Patricia
Polacco. 
Philomel, 1994 
[48p]
ISBN 0-399-22671-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Polacco pulls out all the stops in this heart-wrenching tale of Civil War valor which
has been passed through several generations of the author's family. Sheldon (Say)
Curtis recalls how, as a fifteen-year-old Yankee soldier, alone and bleeding in a
Georgia pasture, he was dragged to safety by another young Union trooper, Pinkus
(Pink) Aylee, who was separated from his company, the Forty-eighth Colored.
The two injured boys make their way to Pink's home, where his mother Moe Moe
Bay tends them in the abandoned slave quarters at the foot of the burnt-out big
house. But after only a week of respite, during which Say finds the courage to
confess he is a deserter, the boys are forced into hiding by approaching marauders.
Trying to draw the marauders off, Moe Moe Bay is shot, and after the boys hastily
bury her, they set off to rejoin Pink's company with renewed commitment to the
Union cause. But Andersonville is their destiny: they are separated at the gate-
Say to be imprisoned, and released in emaciated condition months later; Pink to
be "hanged within hours." Say's narration rings true, incorporating rough-edged
grammar and idiomatic vocabulary. Polacco's signature line-and-watercolor paint-
ings epitomize heroism, tenderness, and terror as Pink hauls his wounded comrade
up a rocky incline, Moe Moe Bay cradles the terrified deserter, and the boys' hands
clutch desperately when they are parted at the prison gate. A minor theme involv-
ing Say's handshake with Lincoln bonds generations of tellers and listeners, who
end the tale with "This is the hand, that has touched the hand, that has touched
the hand, that shook the hand of Abraham Lincoln." Unglamorized details of the
conventions and atrocities of the Civil War target readers well beyond customary
picture book age. EB
PRIMAVERA, ELISE 
Plantpet; written and illus. by Elise Primavera. 
Putnam,
1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22627-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
"Bertie lived alone and liked it that way," but one day he finds a tiny plant in a
cage. Following the attached directions, he turns the cage daily and finds the plant
within growing at a great and peculiar rate-in fact, when he opens the cage door
the plant walks out into the garden on its own. Bertie calls it Plantpet, and they
work in the garden together since Plantpet enjoys botanical labor. When Plantpet
succumbs to a destructive digging frenzy, Bertie banishes him to a far corner of the
garden ("Stay"). Of course, Bertie misses his green friend and fetches him back,
and the happy Plantpet takes root, growing into a solid and friendly tree. Al-
though the ending is a little weak, possibly leaving kids to expect another page, the
boy-meets-plant, boy-loses-plant, boy-gets-plant story is a pleasantly unusual vari-
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 25
ant of the traditional picture-book-friendship plot. The slightly grainy illustra-
tions are rooted in the hues of earth and grass but are overlaid with the intense
glow of vivid pastels; they make an attractive setting for the fetching Plantpet,
whose woolly and vegetable charm, endearing tiny hands, and gentle silence will
immediately make him a favorite with young listeners, who will doubtless start
peering hopefully into their local foliage in search of his like. DS
RUPERT, JANET E. 
The African Mask. 
Clarion, 1994 
128p
ISBN 0-395-67295-3 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Layo is twelve, and she lives in the Africa of 900 years ago, in the area now called
Nigeria. Soon her family will find her a husband, and Layo, a precociously gifted
potter, hopes that her husband's village will specialize in potting, as does hers. Her
horizons expand, however, when she and her father's youngest wife accompany
Layo's grandmother to the city of Ife. There Layo's grandmother engages in a
competition to make a funeral mask; the competition takes a dramatic turn when
her work is vandalized, apparently by her mask-making opponents-who include
the young man Layo is supposed to marry. The setting and details of Yoruba life
(including slavery) are well-realized, and the relationships, particularly Layo's friend-
ship with her father's youngest wife, are generally warm and credible. Layo's sud-
den affection for her suitor is rather unlikely, though, and the narrative inclusion
of information sometimes gives the book an old-fashioned and slightly stodgy tone
occasionally abetted by stiff dialogue ("Mother ofBisi, did you witness the activi-
ties of the servant of the mother ofAjayi while in Abiri?"). Layo is a lively heroine,
however, and readers will enjoy the immersion in a distant place and time. DS
SCHWARTZ, 
AMY 
A 
Teeny Tiny Baby; written and illus. by Amy
Schwartz. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08668-2 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06818-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The baby of the title has the world-and more to the point, its parents--on a
string: "I like to eat when the sun hasn't quite risen yet and then again when I
decide to really get up and then a little later and then in the afternoon and a little
while before supper. .... " The baby's aplomb is counterpointed by Schwartz's
gouache-and-line vignettes showing a loving but wearied pair of parents whose
tender actions often belie their fatigued expressions. This is a witty catalog of
baby-behavior delivered with the affection of a love letter, but the viewpoint and
humor are adult (and the baby seems a lot bigger than the teeny-tiny two-week-old
it's supposed to be). While the book would be a wonderful gift for a baby shower,
it might be lost on the picture-book audience, who are too old for the empathy
and too young for the irony. RS
SCIESZKA, JON 
The Book that Jack Wrote; illus. by Daniel Adel. 
Viking,
1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-670-84330-X 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
"This," says the first line of the book, "is the book that Jack wrote." Yes, this is, but
so is that-the illustration of a framed picture of a book opposite that very text.
Then that book opens, and on it-in it?-appears a rat, then a cat eats the rat, and
various other characters-a cow, a baby, a bug, a man in a tattered coat--enter
26 
* THE BULLETIN
into a traditional "house that Jack built" chain until finally a new copy of the book
within the book-still with me?-falls on top of the last standing member of the
cast, breaking the framed scene and opening up another level, and presumably
starting the story all over again. The characters along the way include notable
guest stars ranging from Alice's Mad Hatter (he knocks over Humpty Dumpty) to
Mother Goose's cow jumping over the moon (she spooks the dog). The illustra-
tions are smooth oil portraits ofcarnivalesque grotesquerie, with the humans huge-
headed and the animals alarmingly expressive of mien; all of this takes place in
shadowy locations or against a background of starry night sky. The book is sim-
pler than Scieszka's even more recursive The Stinky Cheese Man, and any kid who's
seen Magritte's pipe picture or, more likely, a Morton Salt label, will relish the idea
within. Such kids might, however, think themselves beyond such an easy text, and
those of a younger age might not get the jokes other than the circularity of the plot;
the easy identifiability of some of the cast might make the mystery of the others
(this reviewer is still working on it) rather frustrating. This book might work as a
bridge between the Ahlbergs' Ten in a Bed (BCCB 10/89) and The Stinky Cheese
Man for those kids comfortable with familiar characters in new patterns but just
figuring out the manipulations possible in narrative. DS
SINvKIN, SHERI COOPER 
The Shorty Society. 
Viking, 1994 
135p
ISBN 0-670-85248-1 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Danny Greeson used to be Drew Minardi's best friend. But, after a summer with
his father, Danny enters seventh grade tall, mean, and ready to torment anyone
who hasn't matched his growth spurt. When Drew and his other pint-sized friends
Bo and Kate fall victim to the pranks of Danny and his friend Scud, they band
together for revenge. Although less-than-statuesque adolescent readers will be pre-
pared to cheer for characters trapped in this familiar situation, they may be disap-
pointed by the prosaic nature of the Society's plans for vengeance. Shrimp in the
lockers, ice cream in a jacket hood, cafeteria "keep-away" with a treasured cap, and
garbage can lids on the lawn volley tediously between the rivals. Drew's sporadic
pricks of conscience over how their trickery might effect others gives the tale some
depth. And after the Society delivers its coup de grace (pants-ing their foes at the
school dance) and they await their fate in the principal's office, Drew reflects on
the futility of their efforts. He realizes that they have played the same game as their
tormentors: "This time the Shorty Society had no excuse." His epiphany is anti-
climactic; the reader has suspected this all along. EB
SPOHN, KATE 
Broken Umbrellas; written and illus. by Kate Spohn. 
Viking,
1994 
[3 6p]
ISBN 0-670-85769-6 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
SpR 
6-9 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 3, for review.
TEMPLE, FRANCES, ad. 
Tiger Soup: An Anansi Story from Jamaica; ad. and illus. by
Frances Temple. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08709-3 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06859-5 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Teachers and librarians will be polishing up their best Caribbean accents to do
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 
27
justice to this island romp. Tiger is cooking and Anansi is hungry, so there must
be some trickery in the offing. Anansi lures Tiger away from his delicious soup
with the promise of a refreshing dip in Blue Hole ("We close our eyes. You count
to three. We both jump in"), only it's a coconut rather than Anansi that splashes
in beside Tiger. Soon that soup is gone and Anansi is looking for a scapegoat to
catch Tiger's inevitable wrath; an accommodating bunch of monkeys with a pen-
chant for singing are more than willing to learn a new tune from Anansi, "Just a
little while ago/ We ate the Tiger soup!" Tiger predictably misreads the situation
and chases the monkeys into the treetops "where they been living safe, safe ever
since." Lyrical island phrasing glides smoothly off the reader's tongue, and the
present/present-progressive tense narration evokes the immediacy of a storyteller's
presence. Bright paper collages (rather busy, with flashes of creative composition)
often jostle with the text for attention; but there's really no contest-text wins
hands down. No source notes are included, but as an added treat the inside of the
dust jacket (explain that to the processing department) includes the tale recast
into a play, with performance hints. EB
TREVIIrO, ELIZABETH BORTON DE 
Leona: A Love Story. 
Farrar, 1994 
[139p]
ISBN 0-374-34382-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
As she did nearly three decades ago in I, Juan de Pareja (BCCB 12/65), Trevifio
takes a footnote figure from history and weaves a speculative tale around her. Leona
Vicario, later to become wife of Mexican patriot Andres Quintana Roo, was hon-
ored by her government following Mexico's War for Independence in the early
1800s. The few other known facts about Leona's life do have the makings of a
romance-her guardian's loyalty to the Spanish crown, which forced the lovers
into secrecy; her long periods of separation from Andres; her mysterious illness.
Treviiio describes the courtship and marriage with a distant formality to which
romance aficionados may be unaccustomed. Trevifio's style is partially dictated by
her subject matter, particularly the strict courtship protocols of the period. But
the "love story" promised by the subtitle is as much about the couple's devoted
support of the Insurgents and their homeland as about their private romance, and
most of the tale's passion is focused on their involvement in the war. Readers who
are unfamiliar with the social conditions which fueled the Insurgent cause could
use more information than is provided in Leona's brief litany, "We are fighting for
the rights of the Criollos, for the abolition of slavery and the suppression of the
Inquisition." But the reader's involvement in Leona's heroic loyalty to Andres and
their cause may be sufficient impetus to seek further information on Mexico's
struggle for self-government. A glossary of foreign terms and notes on the verifi-
able facts about Leona's life are included. EB
WALSH, ELLEN STOLL 
Pip's Magic; written and illus. by Ellen Stoll
Walsh. 
Harcourt, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-15-292850-2 
$13.95 
R 
2-4 yrs
Overcoming fear of the dark is a challenge shared by Walsh's targeted audience
and Pip the salamander, who embarks on an overnight odyssey to find the wizard
turtle Abra, whose magic will cure Pip's fears. Frogs, a mouse, and a bird urge Pip
along as he ventures into dense woods, dim tunnels, and the dark night on his
quest, only to be told by Abra that he already has the magic: "You found it in the
28 
* THE BULLETIN
woods and in the tunnel and in the night. You have enough, and maybe some left
over." Walsh's tale is brief, simple, and direct, enlivened by neatly turned similes
in Pip's soliloquies ("The tunnel is as black as night with my eyes closed"). Round-
eyed, splatter-painted creatures of cut paper, reminiscent of Leo Lionni's menag-
erie, inhabit a friendly and reassuring landscape-so friendly and reassuring, in
fact, that some may wonder why Pip experiences any anxiety at all, living as he
does amid adequately lit, open spaces. Still, the seriously scared are unlikely to
need broader hints to evoke empathetic shivers; they already know that "the night
is as black as river mud." EB
WILLIAMS, MICHAEL 
The Genuine Half-Moon Kid. Lodestar, 1994 
200p
ISBN 0-525-67470-5 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Just out of high school and undecided about his future, Jay Watson escapes his
confusion by taking clandestine dips with the fish in the tropical-fish store's huge
tanks. The owner, once a partner of Jay's deceased grandfather, wisely suggests
that the boy visit his estranged uncle to claim a certain yellow box with his grand-
father intended him to have. His uncle's strange behavior prompts Jay to seek the
box along a trail that will lead him and a vanful of acquaintances through areas of
South Africa which the sheltered boy has never seen. His quest becomes one of
self-discovery as he pieces together the hows, wheres, and whys of his grandfather's
long absence from the family and finally discovers the zest for living that his grand-
father wished him to inherit. His grandfather's apparent dissatisfaction with ma-
terial success strikes a sympathetic chord in Jay, as does the knowledge that his
grandfather had earned the friendship of township blacks and the love of a home
full of orphans he had helped support. But darker secrets emerge as well. Jay's
young friend Levi is being abused; Jay's uncle and mother have had an affair; his
uncle has swindled him out of trust fund money. The young man's decision to
take up his grandfather's passion for writing is a trifle unrealistic (he has shown no
inclination or aptitude to this point), but as Jay commits himself to a life in the
real South Africa, not in an underwater fantasy, the reader is convinced of his
transition into adulthood. As South African race relations remain in the news,
Williams' novel takes on added interest in brief but frank discussion of the town-
ships. "The problem is," Jay's black friend Lungile explains, "... it's all you see on
the television, and everybody thinks the whole place is burning up.... That's
what gives the community a bad name." EB
WOODRUFF, ELVIRA 
Dear Levi: Letters from the Overland Trail; illus. by Beth
Peck. 
Knopf, 1994 
120p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-94641-1 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-84641-7 
$14.00 
R Gr. 3-6
Austin Ives is heading west from Pennsylvania with a wagon train bound for the
Oregon Territory. Leaving his younger brother at home with friends, the twelve-
year-old makes his journey in the trusted company of the Morrison family to find
his father's land claim. Austin's letters to Levi (few of which, he acknowledges,
will ever be sent) detail the rigors and pleasures, dangers and monotony of the five-
month trip from a child's point of view. Readers learn of the children's makeshift
amusements, such as collecting bird feathers and comparing scars; of the time-
consuming and treacherous river crossings; of primitive medical care, with its whis-
key and cobweb treatments. The death toll mounts as disease and accidents claim
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 
29
many victims; the Morrison children are left orphaned and separated, and Austin
is taken in by the train's kind but eccentric cook, Reuben. Woodruff does not
attempt to reproduce the non-standardized spelling or grammar of period letters,
but the occasional idiom ("suckeyes" are pancakes) and archaic phrase ("school in
my sadness") lend authenticity. Although the novel is slightly marred by a too-
easy ending-Reuben buys Mr. Ives' lost claim and settles down with Austin as a
sort of guardian/trustee-a humorous twist involving Reuben's stuffed cat handily
defuses the sentimentality. Five double-page pencil sketches provide visual breaks,
and a map traces Austin's route. Woodruff presents a bounty of information in a
format that will be especially valued as a classroom readaloud. EB
WORMSER, RICHARD 
Juveniles in Trouble. Messner, 1994 
[192p] 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-671-86775-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-12
Smoothly infusing his overview of juvenile crime and justice with well-chosen
anecdotal material, Wormser covers a range of perspectives: street counselors,
shelter therapists, lawyers and judges, and, most pervasively, teens themselves. While
unfortunately often unattributed, interviews with young runaways, addicts, drug
dealers, prostitutes, and gang members are revealing but not sensationalized and
are placed in contexts that show various ways to get help. New York-based Cov-
enant House is used as the central example of a comprehensive youth services
agency, and while Wormser provides a good picture of its programs, some men-
tion should have been made of the allegations of sexual abuse and financial impro-
prieties that beset the organization under its founding director Fr. Bruce Ritter.
As with Wormser's Lifers (BCCB 12/91), some kids will read this looking for
thrills, but there's a good chance they'll take away a more sober understanding,
with the closing chapters delivering the ultimatums of arrest, incarceration, and,
for some, the death penalty. The finished book will include photographs, a brief
bibliography, and an index. RS
REVIEW POLICY
The question we get asked most-by both publishers and subscribers-is "how do
you decide what to review?" The Bulletin receives some 5000+ new children's
books each year; out of those we review approximately 800. Every week, our
stalwart editorial assistant piles a book truck high with new tides which the editor
goes through, immediately discarding some because they are out of scope (work-
books, kits, anything with a doll attached), skimming others (many nonfiction
series tides are eliminated at this point), reading the picture books (many a lavishly
illustrated but plotless story is bounced) and dipping into chapters of novels and
longer nonfiction (most of these get a closer look).
The first question we ask about each of the remaining titles is: do we
have something to say about this book? If so, who is the best reviewer to say it?
The editor assigns books for further reading and potential reviewing to each of the
30 
* 
THE BULLETIN
staff or, occasionally, contributing reviewers. Assistant editor and equibibliophile
Deborah Stevenson, for example, reads all the horse books to decide which ones
are-or look like they are--of the most interest and value. Reviewer Elizabeth
Bush has a strong background in religious materials and, as a school librarian,
examines books across the spectrum for their curricular support. Editor Roger
Sutton has a longtime interest in books for young adults, and, thank goodness,
former editor (and now consulting editor) Betsy Hearne remains on call for advice
on the current publishing deluge of folklore-derived material. Each of us also
follows particular authors and favorite genres. Sometimes the connection between
reviewer and book is looser-"Hey, you went to the northwoods last fall; do this
book on wolves"-but we are always looking for the best fit (and a good reviewer
should always acknowledge when something is the wrong size, and be ready to
exchange it for something more suitable). We don't claim to be experts on every
subject we review; what we know best are children and books, and how to help
them find each other.
We use no list of evaluative criteria in our reviewing. Each book deserves
to be evaluated on its own terms, not by a preordained checklist. The best books
are those that challenge criteria, that make us see literature and the world in a new
way. Still, there's breaking the rules and then there's just breaking-and we think
it's important to tell you about books that in our estimation fail to meet the chal-
lenges they set for themselves. Obviously, we don't fill the Bulletin with negative
reviews (subscribers want to know what to buy more than what not to buy) but if
a generally strong or popular writer falls short, or if a book on a hot or gap-filling
topic confounds more than it enlightens, you ought to know. (You also ought to
be reading several selection journals, because none of us has the trademark on The
Truth.)
While all the reviews in the Bulletin are individually authored and signed,
we have the smallest reviewing staff of any of the major selection journals and we
work very closely together. At our weekly meetings we all read each others books
and reviews, and what emerges, if not always consensus, are reviews that have been
made to prove their points, and this particular batch of reviewers is not an easy
crowd to convince: "You want to star this book? Fine. Show me why."
The Bulletin's best-known feature is probably our code system, which
can be found on the second page of any issue. Reading the codes is no substitute
for reading the reviews: an "R" review can be heavily qualified, an "Ad" can show
lots of promise or be extremely useful, an "M" might well find a home in a library
collecting widely in a particular area. A "starred" book in one library could be an
"NR" for another. It all depends on your collection-you know what fits in best.
What the codes do is make the reviewers shape an organized, definite (not defini-
tive) opinion, always backed up with evidence from the book. For subscribers, it's
meant to be a useful, handy introduction to what tack the review is going to take.
Useful, handy, and practical-that's what we want the Bulletin to be.
We also hope to be perceptive, honest, and fun to read.
Roger Sutton, Editor
SEPTEMBER 1994 
* 
31
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-stories: Mora
Africa-fiction: Rupert
Africa-history: Barboza
African Americans-fiction:
Burgess; Meyer
African Americans-history:
Barboza; Polacco
African Americans-stories: Binch;
Johnson
Alcohol: Harris
ALPHABET BOOKS: Lobel
Antarctica: L'Engle
Archaeology: Lessem
Architecture: Lobel
Asian Americans-stories: Sun
Babies-stories: Andres
Babies-stories: Schwartz
BEDTIME STORIES: Walsh
BIOGRAPHIES: Lasky; Parenteau
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Burgess
Brothers-stories: Andres
Bullies-fiction: Sinykin
Burma: Parenteau
Caribbean Islands-folklore:
Temple
Caribbean Islands-stories: Binch
Child abuse-fiction: Block
City life-stories: DiSalvo-Ryan
Civil War-fiction: Collier
Civil War: Polacco
Clothing and dress-stories: Parton
CONCEPT BOOKS: Hindley;
Miller
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Cooney
Crime and criminals: Wormser
Death-fiction: Hill
Dogs-stories: Meddaugh
Drivers' Education: Cooney
Egypt, ancient: Lasky
Ethics and values: Baylor; Bode;
Cooney
Family life-fiction: Bradley
Family life-stories: Baylor
FANTASY: Carmody
Fear-fiction: Napoli
Fear-stories: Walsh
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Bruchac;
Greenfield; Kimmel; Temple
Food and eating: Busenberg
Friends-fiction: Bradley; Cooper;
Hiqyilmaz; Hill
Friends-stories: Primavera
FUNNY STORIES: Morgan
Gardens-stories: Primavera;
DiSalvo-Ryan
Grandfathers-stories: Mora
Grandparents-stories: Binch
Guidance: Bode; Garland;
Wormser
Hippopotamuses-fiction: Morgan
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Collier; Holland; O'Hara;
Rupert; Trevifio; Woodruff
History, ancient: Lasky
History, U.S.: Collier; Harris;
Holland; Polacco; Woodruff
32 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Homelessness-stories: Hathorn
Immigrants-fiction: Higyilmaz
Ireland-fiction: O'Hara
Jews-fiction: Meyer
Latinos-fiction: Meyer
Latinos-poetry: Carlson
Latinos-stories: Mora
Llamas-fiction: Hurwitz
LOVE STORIES: Block; Bode;
Cooney; L'Engle; Rupert;
Trevinio
Mathematics: Lasky
Mental illness-stories: Spohn
Mexico-fiction: Trevinio
Micronesia: Hermes
Middle Ages-stories: McCully
Mining-stories: Lyon
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Lyon
Native Americans-fiction: Meyer
Native Americans-folklore:
Bruchac
Nature study: Busenberg
New Mexico-fiction: Meyer
Physical disabilities-fiction: Hill
POETRY: Carlson; Marcus
Poverty-stories: Parton
Prehistory: Lessem
Railroads: Morris
Reading aloud: Carlson; Woo-
druff
Reading, beginning: Bruchac;
Morgan
Reading, family: Andres; Baylor;
Lyon; Miller; Mora
Reading, reluctant: Bode;
Cooney; Cooper; Wormser
Religious education: Podwall
School-fiction: Carmody; Cooper;
Sinykin
Science: Hindley
Slavery: Barboza
Social studies: Hermes; Lobel;
Meyer
South Africa-fiction: Williams
Spain-stories: Kimmel
Story hour: Bruchac; DiSalvo-
Ryan; Greenfield; Hathorn;
McCully; Meddaugh;
Primavera; Schwartz; Scieszka;
Temple; Walsh
Suicide-stories: Garland
Swimming-fiction: Napoli
Switzerland-fiction: Higyilmaz
Vacations-stories: Binch
Vermont-fiction: Hurwitz
Women's studies: Morris
Work: Morris
Work-fiction: O'Hara
Work-stories: McCully
A Book-of-the-Month Club selection
SDfial Books A Division of Penguin USA
+"Fans of The Borrowers
will have cause to celebrate.'*
*"Fantasy at its finest'**
*"Inventive, funny, and convincing.
*"[In] this first nove
family of lifesize rag
reside modestly in a
neighborhood...Wa
their world with nea
mastery."
-*Kirkus Reviews I
*"Waugh 
develop!
whimsical premisei
logic...in this poign;
--
Publishers Wee
(starred review)
*"What 
makes the
successful is Waugi
combine logical far
absurd specific deta
of effervescent fami
-tBulletin of the C
Children's Bool
("Big Picture" st
Ages 10 up. 216 pp.
RTE $14.00/0-688-13
Greenwillow Bo<
A division of William Morrow & C
1350 Avenue of the America
New York, NY 10019
SN 
THE
MENNYMS
Sylvia Wauth
"A satisfying story-hour read-along...
in Hutchins's trademark style."
-School 
Library journal
ittle Pink Pi
PAT HUTCHINS 
,
aw 
I
5 V'" I1 'j 
I I, 
. .
I~1 .l 
U 
1651 L,
clean illustrations are as lucid
as her cumulative text."
-Kirkus 
Reviews (pointer)
In this barnyard comedy of errors,
a playful piglet keeps "disappearing"
when the other animals look for
him. "Young children will easily
see the fun the grown-up
animals are missing."
-ALA 
Booklist
Ages 3 up. 32 pp.
TR $14.00/0-688-12014-8
LE $13.93/0-688-12015-6
Greenwillow Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
5,
' 
"
erratS 
d 
in 
ALA 
Booklist 
and 
Publishe 
y
"MacLachlan introduces the members of a close-knit, extended family
whose devotion to one another is part and parcel of their love for the
rolling hills and woods that encircle them. Within this sanctuary, baby
Eli is born, grows into childhood, and learns to cherish the people
and places around him, eventually passing on what he has discovered
to his little sister Sylvie. . .. MacLachlan's lyrical narrative fixes the
setting, lovely and quiet, while it tugs at the heartstrings. Wimmer's
[full-color] paintings [are] radiant." -Booklist
"This inspired pairing of words and art is a timeless, uplifting portrait
of rural family life." -Publishers Weekly
All ages. $15.00TR (0-06-021098-2); $14.89LB (0-06-021099-0)
Also by the Newbery Medal-winning author of
Sarah, Plain and Tall and Skylark
THREE NAMES
Full-color pictures by Alexander Pertzoff
Ages 4-8. $14.95TR (0-06-024035-0)
$14.89LB (0-06-024036-9); $4.95PB (0-06-443360-9)
'PATRICIA NA(-LAC+ILAN
, 4 ff Ow Pfa, ffj tofo w
9A INTI NGý 
BY 'MIKE "\VlrMrM ER
• 
tre 
i 
L 
ools 
ndPbihesWel
An I Can Read Book® poetry tribute to the elements
kTHER
"In this title in the fine
ýan Read series, Hopkins'
xcellent choices are easily
accessible in large type
ith a spacious design and
ghtly colored illustrations.
rom the catchy nonsense
J. Kennedy's 'Snowflake
I' to the simple, surprising
nagery of Valerie Worth's
'Sun' to Hopkins' own
matopoeic 'Thunder,' the
>rt lines, satisfying rhyme,
and physicalness of the
words can lure beginning
readers-and also
younger listeners-to
the joy of sounds that
make sense."
-ALA Booklist
4-8. $14.00TR (0-06-021463-5)
$13.89LB (0-06-021462-7)
Other I Can Read Book"poetry collections
by Lee Bennett Hopkins
SURPRISES
3-color pictures
by Megan Lloyd
1984 ALA Notable
Children's Books
Ages 4-8. $13.89LB
(0-06-022585-8)
$3.50PB (0-06-444105-9)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
MORE SURPRISES
4-color pictures
by Megan Lloyd
Ages 4-8. $13.89LB
(0-06-022605-6)
$3.50PB (0-06-444131-8)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
QUESTIONS
Full-color pictures
by Carolyn Croll
Ages 4-8. $13.00TR
(0-06-022412-6)
$12.89LB (0-06-022413-4)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
i HarperCollins Children'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
)peal to Henry's fans
Sat lovers."-Kik Reviews
LORCATk
iustrated byErick Ingraham
*"That 
intrepid Siamese cat
Henry, is back in another satisfy-
ing adventure.... Ingraham's finely
detailed illustrations are full of
expression and... make the feline's
daring escapades totally believable.
Seamlessly complementing the art is
a text that captures the lure of sailing."
-School Library Journal
(starred review)
"The cat's point of view is utterly con-
vincing.... A satisfying read-aloud."
-ALA Booklist
Ages 5 up. 40 pp. TR $15.00/0-688-10840-7;
LE $14.93/0-688-10841-5
Henry's previous adventures include:
CROSS-COUNTRY CAT, HOT-AIR
H ENRY, HIGH-WIRE HENRY
mey rorm a powerrui commentary aoour our social ana emononai
responses to homosexuality and our human need for love and acceptance.
A remarkable and welcome collection."- The Horn Book
"An important book that should be in every YA collection."-Booklist
Ages 12 up. $15.00TR (0-06-024253-1); $14.89LB (0-06-024254-X)
l- HarperCollins Children'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
-surtons spngntly verses slap mmbly across each page."
-Publishers Weekly
"Bathed in light and practically jumping off the pages, these
multiethnic children parading their footwear brim with life
and energy Sure to become a favorite for story hour sharing."
-School Library Journal
Ages 3 up. 32 pp. TR $15.00/0-688-11756-2; LE $14.93/0-688-11757-0
Tambourine Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
i2A 
A- 
51 
fh.L 
A 
-i
IOUgvenul 
oI tI 
merclas,[l Ne•w Yol-'• 
9[NI 
U
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
ReruRN POSTAGE GUARNTEED
THE LION AND THE UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children's Literature
EDITrro: Louisa Smith & Jack Zipe
She Lion and the Unicorn is a them
genre- centered journal of inter
scope committed to a serious, ongoin
cussion of literature for children. The
journal has become noted for its inter
views with authors, editors, and other
important contributions to the field.
Published twice a year in June &
n 
Tpn.m.r
Prepayment is required.
ANNUAL SuBscRrIoNs: $19.00, individuals; $36.00, institutions.
FOREIGN POSTAGE: $2.50, Canada & Mexico; $3.80, outside North America
SEND ORDERS To: The Johns Hopkins University Press,
PO Box 19966, Baltimore, MD 21211
CALL TOLL-FREE: 1-800-548-1784 * FAX: (410) 516-6968
E-MAIL ADDRESS: jlorder@jhunix.hcf.jhu.edu
EA4
V-g~;
dS$~ 
BI'
YI~ 
I..d 
, 
,.,,
~rlr~·:xa 
i
dr
rr 
a-
·al
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
-·--- 
-
· ·
·
--
u~~···ur·~
^0 
:.^ 
A
