ILLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
' ;' 
': ,. d 
* 
f ».,..-< 
" 
.i ; 
*' 
.
' * 
f". ., 
*
"An effective history lesson
that is both amusing and thought-provoking."
-The Horn Book
BLOOMERM!
By Rhoda Blumberg
Illustrated in full color by Mary Morgan
"In lively prose supported by Morgan's subtly amusing watrcolrs,
Blumberg tells the youngest readers how the infancy of the women's rights move-
ment put a twist in the knickers of American history." -Kirkus Revews
"The tyranny of fashion in all its absurdity brings a lighthearted touc to
this story about the early struggle for women's rights.....Some of the leading
feminists of the 1850s come into the fashion story: Elizabeth Stanton, who also got
out of her clothes prison'; Susan B. Anthony, who not only wore pants but also
dared to cut her hair; and Amelia Bloomer, who popularized trousers in her maga-
zine and got the new style named after her." -Booklis
Appealing...crip and clear....This is a pleasingly accessible demonstration of
how historical small stuff is not so small, and it's one that kids are likely to take to,
giggling all the while." -Bulletin of the Centerfor 
ldren's Books
$14.95 RSBVFO02-711684-0/Ages 5-10
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
November 1993
Vol. 47 No. 3
A LOOK INSIDE
73 
THE BIG PICTURE
Haveli by Suzanne Fisher Staples
36 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
88 
* T-Backs, T-Shirts, COAT and Suit by E. L. Konigsburg
90 
* Ship by David Macaulay
98 
* I Had Seen Castles by Cynthia Rylant
101 
* Others See Us by William Sleator
104 
* The Sweetest Fig by Chris Van Allsburg
107 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
109 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
'2~9
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 54 East Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of'Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Carol Fox, Youth Services Consultant, Illinois State Library
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $3.00. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois, and additional mailing offices
© 1993 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Steven Rydberg, from Haveli ©1993 by Steven Rydberg and used by
permission of Alfred A. Knopf.
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 73
THE BIG PICTURE
Haveli
by Suzanne Fisher Staples
Suzanne Staples' critically acclaimed first novel, Shabanu: Daughter of the Wind
(BCCB 10/89), left the twelve-year-old Pakistani protagonist accepting her fate of
prearranged marriage with a man forty-two years her elder-yet still determined,
as her individualistic aunt has advised, to preserve her inner independence. The
sequel, Haveli, opens six years later with Shabanu's struggle to maintain dignity
for herself and her five-year-old daughter, Mumtaz, in face of hostility from her
husband's first three wives, who scorn her nomadic desert background and envy
the youthful beauty with which she has "bewitched" their husband. Shabanu's
domestic position is precarious enough, but her husband's attempts to consolidate
tribal lands through complex intermarriages ultimately lead to a blood feud in
which Shabanu and her child's survival depends on constant vigilance, resourceful
planning, physical courage, and emotional sacrifice.
Because Haveli seems as freshly inspired as its predecessor, it functions
more as part of a true set than a sequel, though the opening scenes certainly incor-
porate enough information-a singular and challenging literary task-to allow
the book to stand on its own. As she did in the first volume, Staples has walked a
fine line between the outsider's and insider's view. Her respect for a Muslim cul-
ture that, from a Western standpoint, renders women powerless (except through
their skills at manipulation) resonates in the portrayal of an individual's attempt to
balance the best of tradition with fresh new possibilities. On the one hand, Shabanu
draws deeply from her family's values; on the other, she rejects the resignation of
her best friend-the ill-fated daughter of her husband's evil youngest brother-
who declares, "Duty is not so difficult when there's no alternative."
Supporting the complex social dynamics are vivid details of village and
urban settings, all the more immediately rendered through action rather than de-
scription. While the intricate cast and unfamiliar terms will send readers scuttling
to the list of characters and glossary from time to time, the dramatic plot will bring
them breathlessly back to the story. And don't be deceived; in addition to sensitive
insights, there's also a realistic strain of sex and violence here. It's never sensation-
alized and yet will draw YA readers like a magnet. (The focus, by the way, never
strays from the teenage mother to her child, which must have required careful
control in light of the empathy that naturally centers on a vulnerable naif.) There
is a love story, too, a tragic one that may unsettle those accustomed to television
endings. In Shabanu's case, a room of one's own-the rooftop pavilion of a house
(havelh) in Lahore where she finally finds secret shelter-is lonelier than she could
have imagined. Threatening the heroine is an unspeakable villain, one who is
74 
* 
THE BULLETIN
perhaps overdrawn in terms of contemporary fiction but who effectively evokes
the melodramatic elements of Eastern epics, and more recently, films.
There only remains that niggling question of what audience will read this
260-page saga set somewhere most mall shoppers couldn't locate without a map
(which is provided for that purpose). Well, the answer is, whoever reads it will be
richly rewarded by going beyond themselves into a new place and persona. And
that's enough reason for either a librarian or teacher to expend money and energy
on a work of fiction that stretches young adult literature to a new place. It's odd
how that perennial, predictable question of readership dissolves in face of truly
convincing quality. Often the but-will-they-read-it" query, translated honestly,
applies to a book that professionals think is good literature but that they secretly
find boring and therefore, rather ironically, label "adult." When you find a YA
book you really love, you know you'll find readers for it. How many? How many
adults read Toni Morrison's Beloved compared to consumers of Danielle Steel's
latest? That question is irrelevant to the development of a balanced adult collec-
tion and should be just as irrelevant to the development of a balanced children's
collection. We can't cheat the minority for the majority. There are always those
kids-I was one and I've observed new ones coming down the pike-who alter-
nate The Clue of the Broken Locket with The Count of Monte Cristo. What they
want is to lose themselves in another world, and perhaps find themselves in the
process. Suzanne Staples has given them a rare opportunity to do both.
Betsy Hearne, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANDERSON, RACHEL 
Paper Faces. Holt, 1993 
150p
ISBN 0-8050-2527-8 
$14.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Little Dot remembers nothing but the war and she's alarmed by the idea of peace
("People had been saying that once the war was over, things would change ...
Change was always bad... The nearly worst thing that could happen would be her
father coming back"). She's accustomed to her London life with Gloria, her young
film-struck mother; their basement room in the house of a surly landlady; and the
daily hospital visits to her sickly infant brother. The first change after peace is the
death of that little brother. Then Dot and Gloria take off to a big house in the
country (to which Gloria had once been evacuated), where Dot encounters the
gracious Mrs. Hollidaye and rural life for the first time. Because of her own ill
health and her mother's erratic scheduling, Dot then moves back and forth be-
tween her London home and Mrs. Hollidaye's until Gloria receives the news that
Dot's father-not a hero, but a shell-shocked deserter who spent most of his war
in an asylum-is coming home. This is a vivid picture of one family's struggle to
cope with a peacetime seemingly as difficult as the war, and the ambivalence at
having escaped one invasion by strangers only to be invaded by all those unknown
fathers and husbands. Dot, about six years old, is younger than the readers of the
book will be but she's stubborn and appealing, and that youth allows for some
historical explanation that a contemporary audience may require. Those who have
enjoyed Michelle Magorian's evocations of World War II England will find this
memorable portrait of the same time richly rewarding. DS
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 75
ANDRONIK, CATHERINE M. 
Kindred Spirit: A Biography ofL. M. Montgomery,
Creator ofAnne of Green Gables. Atheneum, 1993 
160p 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-689-31671-2 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Lucy Maud Montgomery, known to friends and family as Maud ("spelled 'not
with an e,' if you please") created one of the most popular heroines of children's
fiction in Anne of Green Gables. This book follows Montgomery's early years on
Prince Edward Island, her career as a writer from the first tentative forays to wild
popularity, and her private adult life with her sometimes difficult marriage and her
children. Montgomery traveled a hard road and achieved an astounding degree of
fame (although female success in writing isn't as unusual for the period as Andronik
makes out), and this is a competent account of a woman who remained essentially
anonymous in her private life while working long and hard at her craft. Pair
Kindred Spirit with Norma Johnston's Louisa May (BCCB 1/92), another good
portrait of a writer of classic girls' stories; they both show not only the rewards of
literary success, but also the hard work and the personal toll. DS
ANNO, MITSUMASA 
Anno's Twice Told Tales: The Fisherman and His Wife & The
Four Clever Brothers by The Brothers Grimm & Mr. Fox; written and illus. by
Mitsumasa Anno. 
Philomel, 1993 
64 p
ISBN 0-399-22005-4 
$17.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Like all of Anno's work, this is conceptually clever, inventively designed, and skill-
fully illustrated. And like Anno's Aesop (BCCB 5/89), it features two narratives
running across every double spread, each illustrated by the same picture. The
newly translated Grimm tales comprise the top text; along the bottom is an en-
tirely different story told by a fox to his son. Unfortunately, Mr. Fox can't read, so
he has to compose a narrative based on the graphic images. And unfortunately
twice over, Mr. Fox is more imaginative than he is coherent. His stories ramble in
seriously circular directions: they'll interrupt the crisp folktales, if read jointly
with them; and they'll fall short of holding kids' attention, if read independently.
There's no real interplay between the concurrent stories, either, so the book doesn't
work as parody. What it does do is show how the same sight can inspire entirely
different interpretations. Young pre-readers who make up their own stories to go
with pictures will enjoy figuring out (if they can-it's never overtly admitted) that
Mr. Fox is improvising, and they'll also, of course, love the time-tested Grimm
tales accompanied by Anno's neatly stylized, slyly humorous watercolors. BH
BAWDEN, NINA 
The Real Plato Jones. Clarion, 1993 
16 6 p
ISBN 0-395-66972-3 $13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
When Plato accompanies his mother back to her Greek homeland for his
grandfather's funeral, he becomes privy to a family tragedy that goes back to the
Second World War, when his other, Welsh, grandfather, CLJ, helped organize the
Greek Resistance. The genealogy, crucial to the story, gets complicated: CLJ was
hidden from the German occupiers by a Greek woman named Elena; long after
the war, CLJ's son (Plato's father) comes to Greece to meet his father's rescuers
and marries Elena's niece Maria (Plato's mother), daughter of Elena's sister and
Nikos Petropoulos. While in Greece, Plato learns that it was Nikos who told the
Germans, in order to save the village, where CLJ and the Resistance group were
hiding in the mountains, and the family has suffered the shame of the betrayal ever
76 
* THE BULLETIN
since. It's a lot to keep straight; probably what you need to do is tell kids it's a book
about a boy whose one grandfather was betrayed to the Nazis by the other. Plato's
wrestling with his family history is believable but not truly compelling, because
once given the evidence, readers will forgive Nikos readily, as does CLJ: "My
friend Nikos was a brave man." Plato is an articulate narrator, and his own struggles
with growing up (or not growing up-he's painfully self-conscious about being
short) give the history a contemporary dimension which circles back again when
he and his family redeem the past by helping to put out a fire in the olive groves
that surround the village. This isn't Bawden at her best, but in the heart of the
over-complicated story is a true portrait of a boy who learns about himself amidst
tumult past and present. RS
BORTON, LADY 
Fat Chance!; illus. by Deborah Kogan Ray. 
Philomel, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-399-21963-3 
$14.95 
R 4-6 yrs
Forced by rheumatic fever to stay home from school for the remainder of the year,
first-grader Marty is bored and lonely. The family dog won't play with her, and
her mother's gentle insistence that Marty learn her letters is met with resistance:
"She hated letters. Letters were prickly, like porcupine quills. Letters had barbs all
over, and they all looked alike." The only thing that inspires Marty is a hostile
stray cat, blind and injured, that she names Chancy and secretly cares for, knowing
her mother's aversion to felines. But Mom eventually comes around, as does Marty,
who writes her first word: C-A-T. While a little too sedate, the book is a gentle
anecdote of a child learning to read as soon as there's a good reason for it. Ray's
charcoal-and-watercolor paintings place the story in a farm setting indeterminate
as to time (there's a school bus and a hand pump) and place (the jacket flap says
inspired by the "gentle hills of eastern Maine" but it looks like the prairie); cozy
and tender, the pictures are flush with warm browns and reds and the small greens
of coming spring. RS
BOWEN, BETSY 
Tracks in the Wild; written and illus. by Betsy Bowen. 
Little,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-316-10377-2 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Bowen, creator of Antler Bear Canoe (BCCB 11/91), here introduces youngsters to
the wildlife of the Minnesota northwoods. "As you follow the marks an animal
leaves," she explains, "you get to know it: where it goes, what it likes to eat, when
it runs, and why." Animals such as the ermine, moose, snowshoe hare, and raven
each get a double-page spread, with one page containing explanatory text and life-
sized foot-, paw-, or hoofprints, and the facing page offering a full portrait of the
creature. The descriptive statements are concise and evocative, although occasion-
ally confusing ("The white ermine of winter becomes a brown short-tailed weasel
in summer"); earth-respecting statements, mainly from Native Americans such as
Black Elk (and the spurious Chief Seattle speech) appear throughout, augmenting
the sense of wonder. The book has a simple hand-hewn look, with text pages
cleanly bordered, labeled, and footprinted; the vigorous, dignified woodcuts washed
with earth tones have an early-morning hush and stillness (although the caramel
brownness of the black bear needs textual explanation that never appears). The
specific regional focus makes the book particularly effective, and the pictures and
"follow the tracks" game give it wide-ranging appeal. DS
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 77
BRANDENBURG, JIM 
To the Top ofthe World: Adventures with Arctic Wolves; writ-
ten and illus with photographs by Jim Brandenburg; ed. by JoAnn Bren
Guernsey. 
Walker, 1993 
4 4 p
ISBN 0-8027-8219-1 
$16.95 
R* 
Gr. 4-7
Where Seymour Simon (see review below) gives us a beautifully photographed
introduction to the wolf, Brandenburg offers a beautifully photographed visit with
some wolves, and most kids will probably prefer the personalized treatment.
Brandenburg's book is as much about wolves and people as it is about wolves
themselves, as when he tells, for example, of how the wolves accepted his presence
as essentially irrelevant (although he does get in trouble after moving a seal carcass
the pack's leader was keeping an eye on). The author watches the pups at play,
follows the pack on a hunt, and provides both verbal and visual pictures of some of
the pack's more distinctive members; his particular favorite is one he names "Scruffy"
(for reasons the photos make clear), who is often in charge of the pups' play/
training. The text is easygoing, with information wisely gathered into the specific
context: "The wolves' eyesight and hearing are in many ways as impressive as their
sense of smell. Once it took me several minutes, with my binoculars, to detect an
Arctic hare that Buster's eyes had been following for some time." Photos, up close
and personal, are stunning: there's an irresistible one of three pups, lined up like
The Supremes, sniffing in the Arctic air; another, which the photographer calls
"the perfect shot," shows Buster, the alpha wolf, sitting in an orange shaft of sun-
light while blue-shadowed mountains, looking like a Van Allsburg backdrop, sur-
round him. RS
CLIFFORD, ETH 
Flatfoot Fox and the Case of the Missing Whoooo; illus. by Brian
Lies. 
Houghton, 1993 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-395-65364-9 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
"The smartest detective in the world," Flatfoot Fox, brightens the pages of a third
mystery for young readers. Silly Goose asks Flatfoot and his loyal assistant, Secre-
tary Bird, to take on the task of finding Mournful Owl's "missing whoooo." Poor
Mournful is unable to speak for himself until the case is solved. Although the
drawings have the same humorous bent as in the previous books, the story and
characters are not as funny. Too bad Clifford didn't continue some of her already
successful characters; Silly Goose is a poor substitute for the witless Lame-Brain
Swan of Flatfoot Fox and the Case of the Nosy Otter (BCCB 11/92). Nevertheless,
Flatfoot fans awaiting a new book will appreciate Copycat Catbird's Walkman
and the mute owl's chalkboard, and the Flatfoot Fox series remains an excellent
suggestion for young mystery lovers. KJ
CORCORAN, BARBARA 
Wolfat the Door. Karl/Atheneum, 1993 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-31870-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Lee isn't happy about her family's move to rural Montana or her younger sister
Savannah's burgeoning amateur stage career, but she's enthusiastic about her ac'
quisition of a wolf (saved from a local one-man "zoo") and then of four more (their
owner is leaving for Europe). Lee is fascinated with the wolves, particularly poor
mistreated Ruthie, to whom she confides her fears and frustrations. The wolves
become the center of local controversy, however, with a neighboring rancher threat-
78 
* THE BULLETIN
ening them and, ultimately, succeeding in poisoning Lee's beloved Ruthie. Al-
though some of the events are overdramatic (the violent end of Ruthie's former
owner, the serendipitous acquisition of the other wolves), Corcoran successfully
blends some diverse plot elements here. The wolves are compelling but realisti-
cally distant and skittish (readers hoping for extensive and anthropomorphic lu-
pine characterization should look elsewhere), and the family dynamics between
parents, sisters, and visiting grandmother are subtle and telling, enriching the story
without distracting from its focus. The wolves will appeal to young naturalists,
who will also enjoy the more complicated human story in which they figure. A
reading list of books about wolves is appended (and two more wolf books are
reviewed in this issue; see Brandenburg and Simon). DS
DAY, ALEXANDRA 
Carl Goes to Daycare; written and illus. by Alexandra
Day. 
Farrar, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-374-31093-9 
$12.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
It's a good thing Carl accompanies Madeleine to the day care center, because he
has to take charge when the director locks herself out of the building. Why Carl is
smart enough to read the lesson plan for the day's activities but oblivious to Mrs.
Manning's several attempts to get back inside is not explained, but he and the kids
have a fine time with her agenda, playing the traffic safety game, practicing the
"Teddy Bears' Picnic" for Parents Day, snacking, and snoozing. While this is
more obviously contrived than the best in the series (see Carl's Masquerade, BCCB
12/92) and the pictures of the children and Carl playing are repetitive, Carl's fans
and daycare attendees will enjoy the big Rottweiler's assured command. RS
DENZEL, JUSTIN 
The Land of the Thundering Herds; illus. by Brent
Watkinson. 
Philomel, 1993 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-399-21894-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr.5-7
Mamoot is an old mammoth, the matriarch of her herd; Metan is a young prairie
lion who learns to hunt and survive; Equus is a young colt who struggles to grow
up, evade predators, and father a new generation. These creatures and their co-
horts roam the southern prairie of what will one day be America, preying and
preyed upon as they live the life of "nature red in tooth and claw." There's not a
lot of development in the plot, since the animals merely grow, die, or migrate;
there's an occasional jarring intrusion of anachronistic geography ("They wan-
dered south, out of Kansas and deep into Oklahoma"); and there's a reliance on
blow-by-blow fight scenes for drama that gets rather tiresome. The book is still a
historically respectable, action-packed account of the Pleistocene era, however,
and the author's decision to show the point of view of all the animals except for the
newly arrived humans is intriguing; Denzel creates a convincing picture of the
eventfulness of life in the long grass before we ever got there. While not for those
who desire gentler animal stories, this could perk up a Prehistoric Life unit. DS
FARBER, NORMA 
When It Snowed That Night; illus. by Petra Mathers. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 1993 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021708-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021707-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 2-4
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 79
Like X. J. Kennedy's The Beasts of Bethlehem (BCCB 12/92), this collection of
fifteen poems celebrates the nativity in animal voices-a stork, ladybug, camel,
sloth, turtle, giraffe, dove, spider, cricket, lamb, and hog-along with several hu-
mans traditionally left out of the picture in "The Queens Came Late" and "Far,
Far from Bethlehem." These latter are perhaps the most innovative and moving
selections: the female adventurers unsung ("They'd left their ladles, linens, looms,/
their children playing in nursery rooms,/ and told their sitters: 'Take charge! For
this/ is a marvelous sight we must not miss!"'); and the confident homemaker
considering a far-off Madonna ("For I have sung my child to dream/ far, far away
from where there lies/ a woman doing much the same./ And neither of our chil-
dren cries"). Mathers' Japanese-influenced paintings, from snowswirled endpa-
pers to deep-hued landscapes or minute domestic scenes, make this a picture book
that will give children as much for the looking as for the listening. In delineating
shapes through color contrast rather than heavy outline, she shows a delicacy that
never becomes coy but rather tips into naive humor as the cat rubs against Mary's
shoulder or eyes a mouse audaciously scampering by. The artist has done a mas-
terful job of taking over where some of the poems seem less finished (Farber died
in 1984) and of striking a quieter pitch where the poetry is strongest, as in her
small, white-line-on-brown illustration for "Spider": "I sing no sound. I spin
instead./ High in the loft above your head/ I weave my quiet song of thread.// I
loop my wiring silver-clear/ to light your manger chandelier./ Listen! My web is
what you hear." BH
FERRIS, JEAN 
Relative Strangers. Farrar, 1993 
229p
ISBN 0-374-36243-2 
$16.00 
R 
Gr.7-10
It's surprise enough when seventeen-year-old Berkeley's divorced and distant fa-
ther invites her on a trip to England and France; it's a shock when the trip also
turns out to include Berkeley's new stepmother (mentioned briefly in a recent
letter) and her obnoxious fourteen-year-old daughter, Shelby (never mentioned at
all). Assisted by occasional appearances of her new boyfriend Spike, who's also
traveling in Europe, Berkeley begins a frustrating odyssey of getting to know her
father better. She discovers his irresistible charm, his ability get his own way even
at the expense of the truth, and her own desire both to please and reject him as he
rejected her: "I didn't like what my father was doing and I wanted him to keep
doing it.". Ferris avoids any final cathartic embrace, keeping her two main players
wary and struggling and leaving Berkeley, at least, wiser. Reminiscent of Paula
Fox's Moonlight Man (BCCB 4/86), this is a finely drawn story of father and daugh-
ter, distance and closeness, and "lioness and rabbit," as Berkeley terms her coura-
geous and cowardly impulses; the characterization is original, subtle, and convincing,
particularly of Berkeley's father and his new family. A compelling read about tense
human dynamics. DS
GALLO, DONALD, comp. 
Join In: Multiethnic Short Stories By Outstanding Writ-
ersfor YoungAdults. Delacorte, 1993 
[240p]
ISBN 0-385-31080-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
The response to Gallo's inviting "a number of authors from different ethnic back-
grounds to write a story featuring American teenagers from specific cultural groups,"
this collection varies from the obviously purposeful to the subtly powerful. Al-
though the former prevail numerically, the latter will probably swing the balance,
80 
* 
THE BULLETIN
with especially strong selections by Julius Lester, Sharon Bell Mathis, Danny
Romero, Edna Escamilla, and Minfong Ho dominating the last third of the book.
The tone ranges from lighthearted to grim; the subjects range from romance to
rock music to rape. Predictably, the deeper of the seventeen stories are character-
driven, framing issues naturally, while the theme-driven stories suffer from some
awkwardly contrived writing ("Eagle Cloud's your Native American-I mean, First
American name?"). Uneven in quality, this will nevertheless offer grounds for
discussion among young adults, who will appreciate the accessibility and brevity of
the stories, each followed by a biographical sketch of the author. (For another
multicultural collection, see Mazer below.) BH
GARLAND, SHERRY 
Shadow of the Dragon. Harcourt, 1993 
314 p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-273530-5 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-273532-1 
$3.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Danny manages pretty well to balance his American high school life with the tra-
ditional expectations of his Vietnamese immigrant family, but when his refugee
cousin Sang Le comes to live with them, Danny finds the culture clashes becoming
all the more complicated. Frustrated with his inability to speak English, do well in
school, or get a job, Sang Le joins a vicious Vietnamese gang and swears Danny to
secrecy about his illegal activities. Danny's also having trouble of his own: he
finally gets a date with pretty blonde Tiffany, but learns that her brother is a racist
skinhead who won't have his sister sullied by a "gook." The melodramatic plot is
steadied by the straightforward prose, and Garland, as she also demonstrated in
Song ofthe Buffalo Boy (BCCB 7/92) and The Silent Storm (4/93), knows how to
tell a story. While the star-crossed lovers theme is formulaic, it's effective, and
Danny is a realistically likable good kid. Sang Le's disorientation and anxiety are
well-characterized, as are the members of Danny's family, particularly his crosspatch
grandmother, who, although lacking a kind word for anyone else, takes Sang Le
into her heart. Information about Vietnamese culture is unobtrusively worked
into the story, which overall will make a grand tragic read for fans of West Side
Story. RS
GEE, MAURICE 
The Champion. Simon, 1993 
212p
ISBN 0-671-86561-7 
$14.00 
R Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Rex, deeply involved in World War II from a safe distance, is
thrilled to discover that an American GI is coming to stay with his family to recu-
perate in their little New Zealand village. He's dismayed, however, when instead
of the dashing white lieutenant he had envisioned they receive a young black pri-
vate. Jackson Coop-Jack-is quiet but sharp, and he gradually wins the respect
of Rex as well as bringing the boy friendship with two local kids, also considered
"different" (one half-Maori, one the son of Dalmatian immigrants). The three
form a close-knit fan club that comes to Jack's aid when he flees from attack by
white GIs (and possibly from the war as well) by hiding out in the local creek
instead of returning to his unit. Gee paints a vivid and detailed picture of wartime
life on the antipodean homefront, with kids infected by Americamania along with
local and global racism as Maori, immigrants, American blacks, and the Japanese
seem equally suspect in the eyes of the town and the white American soldiers also
staying there. Characterization is strong, with Rex's cheerful and law-bending
father particularly convincing ("My wife didn't say you were a darkie. Say, I'll bet
you could do with a beer," he jovially greets Jack); Jack himself, however, is rather
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 
81
too saintly to be true, even as seen through Rex's worshipful eyes. Rex's narration
is touching and earnest, although the occasional interjections of Rex as adult are
distracting ("This is my sixth-grade voice, not my grownup voice"). It's still an
evocative tale of a world distant from that which most young readers know, but
one beset with eternal and recognizable questions about hatred and loyalty. DS
GERAS, ADELE Golden Windows and Other Stories of Jerusalem. Perlman/
HarperCollins, 1993 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022942-X 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022941-1 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Five short stories are set in 1910, 1912, 1948, 1950, and 1954, and although
several incidents involve wartime conflicts connected with the founding of Israel
and its defense, the focus is on the everyday lives of young characters related within
several generations of one family. Pnina Genzel is the protagonist of the first and
second tales, in which she wrestles with jealousy over a birthday present for her
younger sister and then, during their walks together, finds a new friend. In the
third she comforts her niece, Daskeh, whose adventure into the streets during the
bombardment of Jerusalem ends in near tragedy from a stray bullet; and in the
fourth, Daskeh in turn helps comfort a young boy whose war-fueled nightmares
ease when he meets a sympathetic soldier. In the last story, Pnina's grandniece
Malka struggles with jealousy, just as Pnina had done so long before, in trying to
join an in-group dominated by a spoiled girl who seems to have everything Malka
wants. Except for the opening story, which has the most depth of characterization,
these tales seem schematically well planned but theme-driven, especially in the
more didactic last two. There's an uneven balance of internal development and
unnecessary explanation ("Music was comforting. Music was safe") that alter-
nately pulls readers in and then keeps them at a distance. The setting and histori-
cal aspects, however, are consistently realized without becoming labored, which
will make the book especially appealing to those with an interest in Jewish tradi-
tion. BH
GIFALDI, DAVID 
Toby Scudder, Ultimate Warrior. Clarion, 1993 
[208p]
ISBN 0-395-66400-4 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 4-7
Big and tough, Toby Scudder is determined to be as obnoxious a bully in the
sixth-grade as he was in the fifth, but fate-in the form of a just-as-big newcomer
and a savvy teacher-steps in. Gifaldi manages the rare trick of presenting us with
a basically unlikable protagonist; keeping us interested in, even sympathetic to, his
tactics and blunders; and making us applaud his eventual reform. In his most
magnificent moment, Toby swallows, prairie-oyster-style, a cow's eye some fellow
students have been dissecting, but he's trumped when his teacher Mr. Fenning
subsequently finds him vomiting in the john and blackmails Toby into doing the
homework he has so defiantly been avoiding. He must write at least ten pages in
the assigned at-home journal, Mr. Fenning insists, "ten pages and my lips are
sealed forever." Toby's journal comes in fits and starts and contains some startling
axioms, as when Toby recalls a truth he discovered in kindergarten: "I think it has
something to do with math or science: If a big kid sits on a little kid, the little kid
can't get up." The journal has a healthy effect, as does Toby's friendship with a
little girl, begun when the sixth-graders embark on a Kiddie Pals program with the
first grade. Toby's transformation is realistically halting and beset with backslid-
82 
* THE BULLETIN
ing, but our empathy is constant as we see just how hard it is for him to give up his
weapons. With low comedy, some flashy repartee, and a believable classroom
setting, here's a rough-housing boys-book balancer for the school-story shelf. RS
GRANT, CYNTHIA D. 
Uncle Vampire. Atheneum, 1993 
153p
ISBN 0-689-31852-9 
$13.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Rebellious Carolyn and her parent-pleasing twin sister Honey used to be best friends,
but now they can't agree on anything, especially on how to deal with their Uncle
Toddy, who, unbeknownst to the rest of the family, is a vampire who comes into
the girls' room at night to drink their blood. This is a daringly suspenseful treat-
ment of an incest theme; as with Lynne Reid Banks' Melusine (BCCB 9/89), Grant's
book employs a supernatural overlay to give a gothic dimension to real-life evil.
Carolyn's narration is angry and scared and authentic, and while readers will un-
derstand the true nature of Uncle Toddy's attacks before Carolyn can name it,
they will probably not see the startling truth, revealed in the end to a high school
counselor, that Honey is imaginary, a protector made up by Carolyn to defend
herself from Toddy's assaults. While the therapeutic wrap-up sacrifices depth for
information, it's to Grant's credit that the suspenseful, nightmare-like quality of
the story does not detract from the serious subject; in fact, it serves instead to show
just how damaging such abuse can be. RS
GRAY, LIBBA MOORE 
Dear Willie Rudd,; illus. by Peter M. Fiore. 
Simon,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-671-79774-3 
$14.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Middle-aged Miss Elizabeth is rocking on her front porch one nice evening and
thinking back on her childhood love for Willie Rudd, the African-American woman
who took care of her and sang spirituals while holding the young Elizabeth close.
"She remembered the feel of Willie's big lap, covered with a flowered apron, the
feel of Willie's generous bosom against her cheek." She equally remembers how
Willie Rudd had to scrub the floor on her knees, her shoes "split on the sides to
comfort those feet that used to give her such miseries," and she writes to Willie
Rudd, long dead, a letter explaining how things would be different between them
now. "This time you would come in my front door ... not my back door"; "We
would ride the bus, and you would sit in the front seat with me beside you." Softly
lit watercolor illustrations show the girl and the housekeeper enjoying these once-
impossible pleasures together, and author and artist together convey the innocent
love of the little girl and the contrition of her now-grown self. The whole apology
is understated and tenderly sad, but it's really a picture book for adults, who will
know the bitter history of race relations in this country and will also know about
the regret that's usually entwined with nostalgia. RS
GREENBERG, JAN The Sculptor's Eye: Looking at Contemporary American Art; written
by Jan Greenberg and Sandra Jordan. 
Delacorte, 1993 
128p 
illus.
ISBN 0-385-30902-3 
$19.95 
R* Gr. 6-12
Greenberg and Jordan, authors of The Painter's Eye (BCCB 12/91), here add an-
other dimension to their exploration of contemporary art. They discuss the prac-
tical as well as the thematic, with chapters devoted to the subject of sculpture, the
concept of space, and the creation of three-dimensional art; and they make an
effort to get readers to think about art as well as feel about it ("Ask only 'What do
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 
83
I see?' 'What do I know is there?' Identify the subject matter, the material, the
size, and some of the sensory properties of the artwork"). The discussion centers
on several selected pieces, which enhances its continuity as the Claes Oldenberg
ice-cream cone or Joel Shapiro's Untitled reappear from various angles for in-
creased understanding. Liveliest of all are the interviews with contemporary sculp-
tors of all races, ages, and backgrounds, which are sometimes matter-of-fact,
sometimes dreamy, and always thought-provoking. Sophisticated words are occa-
sionally left undefined ("staccato," "curvilinear"), but the clean prose will keep
readers on track through new concepts. There's a welcome absence of condescen-
sion, and the overall attitude is one of great respect for readers and their responses,
including "I don't get it." The book is in the same spacious format as the previous
volume, with color or black-and-white photos on every page (many of artists at
work) and an attractive square trim size. With this book, the authors' earlier vol-
ume on contemporary painting, and Philip Isaacson's A Short Walk around the
Pyramids and through the World ofArt (BCCB 10/93), all splendid works, you've
got practically an entire art history class. Brief biographies of the sculptors, a
glossary, bibliography, and index are included. DS
HAMILTON, VIRGINIA 
Plain City. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1993 
194 p
ISBN 0-590-47364-6 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
"Buhlaire was a going-on-thirteen image of slim and tall Bluezy Sims, her almost-
thirty-year-old mom." From the first page, we get a vivid physical picture of the
protagonist, though it's confusing to hear Buhlaire say, a few pages later, "I sure
don't look like anybody else, not even my mom"-and to find out that's true.
Buhlaire is really the image of her dad, a father who (her family has told her) died
in Viet Nam but who (her principal tells her) is really alive and living right there in
Plain City; in fact, Buhlaire was born five years after the war was over. Buhlaire's
search for her father parallels a growing anger over her mother's constantly leaving
home to pursue work as a singer and fan dancer, as well as escalating conflicts with
the aunt who takes care of her in her mother's frequent absences. All of this culmi-
nates in Buhlaire's wandering into a homeless shelter and then getting lost in a
snowstorm from which she is rescued by her father, who is homeless and mentally
unstable but nevertheless caring. Although the event itself seems too coincidental,
the relationship becomes immediately involving and develops realistically, with
Buhlaire loyal to the truth of who he is despite his unchanging limitations. The
fact that he is part-white and her mother is black emerges subtly but consistently as
an issue in Buhlaire's sorting of the factors that keep her an outsider to family and
peers. Buhlaire's connection with a boy who torments her in school and befriends
her outside forms a subplot as strong as the dynamic between Buhlaire and the
midwestern landscape that cyclically freezes and floods. This is a rich assemblage
of characters, not always converging into a clearly delineated or believable plot,
but always memorable in their individual scenes of encounter. BH
HAVILL, 
JUANITA Jamaica and Brianna; illus. 
by Anne 
Sibley
O'Brien. 
Houghton, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-395-64489-5 
$13.95 
R 4-6 yrs
"Jamaica, you're wearing boy boots!" No little girl wants to hear that, especially
from her best friend, even more especially when that friend is wearing nice pink
84 
* THE BULLETIN
boots with fuzzy cuffs. And when Jamaica finally does get to buy new boots, she
disdains an attractive pink pair because she's afraid Brianna will think she's copy-
ing. Like previous stories about Jamaica (Jamaica's Find, BCCB 5/86 and Jamaica
Tag-Along 5/89), this is a child's-eye view of a child-sized drama, with just enough
tension and a comfortable conclusion: Brianna hates her pink boots (inherited
from an older sister) and hopes her feet grow soon so she can get new boots of her
own. Jamaica is African-American, Brianna is Asian-American; watercolor illus-
trations are sometimes stiffly literal but depict a cozy, snowy suburban setting. RS
HEISEL, SHARON E. 
Wrapped in a Riddle. 
Houghton, 1993 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-65026-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Miranda has lived all over the world with her biologist parents, but this year she
has moved into her GrandAnn's large bed-and-breakfast inn while her parents are
doing research in Antarctica. When GrandAnn's valuable Mark Twain letters are
stolen, Miranda recruits her new school friends to help her do some sleuthing
around the inn. All the guests are suspects, and guilt seems conclusive when un-
pleasant Susan moves out in the night-until Miranda stumbles into a dangerous
trap. This is an uncomplicated mystery in which the bad guys and good guys are
never confused with one another. It's clear early in the story who the culprit is; we
simply don't know how and when he will strike again. The bubbly first-person
narration is good when Miranda is cozy and secure in GrandAnn's house, but
when she is bound, gagged, and threatened, it occasionally seems silly ("I sat there,
helpless ... feeling like the world's foremost defective detective"). Typical of the
melodramas the book seems to be emulating, the criminal takes the time to de-
scribe his life of crime to his captive audience. Although all the characters except
Miranda and GrandAnn are two-dimensional, each one serves a purpose in the
mystery, and at the book's climax, Miranda turns out to be a real hero in the
tradition of Nancy Drew. KJ
HESSE, KAREN Lester's Dog; illus. by Nancy Carpenter. 
Crown, 1993 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-58358-5 
$13.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-58357-7 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4 -7 yrs.
Set in what appears to be a rural 1940s neighborhood, this is a story that will reach
out to children who have been fearful of animals-or human bullies, for that mat-
ter-that they find threatening. At the age of six, the young narrator was bitten by
Lester's dog. Now he can pass Lester's house only with the help of his friend
Corey, who leads him up the street to the spot where Corey's found an abandoned
kitten. On the way back, Lester's dog charges ferociously, and the narrator finds
himself less scared than angry as he protects the kitten, yells the dog down, and
deposits the kitten in the care of a lonely widower. Corey's hearing impairment is
subtly incorporated into the story not as a problem but as a fact; the real problem
is clearly the narrator's fear, and the fact that it is well-founded gives the story
more depth than if Hesse had set out to show such fears are all in a child's mind.
(Who Lester is, and why people tolerate his vicious dog, are questions rightly left
peripheral to the main conflict.) The full-color illustrations are tensely textured
and dramatically composed, with softly blended hues and an occasional stylistic
touch reminiscent of Norman Rockwell. There's a bit of bibliotherapy here, but
the storytelling and pictures are strong enough to support the message. BH
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 
85
HILL, KIRKPATRICK 
Winter Camp. 
McElderry, 1993 
[19 2 p]
ISBN 0-689-5058-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Living with their crotchety neighbor Natasha since the death of their father,
Toughboy and Sister (see BCCB 11/90) are surprised when Natasha announces
she is taking them out of school for two months to go fur-trapping out in the bush.
Toughboy is excited, Sister apprehensive, but both learn new skills and respect for
the resourceful Natasha as she teaches them the traditional Athabascan ways of
hunting and winter survival. There's too much wilderness lore in the book and
not much plot, but Natasha is a compelling, tough-talking teacher, and it's a plea-
sure to see the lessons in action when the two children find themselves left alone to
take care of an injured old miner. As with Hill's first book, this one is simply
written, with an evocative yet totally unsentimental portrait of the Alaskan wilder-
ness and the people who live there. RS
HOWARD, ELLEN 
The Tower Room. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1993 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-31856-1 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Set in 1953, this is the story of ten-year-old Mary Brooke, who moves from Chi-
cago to a small town in Michigan after her mother dies. Her schoolteacher aunt
seems cold and strict when she takes Mary Brooke into the old family home ("Be
careful not to crumple the antimacassars"), but as the woman and girl try to live
together, the past is slowly revealed. Mary Brooke learns the truth about her mother's
death from a cruel girl at school ("I know Mary Brooke's mother had an abor-
tion!'). The room in which Mary Brooke takes refuge from the truth is the tower
room, where Aunt Olive has not been since her father's death years earlier. To-
gether Mary Brooke and Aunt Olive gather courage for grieving, and once they are
past that, for tentative and unfamiliar happiness. The ending is a little sentimen-
tal, albeit with a political slant ("She died because in our country abortion is against
the law"); the story as a whole is well-crafted, especially in the subtle development
of the friendship between Mary Brooke and Olive, which deepens as each finds the
truth about the other. KJ
HOYT-GOLDSMITH, DIANE 
Celebrating Kwanzaa; illus. with photographs by
Lawrence Migdale. 
Holiday House, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1048-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
For an older audience than the Pinkneys' Seven Candlesfor Kwanzaa, reviewed last
month, this is a comprehensive introduction to Kwanzaa, photo-documenting the
holiday experiences of one Chicago family. Thirteen-year-old Andiey Barnes out-
lines the seven principles of Kwanzaa, particularizing the concepts with examples
from her family's life. In explaining Ujamaa (Cooperative Economics), for ex-
ample, Andiey tells of a new program in her little brother Max's school: "The
students who sell candy to raise money for the school order it from black-owned
businesses. This is another way that the principle of Ujamaa works in everyday
life." Tucked-sometimes crowded-in among the explanations are facts about
African and African American history and culture along with quotes from famous
civil rights leaders. While the tone is sometimes self-consciously virtuous, and not
that of a thirteen-year-old, there's plenty of information, and Migdale's color pho-
86 
* 
THE BULLETIN
tos warm up the text. Contributing to the book's reference value are a glossary,
index, and map of Africa. RS
HURWITZ, JOHANNA 
New Shoes for Silvia; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. 
Morrow,
1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-05287-8 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-05286-X 
$15.00 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
"Far away in another America" (a location that seems meant to be inclusive but is
actually only confusing), Silvia receives a gift of new red shoes from an aunt in the
U.S. The shoes are beautiful but too big, and Silvia waits impatiently for the day
when they will fit, filling the time by using the shoes as beds for her dolls, holders
for the shells she collects, etc. Eventually the bright day arrives. Lacking conflict
or even a sense of progression, the story doesn't have much of a plot, but little kids
may empathize with Silvia's waiting to grow, and they will certainly enjoy Pinkney's
large and light-filled watercolor spreads showing Silvia amidst her happy family,
playing in the verdant tropical farmscape that's her home, wherever it is. RS
JENKINS, LYLL BECERRA DE 
Celebrating the Hero. Lodestar, 1993 
179p
ISBN 0-525-67399-7 
$15.99 
R Gr. 7-12
As she did in her O'Dell Award book The Honorable Prison (BCCB 1/88), Jenkins
has captured a family in crisis, this time from the viewpoint of a seventeen-year-
old American girl whose Colombian mother has died unexpectedly and who re-
sponds to an invitation to visit South American relatives for a celebration of her
deceased grandfather's contributions to his small town of San Javier. What begins
as a journey to explore her roots turns into a mystery as Camila discovers the dark
side of her grandfather's life and the tragedy of her oppressed, musically gifted
grandmother. Finding a secret box of letters (shades of Pandora), considering the
theft of a key to open her sinister grandfather's long-locked room (shades of
Bluebeard), getting interrupted and almost caught reading the letters, piecing to-
gether the puzzle through questions and conversations-all of these elements lend
suspense to Camila's quest, which is recounted in a present-tense narrative that
pulls readers irresistibly from one incident to the next. The plot incorporates
themes of cultural clash and gender politics without belaboring either, primarily
because of the writer's acute powers of observation. These range from Camila's
interview with a deaf priest ("his freckled, bony hands are two crawling spiders
pointing here and there") to casual descriptions of transients in a Barranquilla
airport: ("The thin couple is smoking a cigarette between themselves. He takes a
puff and gives it to her; then, after she takes her turn, she puts it in his mouth
delicately, gently, with a devotion that makes me think that they are exchanging
kisses rather than nicotine"). A blending of history and youthful sensibility, of
North and South America, from a rare translator of all these regions. BH
JOHNSON, DOLORES 
Now Let Me Fly: The Story of a Slave Family; written and
illus. by Dolores Johnson. 
Macmillan, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-02-747699-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs.
Born in Africa as a chiefs daughter, Minna recounts her kidnapping by a banished
villager, her march across Western Africa, survival aboard a slave ship, sale at an
auction, work in the fields of a cotton plantation, marriage, and attempt to help
her four children after her husband is sold by their cruel owner. This is a lot to
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 
87
pack into a thirty-two-page picture book, and the protagonist's experience, though
tragic, seems to stay on a generic plane. The author's intentions shine through
more clearly than the characters' individual personalities: at one point, for in-
stance, a small boy Minna's age comforts her on the ship with what seems an
unlikely speech under the circumstances ("Yours is a great African heritage"), and
other fragments of dialogue seem to intrude artificially on the narrative ("Never
speak a word of your savage language again!"). On the other hand, almost no
historical fiction (or nonfiction) about slavery has been published for this age group,
and Johnson-who wrote and illustrated What Kind ofBabysitter Is This? (BCCB
10/91)-manages to be honest without becoming brutal. The informational as-
pects alone make the book worthwhile, especially in context of American history
units in the primary grades, and the paintings, while stiffly posed, show a fine
sense of color and texture. BH
KENNEDY, DOROTHY M., comp. 
I Thought I'd Take My Rat to School: Poemsfor
September to June; illus. by Abby Carter. 
Little, 1993 
6 4 p
ISBN 0-316-48893-3 $15.95 
R Gr. 3-5
A sprightly anthology of fifty-seven poems includes contributors who are for the
most part well known, widely published, and obviously in their element address-
ing the pleasures or frustrations of school. Many of the selections, needless to say,
are either overtly or quietly subversive in tone since curricular goals and childhood
sensibilities seem often at odds. Bobbi Katz describes just this eventuality: "'Write
a composition,'/ said the teacher,/ 'about something you did/ during summer va-
cation./ Make it two pages long/ and neatness counts.// I sat there/ remembering
the quiet of the giant redwoods./ ... 'Teacher,/ could I write a poem/ instead?'"
Colin McNaughton's title poem is more typical of the mostly bouncy rhymes
here: "I thought I'd take my rat to school/ To show my nice new teacher./
'Aaaeeeiiiiiiieeaa!' she said./ 'Get out, you horrid creature!'" Arnold Adoff, Nikki
Giovanni, Nikki Grimes, Russell Hoban, X. J. Kennedy, Myra Cohn Livingston,
David McCord, Eve Merriam, Lilian Moore, Jack Prelutsky, Gary Soto, Judith
Viorst, and other popular favorites are accompanied by comically exaggerated,
softly shaded pencil drawings on every page. BH
KLASS, SHEILA SOLOMON 
Rhino. 
Scholastic, 1993 
16lp
ISBN 0-590-44250-3 
$13.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Annie leads a basically happy life-she's fourteen, has a wonderful boyfriend who
adores her, good friends, and a loving family. She can't help but think, however,
that she'd enjoy it more if she didn't obsessively hate her nose. She has "the Trevor
nose," masculine, aquiline, but on her girlish face it seems a rhinoceros-like pro-
trusion that brings her teasing and self-doubt. She sees plastic surgery as the solu-
tion, and although her family takes some convincing she eventually wins out and
gets the face she feels suits her. This could be a shallow book, but it's not: Klass
takes on issues of self-worth and cosmetic adjustments honestly ("Dee hates her
glasses, so she's getting contacts.... Men decide if they're going to shave or have
mustaches or beards. What's so sacred about a nose?"), and she doesn't knuckle
under to inner-worth lessons or cliches. Annie's quite pleased with her new nose,
and she does seem likelier to be happy now. Secondary plot threads-Annie's
boyfriend's battles with his father, her grandfather's failing health-aren't quite as
well-depicted as Annie's quest for cosmetic contentedness, but the primary story is
88 
* 
THE BULLETIN
enough to keep young mirror-gazers reading and empathizing, whether adults want
them to or not. DS
KONIGSBURG, E. L. 
T-Backs, T-Shirts, COAT and Suit. Karl/Atheneum,
1993 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-31855-3 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Konigsburg's penchant for weird titles is long-established; what's new here is that
her always subversive tone has been amplified into full-blown farce. When water-
shy Chloe learns that summer with her best friends is going to involve jumping
into the local pool, she knows she has to get out of town; and even if spending a
few weeks with her Aunt Bernadette in Florida isn't exactly what she had in mind,
her parents don't give her any choice. "Promise me that you'll help Bernadette,"
says Chloe's adoptive father, Bernadette's younger brother, "and that you'll give
the unexpected a chance." Chloe does help Bernadette, who drives a food-service
wagon to various office buildings and construction sites, and even grows to like
her, although simultaneously secretive and absolutely honest Bernadette is not
someone easy to get close to. As for the unexpected, well, that erupts in the form
of the great T-back war, when Bernadette finds her business threatened as other
commissary drivers begin wearing sexy T-back bathing suits (called "thongs" here
up north), and she refuses to go along. Bernadette becomes a virtuous heroine in
the eyes of the town's more conservative residents (wickedly caricatured by the
author), but she doesn't like them any more than she does her buttock-baring
competition (an equally wicked portrayal). While there's a weak and implausible
subplot about Chloe's convincing a boy that Bernadette is a witch, the story is
carried along by the satiric bite of the commentary, and it's given heart by the
growing bond between aunt and niece. Konigsburg has never been afraid to let
adults be adults, and the portrait of Bernadette is one of her best. Kids will want to
meet her. RS
KRONENWETTER, MICHAEL 
Under 18: Knowing Your Rights. 
Enslow,
1993 
112p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-89490-434-5 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Kronenwetter's easy-to-read summary of students' rights issues includes the areas
of dress code, freedom of the press, classroom behavior, and privacy. Using such
cases as Tinker v. Des Moines (see also Rappaport's book reviewed BCCB 9/93),
the author explains various judicial decisions that have affected-and effected-
the rights of young people, although he also points out how those decisions can
still be ignored by local school administrations and that a court challenge can be a
lengthy and expensive proposition. The text is evenly balanced between informa-
tion and advice, and the book is a solid introduction to the concept of civil rights
in general, making it as provocative discussion material for civics and government
classes as it will be useful guidance for school newspaper editors et al. Notes, a
glossary, a reading list, a directory and an index are all appended. RS
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Monarchs; illus. with photographs by Christopher G.
Knight. 
Gulliver Green/Harcourt, 1993 
64 p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-255296-0 
$16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-255297-9 
$8.95 
R Gr. 4-6
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 
89
Expanding on a scientific subject that has inherent aesthetic appeal, Lasky's vivid
descriptions join with Knight's dramatic full-color photographs to document the
life cycle of monarch butterflies. After watching the metamorphosis from caterpil-
lar to butterfly, readers will travel from the coast of Maine to the mountains of
Mexico in one of nature's most amazing migrations: the insects "come in waves,
or pulses, of thousands and tens of thousands," making a golden pattern against
the sky and then covering trees "so thickly that it is impossible to see the bark or
the fir needles through them." Knight's variation ofcloseups and distance shots-
all well placed in relation to the text for clarity even without captions-gives the
book brisk visual pace. Although her own family makes the journey, as they did in
Dinosaur Dig (BCCB 5/90), Lasky has concentrated on the facts here, which tell
a suspenseful story of their own, and has trimmed her prose for an action-packed
nature narrative that crosses cultural as well as geographical boundaries. BH
LAWRENCE, JACOB 
The Great Migration: An American Story; written and illus. by
Jacob Lawrence. 
HarperCollins, 1993 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023038-X 
$22.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023037-1 
$22.50 
R* 
Gr. 2-8
A sequence of heavily textured, powerfully composed paintings-selected from a
longer series rendered in 1940-41 and housed in several different art museums-
depicts what the introduction describes as "an exodus of African-Americans who
left their homes and farms in the South around the time of World War I and
traveled to the northern industrial cities in search of better lives." The artist Jacob
Lawrence was born during that movement, and his simple, first-person narrative,
formatted in heavy black typeface, is perfectly pitched to balance the gripping facts
and moving graphics. "Many northern workers were angry because they had to
compete with the migrants for housing and jobs. There were riots," reads the text,
while three expressionistically charged pictures symbolize the violence with angry,
angular figures and red-and-blue flames as sharp as the attack weapons and broken
window glass. This visual symbolization and straightforward verbal tone broaden
the book's age range from primary-grade children, who can understand the history
without getting overwhelmed, to junior high students, who can appreciate-and
emulate-the artist's making a political statement in aesthetic terms. Although
numerous picture books have recently explored the roots of African-American ex-
perience, especially in the South, few have been this honest and none has pre-
sented the migration phenomenon that had more impact than any other on today's
black urban populations. Balancing the sad facts is the strength for survival: "The
migrants had to rely on each other. The storefront church was a welcoming place
and the center of their lives, in joy and in sorrow." A cross, a coffin, and heads
bowed in prayer pay tribute to unsung bravery set down in a brave book. BH
LUCAS, BARBARA M. 
SnowedIn; illus. by Catherine Stock. 
Bradbury, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-02-761465-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
A carefully compressed text makes room for softly detailed, literal-yet-imaginative
watercolor scenes that strongly extend this story ofwintering in the rural Northwest's
earlier days. A father drives his wagon-team to pick up two children at school,
stock up on paper and pencils at the store, gather books from the library, and get
home before the first snowdrifts cover the road. Then the pictures alternate be-
tween outdoor chores and indoor reading or writing as the family draws on simple,
90 
* THE BULLETIN
rewarding resources to pass the time till spring releases them back to school. Lucas
neatly punctuates her spare narrative with the rhythmic refrain "And plenty of
them," which Father uses in requesting and distributing supplies for the children's
use and which the children echo in the concluding phrase: "We have good teach-
ers. .... And plenty of them." This sounds more natural than didactic in context of
the lively education depicted here. Preschoolers will enjoy the anticipatory boost
while primary-graders absorb the reinforcement of learning as a cozy, satisfying
venture. Meanwhile, there's a story going on, one that gives a heartening view of
America's past and best heritage. BH
MACAULAY, DAVID Ship; written and illus. by David Macaulay. 
Houghton,
1993 
96p
ISBN 0-395-52439-3 
$19.95 
R* 
Gr. 5-9
With his characteristic flair for casting new perspectives on technological history,
Macaulay tells a two-tiered story: the first half of the book, illustrated in underwa-
ter tones of gray-blue and black, documents the discovery of a sunken sixteenth-
century Spanish caravel by maritime archaeologists exploring the Caribbean; the
second, painted in colors of rich brown and blue, shows the building of the ship as
described by a merchant preparing to sail aboard the doomed vessel from Seville.
Thus, in addition to explaining the complex procedures for deconstructing a wreck
and constructing a sailing ship, Macaulay has suggested the human dimensions of
time past-a life and death reflected in buried facts. The final spread, in which a
ghostly caravel set against a suggestion of blue sky meets a modern ship in ghostly
surroundings, plays with conceptual dimensions of time: the ships will pass each
other, and both will pass. Although sly bits of humor crop up (the journal in
which the archaeologists publish their findings is called Wet History), the over-
tones are more serious than in Macaulay's Unbuilding (BCCB 12/80), about tak-
ing down a skyscraper to be erected again in the Middle East. Here the name of
the ship (Pride ofthe Sea), the care with which it is built, and the hopes of the man
overseeing its construction-to reassure himself of his safety on the voyage-all
reflect an ironic sadness for the frailty of human ambition. Macaulay's brilliance
lies in the depth with which he layers his subjects. What will involve kids are the
myriad details of two crafts examined through action-packed description and care-
fully labeled drawing. What will grow on them as they grow up with the book are
the philosophical implications of information. BH
MAZER, ANNE 
America Street: A Multicultural Anthology of Stories. Persea,
1993 
152p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-89255-190-9 
$14.95
Papered. ISBN 0-89255-191-7 
$4.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Fourteen stories, some previously published and some appearing here for the first
time, comprise an anthology reflecting the "complex experience of growing up in
our diverse society." Contributors range from Grace Paley and Langston Hughes
to Robert Cormier and Lensey Namioka, with some less-famous names as well;
many colors and cultures are represented, including Native Americans, Chinese
Americans, Jewish Americans, African Americans, Latino Americans, and Franco-
Americans. While some of the stories have more individual merit than others (one
of the best is Naomi Shihab Nye's tender "Hamadi," an account of a Palestinian-
American girl's Christmas caroling with her honorary uncle), the overall assort-
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 91
ment is lively and intimate, and there are some enlightening glimpses of diverse
classes and cultures in coexistence. There's humor and pathos, sorrow and victory
enough here to remind any reader of the diversity of human experience as well as
the multiplicity of tradition. DS
MELTZER, MILTON, ed. 
Lincoln In His Own Words; illus. by Stephen
Alcorn. 
Harcourt, 1993 
226 p
ISBN 0-15-245437-3 
$22.95 
Ad Gr. 7-12
Although Lincoln's speeches and writings are available in complete and even se-
lected editions, Meltzer has homed in on particular passages and alternated them
with explanatory narrative for a chronological presentation of the statesman's life
and political development. Thus, although the essential material is available else-
where, students will find it easily accessible here, with a context specifically geared
to those less knowledgeable about the historical period. Also relevant is Meltzer's
clearly defined emphasis on Lincoln's deep struggle between a personal view that
slavery was wrong and a public commitment to compromise for preserving the
Union. What may prove more puzzling is the placement ofAlcorn's striking linocut
portraits, which seem to crop up regardless of any reference to their subjects in the
text. While Stephen Douglas' picture is placed directly across from a passage rel-
evant to his 1858 Senate race with Lincoln and John Brown is shown beside an
account of his hanging, Walt Whitman appears opposite Lincoln's letter to James
Hackett about the actor's performance of Falstaff; Roger Taney, Henry David
Thoreau, William Carney, and others are shown without any clue in the surrounding
text as to who they are. However, a concluding section does allot each of these
figures a descriptive paragraph in order of their appearance, which will at least
clear up the mystery of their connection to Lincoln. Other helpful features in-
clude a year-by-year chronology of historical events during Lincoln's life, a note on
sources and further reading, and an index. Alcorn's portrayals of slavery and of
Lincoln at various stages in his life, the small decorative images, and the hand-
somely framed chapter headings all contribute to a lavish production. BH
MONROE, JEAN GUARD First Houses: Native American Homes and Sacred Struc-
tures; written by Jean Guard Monroe and Ray A. Williamson; illus. by Susan
Johnston Carlson. 
Houghton, 1993 
[160p]
ISBN 0-395-51081-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
In keeping with their subject-houses that often reflected aspects of the sun's jour-
ney from northeast to southeast, southwest, northwest, and back again-the au-
thors have selected Native American peoples in a geographical circle, including the
Iroquois, Navajo, Pueblo, Mohave, west coast and northern plains groups, Paw-
nee, and Delaware. The structures that each built for living and ceremonial use are
described and accompanied by a brief adaptation of an associated legend, often a
creation myth, that dictated their shape, materials, and proportions. At a very
practical level, this shows the interconnection traditionally fostered between natu-
ral and human powers, along with the place of storytelling as oral history. The
specifics speak eloquently for themselves, as when the Quinault Indians built plank
benches for the old men "to take in the sun and to gossip. They might sit there
just to 'watch the earth,' as the Quinault say." Occasionally the text slips unneces-
sarily into a less factual tone ("Growing up in a Pawnee lodge was a special experi-
92 
* THE BULLETIN
ence") or into overgeneralization ("After thoughtless white settlers and adventur-
ers destroyed the great herds of buffalo ... "), but on the whole it offers a solidly
packed sequence of information. In fact, the book's best use is for reference, since
few students will sustain the interest required to read it cover to cover, given the
technical and occasionally repetitive detail. For units involved in studying various
Indian peoples and replicating model dwellings, both the explanations and the
black-and-white drawings, some with diagrammatic cutaways, will prove invalu-
able. No map is provided, but a glossary, list of books for further reading, bibliog-
raphy, and index are appended. BH
NASAW, JONATHAN 
Shakedown Street. 
Delacorte, 1993 
[192p]
ISBN 0-385-31071-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-10
After the Guru of their commune departs with their money and their car is stolen,
thirteen-year-old Caro and her mom are on the streets, where they're soon adopted
into a loose colony of the San Francisco homeless who protect one other. The
group eventually settles in a squat in Berkeley and puts down some roots, but a
violent eviction scatters them to the winds, sending Caro to the brink of prostitu-
tion until one of the "family" saves her. None of this quite hangs together: the
members of the group have colorful eccentricities rather than character, so it can
be hard to tell them apart, and this combined with the glib shallowness of Caro's
narration cheapens the violence (a rape attempt, a shooting, a murder, and a sui-
cide) without lessening its impact. It's a change to read about homeless people
who aren't merely sad and virtuous, and some of the down-and-dirty details of
street life and panhandling are somewhat interesting, but the book never really
flows or rings true. DS
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
The Girls Get Even. 
Delacorte, 1993 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-385-31029-3 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Very much a sequel to The Boys Start the War (BCCB 4/93), this follow-up re-
counts the continuing feud between the Hatfords (boys) and Malloys (girls), start-
ing with the girls' attempt, quickly overturned by the boys, to spook the boys
while on an overnight stay in the woods and ending, sort of, with the girls turning
the tables Halloween night. The elaborate plots for revenge are almost as funny as
those in the first book, but this one lacks a satisfying structure: while there are
hijinks aplenty, there's no beginning, middle, or end. Feuds are like that, one
supposes, and there's more of the same promised in an as-yet-unpublished third
book, The Boys against the Girls. RS
NEWMAN, LESLA 
Saturday Is Pattyday; illus. by Annette Hegel. 
New Victoria,
1993 
24p
Trade ed. 0-934678-52-9 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-934678-51-0 
$6.95 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
With the advent of picture books about gay parenting (see Willhoite's Daddy's
Roommate, BCCB 3/91, and Newman's Heather Has Two Mommies, 2/90) it was
inevitable we should next see books about gay divorce. Frankie has been hurt and
angry since his mothers, Allie and Patty, "divorced" (the author's word), but even
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 93
though Patty has moved out, she assures Frankie that every Saturday will be Pattyday,
the day they spend together. Gender aside, there's nothing here we haven't seen in
countless other bibliotherapeutic picture books, but the story reads naturally and
directly, and it's nice that no particular weight is given to the mothers' lesbianism;
the situation is just as a young child would perceive it. Line-and-watercolor illus-
trations, mostly black-and-white, are a bit naive but have a fresh, open line. RS
ORAM, HIAWYN 
A Creepy Crawly Song Book; lyrics by Hiawyn Oram; music by
Carl Davis; illus. by Satoshi Kitamura. 
Farrar, 1993 
54 p
ISBN 0-374-31639-2 
$17.00 
R* 
4 -7 yrs
Tired of I-love-you-you-love-me? Here's a song collection with some teeth in it:
"Black Widow's crying:/Her husbands keep dying/ As soon as each wedding is
done./ She's loudly complaining/ There's no men remaining,/ Forgetting she ATE
EVERY ONE!" "The Black Widow's Waltz" is one of seventeen ditties here, skin-
crawlers all, save the onomatopoeic extravaganza "Busy Bee" and the sweet
"Ladybug's Lullaby." With songs about snails ("You took forever to cross that
leaf/ You couldn't make haste and you came to grief), praying mantises ("the only
words of prayer I know are GIMME, GIMME, FOOD"), and head lice ("Mary's
hair is dirty,/ Dan's sits up and begs,/ So why's it always MY hair/ where they lay
their eggs?"), the kids can go buggy, and they'll find Carl Davis' sinister melodies
a refreshing change from the C-major sing-song of many children's songbooks.
The piano arrangements are simple but sometimes tricky; a mock-lachrymose tone
prevails, but one of the best songs is a seductive, Harold Arlen-like (with a Gershwin
finish) blues number, "Mama Mosquito's Midnight Whine." Inky and angular,
the pen-and-watercolor illustrations feature sophisticated full-page portraits and
witty border vignettes; a few of the songs have quasi-choral arrangements that
could cause a big buzz in school assemblies. RS
ORLEV, URI 
Lydia, Queen of Palestine; tr. from the Hebrew by Hillel
Halkin. 
Houghton, 1993 
[19 4 p]
ISBN 0-395-65660-5 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Lydia, Queen of Palestine, could also be called Eloise in Israel: she's a willful ten-
year-old determined to get her way, whether it's in wartorn Bucharest where her
parents' marriage is unraveling, or on a kibbutz where she's been sent alone to
escape the fate of other Romanian Jews. Lydia's narrative is at first almost self-
consciously defiant, but the intricate dynamics she imagines among her dolls show
her to be vulnerable though unsentimental: "That Woman [Lydia's nickname for
her father's new girlfriend] was my ugliest doll. I liked to put her to death." Re-
sentment builds after Lydia's father escapes to Palestine and the family hears noth-
ing of his whereabouts. Lydia's commentary, initially rambling as she pulls readers
into her background of early memories, tightens as the focus shifts from scenes of
domestic conflict with her mother to the tense train ride away from Nazi-domi-
nated territory. Most vivid of all is her adjustment to life on the kibbutz and to her
father's remarriage in Palestine, where her irrepressible individuality shapes her
emotional survival. Young readers will especially enjoy Lydia's flip, often irrever-
ent humor. As he has done in his other award-winning books about World War
II, Orlev gives us an offbeat perspective here, showing family strife as dominating
a child's view of the catastrophic events surrounding her. BH
94 
* THE BULLETIN
PATNEAUDE, DAVID 
Someone Was Watching. Whitman, 1993 
220p
ISBN 0-8075-7531-3 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Chris' toddler sister, Molly, was apparently drowned in the river near Chris' family's
cabin in Wisconsin; three months later, the family is trying to adjust to its loss.
Chris, however, refuses to adjust. Supported by some slender evidence, he con-
tends that Clover and Bud, proprietors of the local ice-cream shop, have kidnapped
Molly. Chris and his loyal friend Patrick play sleuth, track Bud and Clover to
their new home in Florida, and rescue Molly. The plot is touching in its wish-
fulfilling naivete, with our thirteen-year-old heroes doing throughout what the
adults could not; the events are pleasantly unlikely and unimpeded by character-
ization. The story unfolds swiftly and easily, however; kids afraid to move beyond
the paperback rack will feel comfortable with the pacing, and reluctant readers will
be reassured by the big print. DS
PAULSEN, GARY 
SistersHermanas. Harcourt, 1993 
[14 4p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-275323-0 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-275324-9 
$3.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-10
In this tidy little fable, two fourteen-year-old girls in Houston, one an illegal im-
migrant who works as a streetwalker, the other a frosted-blonde beauty who works
at her looks, are equally manipulated by a culture that values nothing in women
but their sex. Ironically, they're also manipulated by their author, who never gets
beyond the stereotypes of a devout Mexican girl (Rosa) who lights a candle to
Baby Jesus and then hits the streets, and a privileged Anglo girl (Traci) driven by
her mother to be the perfect cheerleader and beauty pageant winner. Rosa and
Traci's stories alternate in brief but portentously written chapters; their worlds
collide when the Traci finds Rosa hiding from the police behind a rack of clothes
in a fancy dress shop. In a flash of gratuitous epiphany, Traci realizes that "we are
the same," but Rosa goes off with the cops while Traci, enlightened if not empow-
ered, picks out a new red dress. While the book might have possibilities as an
elementary exercise in consciousness raising, its lessons come too easily. The girls
are the same: both cardboard victims of a preachy story. The book will be pub-
lished in a flip/flop English/Spanish edition-two for the price of one. RS
PEVSNER, STELLA 
I'm Emma: I'm a Quint. Clarion, 1993 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-395-64166-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
The Wentworth quints (see also Sister ofthe Quints, BCCB 4/87) are approaching
eighth-grade graduation, and quint Alice, in league with a TV reporter, thinks it's
high time that the sibs come out of the cocoon that their parents have protectively
woven. But Emma's just as happy with the family's lack of celebrity; her acting
lessons, a budding love interest, and a secret invitation from her older half-sister
Natalie to be maid of honor in Natalie's upcoming wedding are more than enough
to fill her plate. Pevsner brings a practiced hand to blending the various subplots
and secrets, and the book has an appealing balance of light moments and intense
family argument, as when Mr. Wentworth angrily refuses to allow Emma to par-
ticipate in Natalie's wedding unless the other four can be a part as well. Too, the
rivalry among the quints, three girls and two boys, is equalled by their special
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 95
bond; as Emma says, "If I had to be a quint, I couldn't have picked a better bunch
to be ... well, bunched with." RS
PFEFFER, SUSAN BETH 
The Riddle Streak; illus. by Michael Chesworth. 
Holt,
1993 
57p 
(Redfeather Books)
ISBN 0-8050-2147-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Siblinghood can be hell, and it certainly is for Amy Gale, who hates her brother's
winning streaks in ping-pong (he's beaten her one hundred and seventy-two times
in a row) and at checkers (he's beaten her one hundred and twelve times in a row).
Amy determines to beat Peter at something, and she turns to riddles-at first with
no luck since Peter had the same riddle book, but finally she triumphs splendidly
by creating some clever new riddles that her superior older brother's never heard
of. Pfeffer demonstrates the same flair for this kind of grade-school crisis that she
did in Twin Troubles (BCCB 12/92): Amy's real and hopeless frustration at being
younger complements Peter's authentic delight at having somebody to lord it over
at home while school offers more daunting challenges, and there are some crisp
touchdown lines (Amy cries in defiance to Peter, "I'm younger and I'm a girl and
you're going to die first") that capture the sibling relationship perfectly. Sweet
without cloying, sharp without cutting, this is a pithy, honest, and cheering sibling
story about an African-American middle-class family; playful black-and-white ink-
and-wash illustrations appear throughout. DS
PINKNEY, ANDREA DAVIS 
Alvin Ailey; illus. by Brian Pinkney. 
Hyperion,
1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-414-7 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-413-9 
$13.95 
Ad Gr. 3-5
A brief note on the copyright page describes this book as a "biographical history,"
explaining that some of the dialogue is invented but the other information is fac-
tual; although the work depicts part of Ailey's life and dance career, it's more an
introduction than a biography. The book is divided into short chronological "chap-
ters," with headings such as "1945-1947: Los Angeles" to set the scene, and a few
pages of text describing the events or progress of Ailey's dancing life in that period,
including his first view of Katherine Dunham's dancing, his work with Lester
Horton, his formation of his Dance Theater, and its first performance. Unfortu-
nately, the episodes flash by too quickly, the narrative oddly ends in 1960 (an
appended note describes Ailey's substantial achievements in the thirty years fol-
lowing), and there's never any explanation of funding or finances. Despite the
book's slenderness it's still an evocative portrait of a young African-American man
finding his own way into a lively art. Brian Pinkney's familiar scratchboard images
are swirly with movement lines as the dancers cavort in rehearsal and onstage.
Alley's an attractive figure, and kids scornful of dance may well find themselves
reconsidering after viewing this look at his life. DS
PoLAcco, PATRICIA 
Babushka Baba Yaga; written and illus. by Patricia
Polacco. 
Philomel, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22531-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In a revisionist approach to the Russian witch Baba Yaga, Polacco introduces lis-
teners to a forest creature whose dearest wish is not to eat children but to hug
96 
* THE BULLETIN
them. With her long ears disguised under a scarf, Baba Yaga joins some villagers,
offers to care for one of the children, Victor, and becomes part of his family. Only
when he cries after hearing one of the grandmothers tell a scary Baba Yaga story
does she leave, for fear he will find out the truth. Alas, what Polacco discovers is
that doing away with one villain only necessitates finding another; a pack of wolves
with "evil burning eyes" surrounds Victor, who is rescued by Baba Yaga, who is
then recognized as benevolent and incorporated into the community. Polacco's
art here is better than ever, with deep colors, expressive faces, and varied composi-
tions. The story itself is cleverly paced and well written, but wait .... Where are
the iron teeth and the hut on chicken legs and the mortar and pestle that carried
Baba Yaga over the treetops, and the broom with which she swept away her tracks?
Why are all those winged, green, Irish fairies cavorting around a Russian folktale
figure? Something is amiss, and it is the imaginatively terrible witch whom chil-
dren have long loved to hate. Is Brer Rabbit going to get depressed now? Is
Coyote going to take truth serum? If the purpose of civilizing Baba Yaga is to
defuse children's fears, why substitute yellow-eyed devils salivating to sink their
fangs into our helpless little hero? Why convert Baba Yaga and then blame the
wolves? The answer is that we need Baba Yagas to put a face on our fears as much
as we need Babushkas to comfort us. BH
PRINGLE, LAURENCE 
Jackal Woman: Exploring the World of ackals; illus. with
photographs by Patricia D. Moehlman. 
Scribners, 1993 
42p
ISBN 0-684-19435-X 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
A new entry in Pringle's series on animal scientists (Batman BCCB 5/91, Bearman
11/89), Jackal Woman focuses on Patricia Moehlman, who's usually found in the
Serengeti plain watching silver-backed or golden jackals, the species she's been
observing for nearly twenty years. Jackals, Moehlman explains, aren't shy in the
presence of humans, making them easier to study than many wild animals, and her
accounts of their lives, as reported by Pringle, are detailed and absorbing. Jackals
may not have the same appeal to youngsters as do bats or bears, but this is a com-
pact and readable summary of their habits, and Dr. Moehlman herself is a friendly
figure matter-of-factly leading her rustic life. Photographs of the jackals are close
and endearing if sometimes shadowy; a bibliography and index are included. DS
PULLEIN-THOMPSON, CHRISTINE 
The Long Search. Bradbury, 1993 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-02-775445-6 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In an unnamed Eastern European country (although CIP credits Romania) in the
midst of an anti-communist revolution, Ion is searching for his parents, impris-
oned by the government when he was only two. His journey is dangerous and
swift, helped along by such people as the beautiful revolutionary Cristina, and
hindered by others such as a doctor who works at the "hospital" where Ion's par-
ents are incarcerated: "I'll give him an injection. That will keep him quiet until
the police arrive." While the action is quickly paced, characterization is general-
ized, with Ion, his parents, and Cristina serving more as object lessons than indi-
viduals. Yet the picture of political upheaval is authentically disheveled, and realistic
too are the uncertainties faced by Ion and his family even after he has them to-
gether again. RS
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 
97
REYNOLDS, JAN 
Amazon Basin; Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-202831-5; Paper ed. ISBN
0-15-202832-3. 
Frozen Land; Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-238787-0; Paper ed. ISBN
0-15-238788-9. 
Each book: written and illus. with photographs by Jan
Reynolds. 
Harcourt, 1993 
32p 
(Vanishing Cultures) 
Trade ed. $16.95;
Paper ed. $8.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Reynolds has made a lot of stops on the globe, and this latest pair of visits takes
readers from the heat of the Amazon to the cold of the Arctic. As in the other
series entries, these begin with a family member telling a story, but they aren't
really stories, they're mini-guides to the group in question: "Long ago, when the
Yanomama danced, we painted our faces and bodies with the designs and patterns
we saw every day in the jungle." They do this in the book, too, just as Kenalogak
builds an igloo like the one built "long ago" by her grandfather. Other than these
adulatory intros, neither book tries to get too fancy, but follows each child through
a day that packs in as much traditional activity as possible: with fishing, a journey
through the jungle, and an all-stops-out funeral (costumes, makeup, singing danc-
ing, eating the ashes of the deceased ) in Amazon; and in Arctic, there's fishing,
skinning, and making an igloo for a low-key night of eating frozen raw fish and
watching a drummer. Each book has its moments of overly hushed reverence, but
the texts are easy and the color photographs, focusing on the children whenever
possible, are fine. RS
RODDA, EMILY 
The Timekeeper; illus. by Noela Young. 
Greenwillow,
1993 
[160p]
ISBN 0-688-12448-8 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In Finders Keepers (BCCB 12/91), Patrick discovered the existence of a parallel
world, much like our own, bounded by a Barrier through which sometimes ob-
jects-and people-fall from one world into the other. Now the Barrier is disin-
tegrating, and it's up to Patrick, with the initially unwitting complicity of his big
sister and little brother, to keep both worlds from . . . well, the book doesn't
exactly say, but it's definitely trouble. Rodda competently outlines the premise
and events from the first book in the first chapter of the second, but because the
crisis in part stems from events in Finders Keepers, the sequel doesn't really stand
on its own. The deterioration of a special clock is the key to the action here, but
the race against time to fix it seems calculated and arbitrary, as does the unlikely
solution. Still, the premise is an intriguing one and there's lots of excitement; fans
of the first book won't hesitate. RS
RUBIN, SUSAN GOLDMAN 
Emily Good as Gold. Browndeer/Harcourt,
1993 
180p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-276632-4 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-276633-2 
$3.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Developmentally disabled Emily is her mother's good girl, "good as gold," but
she's thirteen now and curious about aspects of the world from which her parents
have tried to protect her. Phyllis, her new sister-in-law, is an exciting friend, but
she's soon busy with her baby; Emily has always adored babies and wants one of
her own, but handling them seems to be just one more thing she can't do. She's
also trying to learn the difference between, as Phyllis says, "nice boys and not-so-
98 
* THE BULLETIN
nice boys"; one of the latter attempts to molest her in the basement of their build-
ing, but Donny, the careful boy in her special education class, is definitely one of
the trustworthy ones-why can't her father see that? Emily comes off well in the
inevitable comparison to Virginia Wolffs Probably Still Nick Swansen (BCCB 1/
89), as the title character's eagerness and frustration are clear and understandable
and her worried family touching. Emily's really not sure of what she can do (any
more than her family is) but knows she can do more; readers struggling with their
own limitations will empathize with her. DS
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
IHadSeen Castles. Harcourt, 1993 
97p
ISBN 0-15-238003-5 
$10.95 
R Gr. 8 up
Narrated by a sixty-seven-year-old man remembering the time before he turned
eighteen and left for the European front in 1942, this is a lyrically compressed
story of love and war. What will make it vivid historical fiction for young adult
readers is the selective, individualized detail of the war years: the way two adoles-
cents felt when faced with what might be their only chance to make love before
losing each other, for instance, or the homefront price of mobilizing for war ("our
family had disappeared"). The protagonist's girlfriend sees and articulates this
human price, and her unpopular pacifist point of view becomes a wedge that splits
the two main characters apart more surely than the narrator's departure on a troop
ship. Because such experiences emerge through a first-person story, they have the
impact more of action than of explanation or reminiscence. Only in one or two
places does generalization overwhelm storytelling, primarily in a section when the
narrator, philosophizing about the war's effects, drifts away from his own situation
to ruminate on millions affected by the war or on the similarities between Our
Side and Their Side. As the narrator says and Rylant knows, "it was the smaller
accidents that became most significant, most damaging to each soldier"-and more
telling for each reader. The book's strength is historical clarity evinced through
private life, with surprising turns of image or phrase that may one moment recall
the sound of oak floors and the next, summarize a city. BH
SCOTT, ANN HERBERT 
Cowboy Country; illus. by Ted Lewin. 
Clarion,
1993 
42p
ISBN 0-395-57561-3 
$14.95 
R 6-9 yrs
"You say you've never been to cowboy country and you'd like to take a look."
Well, with an old hand as a guide, a pinto pony to ride, and an old dog at your side
you're home on the range in this introduction to both the practical work and the
legend of cowboying. The text, Rocky Mountain lyrical in style, is spoken by a
white-haired old-timer to a young would-be cowpoke: "You think you'd like to
learn to cowboy? Then you'll need to watch and listen. Most cowboys don't say
much but their eyes and ears are working all the time." As the pair travels the trail
and makes camp, the old man tells how things used to be ("My grandfather's
grandfather cowboyed then-months without a bath or drink or sight of a woman's
face. No wonder they went wild when they hit town!"), how things have changed
("Some of those cowgirls are top hands.... And as for trucks I'd be the first to say
a pickup comes in handy when you're miles from town"), and how things remain
the same ("The weather doesn't change that much either. And it's the weather
that gets you in the end"). Lewin's watercolors depict dusty and majestic land-
scapes, dark leathery interiors, and windblown action scenes with equal wish-you-
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 
99
were-there clarity and appeal. Youngsters swept up by space-opera technomyths
may rediscover the wonders of the West with this book, so round 'em up. DS
SEIDLER, TOR The Wainscott Weasel; illus. by Fred Marcellino. 
DiCapua/
HarperCollins, 1993 
194p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205033-8 
$19.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205032-X 
$20.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
While the weasel of the title tends to shy away from dancing, his fellows just love
it, and this vernal breeze of a book appropriately opens with the weasels' First
Spring Cotillion, where some harmless flirtation starts the action. Belle of the ball
Wendy Blackish, "down from the North Fork for the season," attracts the ardent
attentions of young Zeke Whitebelly, and Wendy returns the sentiments until she
meets Bagley Brown, Jr, a most eligible bachelor, equipped with a dashing Hathaway
eyepatch, whose legendary father was responsible for the Double B, a tunnel net-
work that allows the weasels safe and easy access to fresh chicken eggs. Bagley
might have been interested, but he instead falls in love with a beautiful fish, and
while he knows that his love can lead to naught, he is inspired to heroism when the
fish's life is threatened by a menacing osprey. Jaunty and elegant, the writing
celebrates young love and amity among creatures, as when Bagley enlists a bullfrog
to help in the rescue effort. (Later, the same frog almost ends up as a tasty pre-
nuptial hors d'oeuvre when he's caught by Zeke's brothers on the morning of
Zeke's wedding to Wendy.) With a pleasing balance between comedy and drama,
the book continues the cozy tradition of E. B. White's animal tales, with a roman-
tic allure all its own. Full and half-page pencil illustrations, both black-and-white
and color, appear throughout; they have an appealingly soft texture but a careful
and clever composition that gives them life and humor. RS
SEYMOUR, TRYNTJE VAN NESS 
The Gift of Changing Woman. 
Holt,
1993 
[40p] 
illus.
ISBN 0-8050-2577-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
With a respectfully anthropological approach, Seymour describes the important
Apache ceremony that marks a girl's coming of age and reinforces her people's
traditions. Like Sneve's books on the Navajos and the Sioux, reviewed last month,
this begins with a creation myth centering many spiritual values for the tribe and
dictating symbolic activities at various stages of the complex, four-day-long rite.
The design of the book is an inherent part of the author's approach to her subject:
all of the illustrations are by Apache artists, so that the view is by insiders rather
than outsiders; and Seymour's own reportage is laced with eloquent italicized quotes
from Native American participants in the ceremony, all of whom are introduced
in concluding notes. A brief bibliography, glossary, and author's note further
substantiate the care with which Seymour has considered her project, the out-
growth of a book on Indian artists called When the Rainbow Touches Down. Al-
though the length and format of Gift suggest a picture book, the intricate subject
and small print will challenge independent readers, who are nevertheless given
plenty of leeway by copious white space that sets off both the text and the dramatic
paintings on every double-page spread. This will serve as an invaluable resource
for students of Native American culture, and it's a model of investigation into-
and authentic presentation of-an often misrepresented culture. BH
100 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SHELTON, RICK 
Hoggle's Christmas; illus. by Donald Gates. 
Cobblehill,
1993 
80p
ISBN 0-525-65129-2 
$12.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Ten-year-old Richard and his six-year-old sister Isabel miss their next-door neigh-
bor, Mr. Hoggle, a high school teacher who exerted the magic of a pied piper over
the two children before he moved away. First he taught them how to make kites
(and seemed to wave Isabel's up in the wind); then he taught them to direct rain-
fall by singing with African masks and wood drums; finally, he took them and
several skeptical friends deep into a cave, once under the sea, and showed them a
dinosaur skeleton. Now he's gone, but a package arrives with the masks, drums,
and a note saying "Play the drums every day. Something you don't see very often
will come." Faithfully the children drum every afternoon throughout an unusu-
ally hot fall that extends to Christmas Eve, after which they wake up to the deepest
snow ever seen in Tuscaloosa, Alabama, on Christmas Day. While the character-
ization is sketchy and the ending predictable long before it comes, the scenes are
involving, with an understated implication that creativity has its own magic. Mr.
Hoggle is brown-skinned (and golden-eyed); the children are white; the relation-
ship between them seems natural and spontaneous. Black-and-white drawings,
one per chapter, are carefully drafted without becoming studied. BH
SHREVE, SUSAN 
Amy Dunn Quits School; illus. by Diane De Groat. 
Tambourine,
1993 
[96p]
ISBN 0-688-10320-0 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Amy Dunn's father died before she was born; she loves her mother but is tired of
being Nicole Dunn's whole world. To please her mother, Amy struggles to get
nothing but A's at school, labors through ballet and piano lessons that she dislikes,
and strives to be the wonder athlete in soccer that her mother hopes for. Amy
cannot, however, face the beautiful Queen of Hearts costume her mother so dili-
gently sewed for her to wear in the Halloween parade at school, since no reason-
able sixth-grader will be wearing a costume. Instead, Amy drops out, just for a
day, and slips out of the apartment while her mother's at work, planning to spend
the day on the loose in Manhattan. She has a few alarming moments but a reward-
ing time, which becomes even more rewarding when she and her wised-up mother
(whose point of view the narration occasionally adopts) make a clean breast of
their secrets that evening and seem headed towards happier times all around. The
writing is brisk and sure, and there's some classic Shreve characterization here,
with anxious but determined Amy a sympathetic figure. Her Manhattan odyssey
is controlled enough to be credible, and her frustration at her mother's excessive
interest will resonate with all kids who wish their parents were a little less inter-
ested sometimes. DS
SIMON, SEYMOUR 
Wolves. 
HarperCollins, 1993 
32p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022534-3 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022531-9 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-7
Wandering around the animal world with the same ease with which he tours the
solar system, Simon here sights the wolf and offers a concise introduction. The
text is casually organized, with each large-print page covering some wolf-topic,
such as differing subspecies, hunting behavior, and pack groupings. The style is
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 
101
easygoing and accessible: "The members of a pack are usually very friendly with
each other. They hunt, travel, eat, and make noises together." Animal books that
avoid the "Amazing Facts about... " syndrome are always welcome, and Simon's
books-this one no exception-have the bonus of alluring photographs, intense
in detail, and, in one of a pack pursuing a moose, exceptionally dramatic. RS
SLEATOR, WILLIAM 
Others See Us. 
Dutton, 1993 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-525-45104-8 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
When the brakes on Jared's bike fail, he tumbles into a swamp filled with toxic
waste and comes out not only covered with gunk, but also with the ability to read
other people's minds. Sleator-a master storyteller in good form here-shows
how disorienting such an ability can be, as Jared not only learns to sort through the
jumble other people are always thinking, but also discovers secrets about all the
members of his extended family who have gathered for summer vacation at the
family's seaside compound. He's not at all pleased, for example, when he finds out
what's really going on in the mind of his cousin Annelise, an apparently sweet,
perfect girl whom Jared secretly loves and who is actually a vicious sociopath. The
story zips along as readers share Jared's fear of Annelise, his dreadful discovery that
someone else in the family can also read minds, and his horror when Annelise
acquires the power as well. That's all we're going to give away; let it suffice to say
that the book is an elaborately creepy take on paranoia in overdrive and is just as
scary on the last page as it is in the beginning. RS
SMITH, BARBARA A. 
Somewhere Just Beyond. Atheneum, 1993 
[96 p]
ISBN 0-689-31877-4 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Just after Callie arrives at her Aunt Lil's house for her usual two-week stay in the
summer, Aunt Lil announces that they have to go to Gramma's farm. They find
Callie's grandmother on the bathroom floor, confused and very ill. Callie isn't at
all sure she can cope with seeing her grandmother like this, but as she plunges into
work on the farm and remembers stories and times with her grandparents, she
takes the inevitable in stride. The strength of character twelve-year-old Callie
displays as she naturally begins to assume family responsibility reflects her under-
standing of her family's history and her own place in it. The first-person narra-
tion, with its limited view of the world, keeps the story from overstating its case,
and while the author intends to suggest a believe in an afterlife, the book as clearly
affirms life on earth. This is not so much a story of growing up as it is a story of
continuation. One generation teaches another about its history and its dreams
and then falls, only to have the next generation step unconsciously into the pat-
tern. CAROL Fox
STANLEY, DIANE 
Charles Dickens: The Man Who Had Great Expectations; written
by Diane Stanley and Peter Vennema; illus. by Diane Stanley. 
Morrow,
1993 
4 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-019111-3 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09110-5 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
The latest in Stanley and Vennema's series of picture-book biographies (see Bard
102 
* THE BULLETIN
ofAvon, BCCB 12/92), this volume depicts the life and career of the famous Vic-
torian writer. The book describes the best of times and the worst of times, from
Dickens' childhood to his fantastic adult popularity; it explores the personal
(Dickens' unhappy marriage) while remaining conservative (there's no mention of
Dickens' possible extramarital involvements), and it mentions the high points of
Dickens' literary career and fame rather than merely listing his prolific output,
although some explanation of the serial publication of the novels should have ap-
peared. The final authorial summation is more sentimental than is usual for this
team, but Dickens can have that effect. The illustrations, with Stanley's signature
flattened and stylized figures and historically convincing if too-clean streets, are
distant enough to be intriguing but human enough to be engaging, particularly
the comic portrait of middle-aged Maria Beadnell making eyes at Mr. Dickens.
This is a good introduction to an unnecessarily daunting literary figure-you might
want to use it in conjunction with a readaloud of A Christmas Carol or another
short piece. A brief partial bibliography, both of books for further reading and
works by Dickens, is included. DS
STAPLES, DONNA 
Arena Beach. Houghton, 1993 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-395-65366-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Terra Bliss, known as Tee, has never imagined living anywhere but in the tiny
coastal town of Arena Beach, where she resides with her flower-child mother Ce-
lestial (who makes money by channeling and sewing), dates a surfer, and works as
a part-time mechanic at a garage run by the irascible Turbo. Her peace is shattered
when the father she's never met arrives for a visit. She's conflicted, finding him a
nice man, but she's angry about his original desertion and about losing him again
when he goes back to his wife and family. Pressure mounts when Tee's boss and
friend dies, her mother gets dangerously into the spirit world and then signs up for
the Peace Corps, and Tee is caught in the San Francisco earthquake of 1989, all of
which forces her to make some decisions about her life. The book suffers from an
overeventfulness common to first novels, so that the focus lacks sharpness and the
pacing begins to lag. However, the characters, particularly strong-minded Tee
(reminiscent of Marsha Qualey's capable heroines) and her crude, sad, and affec-
tionate boss Turbo, are well drawn, and Staples is a good writer who treats the year
of turmoil with sympathy and depth. DS
STAPLES, SUZANNE FISHER 
Haveli. Knopf, 1993 
26 3p
ISBN 0-679-84157-1 
$18.00 
R* 
Gr. 8 up
See this month's Big Picture, p. 73.
SUTCLIFF, 
ROSEMARY 
Chess-Dream in a Garden; illus. by Ralph
Thompson. 
Candlewick, 1993 
48p
ISBN 1-56402-192-0 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 3-5
Sutcliff and Thompson have collaborated to create a book based on the ancient
Lewis chess set, the pieces of which can now be found in both the British and
Scottish National Museum. Sutcliff has woven a surrealistic tale of love and battle
with the famous chess pieces as the players. The book has a dreamy quality which,
combined with the chess-playing, gives it a strong kinship to David Wiesner's Free
Fall; (BCCB 5/88), and as in that book--as in many dream books-sense is often
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 
103
sacrificed for mystery. Surrounding the pieces/players with animals both real and
dreamed in a way that's both overelaborate and inconclusive, Sutcliff crowds the
conflict with too many motifs, and in the midst of fiction, one feels cheated of a
complete introduction to the real chess pieces. On the other hand, Sutcliffs po-
etic phrases and Thompson's misty watercolors sometimes merge to form a power-
ful and moody dream fragment, if not a cohesive story. KJ
TAMAR, ERIKA Fair Game. Harcourt, 1993 
293p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-278537-X 
$10.95
Papered. ISBN 0-15-227065-5 
$3.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
The narration here moves between three characters: Laura Jean is a popular senior
in high school, afraid that college will separate her from her long-time boyfriend
Scott; Joe Lopez is a friend of Scott's, but he always feels a little outside of the
crowd because of his Latino heritage; although old enough to be a junior, mildly
retarded Cara is a freshman, desperate for attention from her peers, particularly
her male peers. Cara's desire for acceptance leads her to do anything-anything-
to please the handsome popular boys, including Scott; this leads to a mounting
series of sexual encounters with them that eventually ends in a brutal gang rape.
The boys say it wasn't rape, that she did it all of her own free will, or as loyally
defending Laura Jean says, "The girl's a slut and she's been giving out blow jobs,"
but the media coverage, national reaction, and legal system view the situation dif-
ferently. What the book suggests is that Cara does consent, but to what she mis-
takenly views as increased fellowship, not to being the sexual springboard that the
boys make her. Tamar doesn't let anybody off easy, however: although Joe Lopez
cuts out before the rape, he's capable of some vicious commentary ("One of these
days, I'd hump the ears off some blond WASP bitch!"); Cara is vain, petulant, and
snobbish, aware of her own sexual desire but not of the social rules governing it
(one startling scene has her rubbing lasciviously against her father). Readers drawn,
as some will be, by the racy and delivered-on promise of sexual violence will be
unlikely to hear the authorial irony behind the kids' limited viewpoints ("I'm not
like that, and neither are any of the other people I know," says Laura Jean after a
Holocaust class's discussion on dehumanizing the "other"), particularly with the
absence of a moral center in the book. Less clear-cut than Mazer's Out of Control
(BCCB 4/93), this is a challenging book dealing with the interconnection of many
complicated issues (racism, sexism, violence)-a book that could provoke some
heated discussion. DS
TAYLOR, THEODORE 
Timothy ofthe Cay. 
Harcourt, 1993 
161p
ISBN 0-15-288358-4 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The experiences that an old African-American, Timothy, and a blind white boy,
Phillip, shared in The Cay (BCCB 7/69) were once-in-a-lifetime events for both of
them, and readers haunted by those two individuals who shared an island will find
that Timothy of the Cay deepens Taylor's portrayal of both characters. This is at
once a prequel and a sequel, which, in alternating chapters, recounts incidents in
Timothy's life and events of Phillip's reentry into civilization. While Phillip's
story has potential for drama in the promise of his returning sight, it is Timothy's
story that grips the reader. That story begins when Timothy is twelve in St. Tho-
mas, in a culture that allowed dignity even while it struggled with the aftermath of
slavery, so that his experiences of achievement and anguish leave him able, even
104 
* THE BULLETIN
determined, to confront a blind boy's hostility. The book comprises a long, satis-
fying denouement for readers of the first book or provides a grounding for those
who read this book first. Either way, The Cay is still the central experience. CAROL
Fox
VAN ALLSBURG, CHRIS 
The Sweetest Fig; written and illus. by Chris Van
Allsburg. 
Houghton, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-67346-1 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs.
In the folktale tradition, magic can be a dangerously uncontrollable element, as
misspent wishes often attest. Many of Van Allsburg's books deal with magic gone
awry... or is it aright? The fussy Parisian dentist Monsieur Bibot gets just what he
deserves when a poor woman pays him with two figs that will make his dreams
come true. Monsieur Bibot, who treats the old woman with the same cruel dis-
dain he rains on his dog Marcel, doesn't believe her until he finds himself prom-
enading down the sidewalk in his underwear and sees the Eiffel Tower droop "over
as if it were made of soft rubber"-both dreams from the previous night. Then he
gets busy hypnotizing himself to dream about being the richest man in the world
and prepares to eat the second fig, but Marcel gets it first. Needless to say, Marcel's
dream is not Monsieur Bibot's but a classic role reversal that will satisfy listeners
with its poetic justice. The mottled mauve, fig-colored drawings accumulate power
through subtle variations of shading and value; although Monsieur Bibot's values
are askew, Van Allsburg's are well modulated, and the symmetric compositions
and impeccable patterning dictated by Bibot's compulsive nature manage to sati-
rize him while reflecting his misplaced precision. This is a sophisticated picture
book, but not at the expense of its audience. Although the story features no kids,
neither do most folktales, and young listeners will chuckle over skinny Monsieur
Bibot's polka-dotted underwear, find fun in the bent Eiffel Tower (without get-
ting the Freudian significance), and rejoice in Marcel's eventual triumph. Van
Allsburg has become a veteran at showing how imagination controlled by art un-
leashes magic. BH
VAN DER ROL, RUUD 
Anne Frank, Beyond the Diary: A Photographic Remem-
brance; written by Ruud van der Rol and Rian Verhoeven; tr. by Tony Langham
and Plym Peters. 
Viking, 1993 
113p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-670-84932-4 
$17.00 
R* 
Gr. 6-10
As Anna Quindlen points out in her introduction to this album of photographs,
the single most arresting picture is the one that comes right at the front: "looking
at the pictures of the actual diary, with its plaid cover and impotent little lock, a
shiver took hold of me as though the thing was a relic, as indeed it is." The photo
of the pink-plaid diary sits alone and starkly uncaptioned, needing no explication
beyond itself; other photos, of the Frank family, the Secret Annexe, the others who
hid there and the still others who kept them hidden, are generously labeled and
accompany a text that briefly explains why the Franks went into hiding and sum-
marizes, with plenty of quotes, the content of the diary itself. There is also plenty
of information on what happened to the family after their arrest. Probably the
most chilling photograph is one of a portion of the Nazis' typed list of the Jews to
be transported from Westerbork to Auschwitz; the Franks are numbers 306 through
309. The appeal of Anne's diary is in its documentary/reliquary qualities: this is a
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 
105
real diary that we were never meant to read (although van der Rol and Verhoeven
do tell us that Anne was preparing the diary for eventual publication). So in some
ways, this book is documentation of the document itself, a footnote not only re-
minding us that Anne was real-and it's made clear that some people need re-
minding-but also letting us see Anne as she never could have seen herself. RS
VUONG, LYNETTE DYER 
The Golden Carp and Other Talesfrom Vietnam; illus. by
Manabu Saito. 
Lothrop, 1993 
128p
ISBN 0-688-12514-X 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
The author has adapted six Vietnamese tales that will have particular appeal to
fairy tale readers because of the romantic themes woven through each. A man is
saved from misfortune by his friend's beloved sister; another is saved by a woman
from his friend's betrayal; a sea captain disappears under water with a fish fairy; a
rejected youngest daughter weds a prince; a warrior woman finds her true love on
the battle field; and a poor scholar falls in love with a golden carp in human form.
The spirit world is pervasive here, and Vuong has struck a good balance between
folkloric distance and realistic detail. These are sharply focused and readable, with
informative notes on each story at the book's end and an exemplary source note at
its beginning. Occasional paintings are awkwardly glamorized in facial expression
but fluid in details of landscape and costume. Although libraries serving Chinese
and Vietnamese populations will find the book especially valuable for book talks
and storytelling, its readership will extend cross-culturally. BH
WATERS, KATE 
Samuel Eaton's Day: A Day in the Life ofa Pilgrim Boy; illus. with
photographs by Russ Kendall. 
Scholastic, 1993 
40p
ISBN 0-590-46311-X 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-4
In this companion to Waters' and Kendall's Sarah Morton's Day (BCCB 2/90),
the author and photographer follow seven-year-old Roger Burns as he "interprets"
the life of a real boy who lived at Plimoth Plantation in 1627. There's not really a
story, but what will catch kids are all the details of a colonial boy's life: what he
wore and ate, his work checking animal snares and gathering mussels, his arduous
assistance with the rye harvest. Color photos are generally unposed and seem
natural, given the basic anachronism of colonial photography, and the first-person
narration is gracefully sprinkled with antiquated words and phrases, most of which
can be understood from the context (although there's also a helpful indexed glos-
sary). It's nice to see a Pilgrim book that takes place in July, not November, and
younger readers will also enjoy the personalized approach. Along with the glos-
sary, appended material includes biographical information about both Samuel Eaton
and Roger Burns, the lyrics to an early version of "Froggy Went a Courtin'," notes
on Plimoth Plantation, the rye harvest, clothing, and the Wampanoags. RS
WELLS, ROBERT E. 
Is a Blue Whale the Biggest Thing There Is?; written and illus.
by Robert E. Wells. 
Whitman, 1993 
32p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8075-3655-5 
$13.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-2015-3656-3 
$6.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
No-a blue whale may be the biggest animal that ever lived, but it's awfully small
compared to Mount Everest... which, in turn, if stacked onto itself one hundred
times over, "would be a mere WHISKER on the face of the Earth!" Wells takes
106 
* 
THE BULLETIN
this progression all the way to the limits of the universe, piling up each successive
"biggest" in a way that's both funny and instructive. "If our sun were turned into
a SUN-SIZED ORANGE and packed in an IMMENSE orange crate along with
99 other sunsized oranges," it would still be but a speck on the star Antares, a
comparison made clear by Wells' cartoon of "Sunsize" labelled oranges sitting
atop the red supergiant. Like Schwartz's How Much Is a Million (BCCB 7/85) or
Hirst's My Place in Space (BCCB 3/90), this book makes the very big definable, if
not comprehensible, a paradox sweet with mystery. Middle-graders will find here
a light and easy read for science class; the big-bigger-biggest setup also makes the
book an unusual story hour companion to "The Three Billy Goats Gruff." RS
WELLS, ROSEMARY Max and Ruby's First Greek Myth: Pandora's Box; written and
illus. by Rosemary Wells. 
Dial, 1993 
24p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1525-0 
$11.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1524-2 
$11.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs.
If Max and Ruby's first Greek myth is young listeners' first Greek myth, there may
follow some confusion despite Wells' characteristically witty text and illustration.
The framing story is Ruby's attempt to keep Max out of her room by posting a
sign saying "No! This means you!"-which of course Max can't read, leading to
his getting caught in the act of investigating Ruby's jewelry box, leading to Ruby's
reading him a revisionist version of Pandora's violating her mother's injunction
against opening her jewelry box. Of course Pandora does open it, releasing a slew
of bugs, which are counteracted not by Hope but by an efficient spider. Pandora's
mother returns to congratulate Pandora on being a good bunny and rewards her
with a trip to the movies, for which they decorate themselves with a bug necklace
and spider pin from the magic jewelry box. Back to Max, Ruby, and a punch line
that concludes their discussion of the moral: "And what does my sign say, Max?"
asks Ruby. "No!" says Max. "And who does it mean, Max?" Ruby asks. "You!"
says Max. It's very funny, but it's very complicated, storywise, although Wells
does a clear-cut job of distinguishing the two tales: the framing story is on white
paper with plain borders around the watercolor paintings; the myth is on pale blue
paper with borders of traditional Greek motifs. More than a tale within a tale, this
is a spoof within a spoof, so kids will need a grounding in the myth's straightfor-
ward rendition to deconstruct this one. While fans will sit still for anything about
Max and Ruby, and adults will adore the Grecian profiles of rabbits in full battle
regalia (including chariot and victory wreaths), do give kids a crack at the d'Aulaires'
Book of Greek Myths first. BH
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 
107
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR LIBRARIANS AND TEACHERS
Baltuck, Naomi. Crazy Gibberish and other Story Hour Stretches (From a Storyteller's
Bag of Tricks,) illus. by Doug Cushman. Linnet/Shoestring, 1993. 160p. Trade
ed. ISBN 0-208-02336-4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-208-02337-2. Trade ed. $25.00;
Paper ed. $15.00.
There's lots of useful story hour lagniappe here, including chants, audience par-
ticipation stories, songs and musical games, and jokes and riddles. Practical tips
for how to incorporate the material are included, as is advice on how to create
"stretching" activities of your own. RS
Bologna Annual '92. Picture Book Studio, 1993. Paper ed. ISBN 0-88708-242-4.
194p. 39.95.
More than just lavish production (and reproduction), this international sampling
of pictures by 92 artists from 31 countries will give specialists in children's litera-
ture a chance to examine widely varied styles and media that reflect new trends in
children's book illustration. Each artist is represented by a double spread of illus-
trations, selected by a committee for the Annual Illustrator's Exhibition at the
Bologna International Children Book Fair, with brief information about his or her
background and technique. BH
Chelton, Mary K. and James M. Rosinia. Bare Bones: YoungAdult Services Tips for
Public Library Generalists. ALA, 1993. Paper ed. ISBN 0-8389-7665-4. 73p.
$12.00
Estes, Sally, ed. Genre Favorites for Young Adults: A Collection ofBooklist Col-
umns. Booklist/ALA, 1993. Paper ed. ISBN 0-8389-5755-2. 6 4p. $7.95
Young Adult Library Services Association. Directions for Library Service to Young
Adults. Second ed. ALA, 1993. 3 0p. Paper ed. ISBN 0-8389-3434-X. $10.00
Three new publications from ALA together provide a roadmap for successful li-
brary work with teenagers. Directions, a revision of a 1977 title, outlines areas of
service such as collection development and programming, explaining the philo-
sophical and practical standards for YA work. Bare Bones, aimed at the generalist
but useful for YA specialists as well, is a common-sense manual on book selection,
programming and reference work, and effective communication with young adults.
Sally Estes' compilation of genre favorites (mysteries, science fiction, romance,
etc.) provides a good starting place for YA collection-building. RS
Hearne, Betsy. Beauties and Beasts. Oryx, 1993. Paper ed. ISBN 0-89774-729-1.
179p. $23.50.
Dividing her anthology into three parts ("Rescued Beasts," "Questing Beauties,"
and "Homely Women and Homemade Men"), Hearne includes here twenty-seven
variants on "Beauty and the Beast." The stories range from Turkish to Appala-
chian to Lithuanian tales; a concluding section includes activities, an annotated
list of picture book versions, sources, and a bibliography. RS
108 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Hettinga, Donald R. Presenting Madeleine L'Engle. Twayne, 1993. ISBN 0-
8057-8222-2. 171p. $20.95
One of the most prolific and distinctive writers of young adult fantasy gets thor-
ough coverage in Hettinga's discussion, which emphasizes L'Engle's life, art, and
philosophy as inextricably intertwined. Emphasized here are her most popular
series featuring the Murrys (A Wrinkle in Time), the Austins, and the O'Keefes
(The Arm of the Starfish), as well as her early boarding school novels and later
Biblical fiction. A chronology and extensive bibliography complete the study,
which draws selectively on L'Engle's own autobiographical reflections. BH
Rochman, Hazel. Against Borders: Promoting Books for a Multicultural World
Booklist/ALA, 1993. Paper ed. ISBN 0-8389-0601-X. 288p. $16.95
In seven thematic essays and eight annotated bibliographies, Rochman considers
books for middle, junior, and high school readers that "change our view of our-
selves [and] extend that phrase 'like me' to include what we thought was foreign
and strange". Using such themes as "The Hero and the Monster" and "Family
Matters," the essays link books from disparate cultures; the bibliographies are di-
vided by ethnic group, including African Americans, Asian Americans, Jewish
Americans, Latinos, and Native Americans; three other lists on the Holocaust,
apartheid and "The Widening World" address international concerns and cul-
tures. Rochman's selection is wide ranging, from contemporary YA novels to books
in translation to nonfiction to adult memoirs, and each of the bibliographies in-
cludes video resources as well. RS
Susina, Jan, ed. Kiddie Lit(e): The Dumbing Down of Children's Literature [ The
Lion and the Unicorn, June, 1993].
Nine contributors address issues of taste and trash in children's literature, explor-
ing the ways in which producers (authors, publishers, anthologists) of books for
children can underestimate their audience. RS
Walker, Barbara K. The Art of the Turkish Tale. Texas Tech, 1993. 2 volumes.
Trade ed. ISBN 0-89672-265-1 (set); paper ed. ISBN 0-89672-318-6 (set). 512p.
Trade. $47.50; Paper ed. $32.00
The editor of A Treasury of Turkish Folktales for Children (BCCB 12/88) has as-
sembled a much more extensive two-volume work based on her collections of oral
narrative tape-recorded in Turkey from 1961 to 1990. Each volume is accompa-
nied by an informative introduction emphasizing different elements, types, and
characteristics of Turkish folklore. The stories themselves-and the variations
they offer on well-known European tales-make this a strong storytelling resource,
with two-color drypoint etchings that enhance the book's aesthetic appeal. Each
book also contains a specific list of sources, a pronunciation guide, a glossary, and
an index. BH
NOVEMBER 1993 
* 
109
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In no way meant to be a cataloging aid, this rather
idiosyncratic index is instead intended to lead readers to those books that could fill
a particular gap in a collection, to help teachers and librarians find books that
might be useful in various school or recreational settings, and to help in those
common requests for a "love story" or a "scary story." In the case of subject head-
ings, the subhead "stories" refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to
those books intended for independent reading.
African Americans: Hoyt-
Goldsmith; Lawrence; Pinkney
African Americans-fiction: Gee;
Hamilton; Pfeffer; Taylor
African Americans-stories: Gray;
Havill; Johnson
Alaska-fiction: Hill
Animals-fiction: Denzel; Seidler
Arctic regions: Brandenburg
Arithmetic: Wells, Robert
Art history: Greenberg; Seymour
Asian Americans-fiction: Garland
Asian Americans-stories: Havill
Aunts-fiction: Howard;
Konigsburg
BIOGRAPHIES: Andronik;
Meltzer; Pinkney; Stanley; van
der Rol
Books and reading: Stanley; van
der Rol
Books and reading-fiction: Gifaldi
Books and reading-stories: Anno;
Borton; Lucas
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Pevsner; Pfeffer
Bullies-fiction: Gifaldi
Butterflies: Lasky
California-fiction: Staples, D.
Chess-fiction: Sutcliff
Child abuse-fiction: Grant
Christmas: Farber
Christmas-fiction: Shelton
Christmas-poetry: Farber
Civil rights: Kronenwetter
Civil rights-stories: Gray
Colombia-fiction: Jenkins
Colonial life: Waters
CONCEPT BOOKS: Wells,
Robert
Cowboys-stories: Scott
Dance: Pinkney
Daycare-stories: Day
Deafness-stories: Hesse
Death-fiction: Howard; Smith
Divorce-stories: Newman
Dogs-stories: Day; Hesse; Van
Allsburg
Ecology: Reynolds
England-fiction: Anderson
Ethics and values: Tamar
Ethnic awareness: Mazer
FANTASY: Rodda; Seidler;
Sutcliff
Farm life-fiction: Smith
Farm life-stories: Lucas
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Ferris; Hamilton
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Anno; Polacco;
Vuong
FUNNY STORIES: Clifford
Gangs-fiction: Garland
Grandfathers-fiction: Bawden
Grandparents-fiction: Jenkins;
Smith
Greece-fiction: Bawden
110 
* THE BULLETIN
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Anderson; Gee; Howard; Orlev;
Rylant
History, American: Waters
History, English: Stanley
History, U.S.: Johnson; Lawrence;
Meltzer
History: Macaulay
Holocaust: van der Rol
Homelessness-fiction: Hamilton;
Nasaw
Insects-songs: Oram
Israel-fiction: Geras; Orlev
Jews: van der Rol
Jews-fiction: Geras; Orlev
Kwanzaa: Hoyt-Goldsmith
Latinos-fiction: Paulsen
Latinos-stories: Hurwitz
Lesbians-stories: Newman
Literature, children's: Andronik
Literature, English: Stanley
LOVE STORIES: Rylant; Seidler;
Staples, S.
Mental retardation-fiction: Rubin;
Tamar
Minnesota: Bowen
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Shreve; Staples, D.; Staples, S.
Music: Oram
MYSTERY STORIES: Clifford;
Heisel; Patneaude
Mythology, classical: Wells,
Rosemary
Native Americans: Monroe;
Seymour
Native Americans-fiction: Hill
Nature study: Bowen;
Brandenburg; Lasky; Pringle;
Simon
New York City-fiction: Shreve
New Zealand-fiction: Gee
Pakistan-fiction: Staples, S.
Paris-stories: Van Allsburg
Pets-stories: Borton
Pilgrims: Waters
POETRY: Farber; Kennedy
Prehistoric life: Denzel
Ranch life-stories: Scott
Rape-fiction: Tamar
Reading aloud: Kennedy
Reading, easy: Clifford; Heisel;
Hill; Patneaude; Pfeffer; Shreve
Reading, family: Farber; Johnson
Reading, reluctant: Naylor;
Patneaude; Paulsen; Sleator
School-poetry: Kennedy
SCIENCE FICTION: Sleator
Scuplture: Greenberg
Self-image-fiction: Klass
Sex roles: Brooks
Ships-fiction: Macaulay
SHORT STORIES: Gallo; Geras;
Mazer
Slavery-stories: Johnson
Social issues: Konigsburg;
Kronenwetter
Social studies: Reynolds
Stepfamilies-fiction: Ferris
Story hour: Borton; Day; Havill;
Hurwitz; Johnson; Van
Allsburg; Wells, Robert; Wells,
Rosemary; Vuong
Vacations-fiction: Ferris
Vietnam-folklore: Vuong
War-fiction: Pullein-Thompson
Wishes-stories: Van Allsburg
Wolves: Brandenburg; Simon
Wolves-fiction: Corcoran
Women's studies: Andronik;
Paulsen
World War II-fiction: Anderson;
Bawden; Gee; Rylant
/
WILSON REFERENCE BOOKS
Make Multicultural Literature and Folklore Come to Life with...
Look Back and See
"For both new and experienced storytellers, MacDonald's latest collection offers
a rich variety of peaceful stories to use with all ages. "-NJEA REVIEW
Look Back and See provides easy-to-learn,
easy-to-tell stories from renowned folklorist
and author Margaret Read MacDonald.
Presented in an ethnopoetic format to facili-
tate natural phrasing, the gentle stories in
Look Back and See are multicultural in scope,
drawn from Native American, African, Latin
American, and many other traditions.
Fantastic Theater, Look Back and See, and When the Lights Go Out are classic folk-
tales from around the world that entertain listeners and inspire them to read.
To Order Call Toll-Free 800-367-6770.
Outside of the U.S. and Canada call 718-588-8400. Fax 718-590-1617.
fi THE H.W. WILSON COMPANY Sharini Knnowleda Sinre 1898
9UAxcu 
-
oix X 
012. 
036- 677
Look Back and See
by Margaret Read MacDonald
178pp. 1991 ISBN-0-8242-0810-2 LC 91-2538
$35 U.S. and Canada, $40 other countries.
nn TH H.WWIL 
N COPANYhari 
Knolido S c 189
PETER Sis
paints "an evocative
picture of northern adventure"*
A SMALL TALLTALE 
,k\
FROM THE FAR
FARNORTH
From the acclaimed author- 
1,
artist of Follow the Dream
comes this dazzling Arctic
odyssey inspired by the
Czech folk hero Jan Welzl,
and his friendship
with American
Eskimos.
*"Full 
of action,
good humor, idealism,
and cryptic detail... Sis has suc-
ceeded masterfully in translating his
own childhood fascination into a highly
original irresistible adventure that children
will pore over with relish." - School Library Journal (Starred)
\"The art is mystical and haunting.. .the
story echoes the art's dreaminess, with
its gentle pace and wry humor... the pic-
tures [will] stretch the perceptual skills
of young readers."- tRecommended by The
Bulletin of the Center for Children 's Books
Color maps, storyboards, panoramas, and pictographs throughout.
Ages 5-10. $15.00 (0-679-84345-0). GLB $15.99 (0-679-94345-5)
A Peter Sis favorite - now in Dragonfly paperback!
RAINBOW RHINO
Ages 3-7. Paper, $4.99 (0-679-85005-8).
A New York TI~mes Best illustrated Book of the Year
Alfred A. Knopf a"
"A
picture
PIG
APLE1
PIG
GALC
Da.
I
I
k
nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn
Sevening of reading in this
k 
•liveliest 
of picture books.'
-Publishers Weekly (Starred)
S 
c
*s "A thoroughly enjoyable
IB E 
romp...great for reading
A A-e 
/ 
aloud....McPhail's rolling,
-
rhyming text perfectly
-7 f 
'' 
rint+i iroc 1ho cnirit nf +ho c
m-- 
------ 
~------------
UUUUUUUUUUUUUUU000000 
00000000000000
C
must for all
book collections"*
S 
"McPhail at his whimsical
best....Full of humor and slurps,
high jinks and burps, pigs
-
L -1 
I
nva 
e 
e 
narrao 
e
~I 
• 
i 
I
Compiled by Charlemae Hill Rollins
Illustrated by Ashley Bryan
With a new introduction by Dr. Augusta Baker
A new generation of readers is sure to enjoy Christmas Gif'-
a collection of poetry and prose by such noted writers as
Frederick Douglass, Langston Hughes, and Zora Neale Hurston.
Spirituals and traditional recipes complete a holiday mix
that preserves and promotes a unique part of our American
heritage. Reissued with 74 magnificent new linoleum-print
illustrations by award-winning artist Ashley Bryan.
All Ages. 128 pp. RTE $14.00/0-688-11667-1; LE $13.93/0-688-11668-X
Morrow Junior Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
"This reissue of Christmas Gif' is a cause
for celebration."-Dr. Augusta Baker
CHRISTMAS GIF'
AN ANTHOLOGY OF CHRISTMAS
POEMS, SONGS, AND STORIES
WRITTEN BY AND ABOUT
AFRICAN-AMERICANS
I
WEARJ~E~ALL
iN THEE DUMPS
WTHLJ[ACKYAND 
GUIY
' 
Starred in ALA Booklist
The best of the old, the best of the new, the best that is yet to be
-that's 
how Toyland, home of Santa and Mrs. Claus, is described
when Santa himself invites Art Atchinson Aimesworth, his
little sister Esther, and his pal Spaulding Littlefeets to journey
North. But why are they summoned? "Joyce turns his considerable
talents to Christmas and the results are particularly merry. [The
story] is robust...the [delicious art is] filled with lights, toys,
candy, action. And [with the foldout letters at the end] readers
will find a measure of the Christmas spirit as well."-Booklist
A Laura Geringer Book
All ages $18.00" (021133-4); $17.89t (021134-2)
Full-color picture books by William Joyce
DINOSAUR BOB 
A DAY WITH WILBUR ROBINSON
And His Adventures with the 
Ages 4-8 $15.00* (022967-5)
Familv 
azardn 
$14.89t (022968-3)
Ages 4-8 $15.00* (0:
$14.89t (023048-7)
GEORGE SHRI
Ages 4-8 $15.00* (0:
$14.89t (023071-1)
Harper Trophy papi
$4.95* (443129-0)
Miniature Book ed.
(023299-4)
HarperCollins
ISBN prefix: 0-06.
*Trade and paper eds.
fLibrary ed. Publisher's
prices only and in no
way reflect the prices
at which available from
any other source.
8mmmmmmmmmmmma
BY LAURA KRAUSS MELMED
ILLUSTRATED 
BY ED YOUNG
"Melmed and Young strike up a singularly harmonious collaboration.
...Melmed's text is strikingly musical." 
-Publishers Weekly
"Young uses paints and crayons to create impressionistic pictures
of great beauty, power, and sensitivity." 
-ALA 
Booklist
"The borderless double-page illustrations meld perfectly with the
text; each one seems more intriguing, more stunning than the
last....Powerful!" 
-School Library lournal* (starred review)
Ages 3 up. 32 pp. TR $15.00/0-688-08230-0; LE $14.93/0-688-08231-9
Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc. * 1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
THE LION
AND THE
UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children's Literature
Smith and Jack Zipes, Editors
S17, Number I presents
Kiddie Lit(e): The Dumbing
S-- 
Down of Children's Literature
* Sharon Shaloo "Get with the Programl" The Mass and Direct
Marketing of Children's Literature
* Elizabeth Law "Yes, but Im Eleven": An Editor's Perspective
on Condescension in Children's Literature
* David Galef Writing Wrongs: Revising a Children's Book
Manuscript
* Julie Brown and Robert Brown Manufacturing Kiddie
Lit(e): The Process and Politics of Abridging History
* Richard Flynn Can Children's Poetry Matter?
• Anne Lundin Under the Window and Afternoon Tea:
"Twirling the Same Blade of Grass"
* Judith L Kellogg The Dynamics of Dumbing: The Case of Merlin
8 Joel D. Chaston Polistopolis and Torquilstone Nesbit, Eager,
and the Question of Imitation
* A. Waller Hastings Moral Simplification in Disney's
The Little Mermaid
* Plus book reviews!
Published twice a year in June and December.
Prepayment is required. Annual Subscriptions: $19.00, individuals; $34.00,
institutions. Foreign Postage: $2.40. Canada & Mexico; $4.40, outside North
America. Single Issue Prices: $10.00, individuals: $18.50. institutions. Double
Issue Prices: $13.50, individuals, $23.00, institutions. Payment must be drawn
on a U.S. bank or made by international money order. MD residents add 5%
sales tax. For orders shipped to Canada add 7% GST (#124004946).
Send ordersto: The Johns Hopkins University Press, PO Box 19966. Baltimore.
MD 21211.
'PCall Toll Free 1-00-548-1784, Mon.-Fri., 8:00-5:00 ET for VISA or
MasterCard orders. Or FAX your order anytime: (410) 516-6968.
B THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS
PRES
I 
Illustrated by John Parker Sherrod
This companion volume to Ninety-nine Gnats,
Nits, and Nibblers runs the gamut from the
regrettably familiar, including mosquitoes, ticks,
cockroaches, and what the author describes as
"other arthropodan indignities," to the bizarre
and obscure, creatures such as sheep keds,
mantispids, and reindeer throat bots. Combining
a naturalist's keen observation of the subject
with witty wordplay and amazing anecdotes,
Berenbaum has provided a uniquely informative
and entertaining book, useful not only for the
I 
scientific novice but also for entomologists who
need a handy guide for their own use or for use
in teaching, especially in introductory classes
"May Berenbaum has again shed a warm light on
a part of the animal world that is usually outside
our circle of understanding." -
Bayard Webster,
reiter 
d 
New 
York 
15mes 
science 
writer 
and
freelance nature writer. lus. Cloth, *2.50;
Paper, $12.95
Order tol free 800(/54-470S
University of Illinois Press
54 East Gregorv Drive * Chamnaim. IL 61820
University of Illinois Pre 
SECOND CLASS
54 East Gregory Drive 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN POSTAGE GUAwATEED
Ninety-nine More
Maggots, Mites,
andMnunchers
May R. Berenbaum
I
