T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
May 2016
Vol. 69   No. 9
Disseminate. Innovate. Collaborate.
JHU Press Scholarly Journals
Scholarly journals, or collections of new ideas and scholarly 
research, are brought to light by authors, editors, reviewers, 
professional associations, librarians, readers, and university presses 
like the Johns Hopkins University Press. These intrepid heroes 
work together to do what no one person can do alone: transform 
research into volumes of scholarly works that can ultimately 
change the world. 
www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
May 2016
Vol. 69 No. 9
453  the BIg PICture
 
 Nobody Likes a Goblin  written and illus. by Ben Hatke
454  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
454 • Booked by Kwame Alexander
462 •What Elephants Know  by Eric Dinerstein
466 • Stop Following Me, Moon!  written and illus. by Darren Farrell
481 •  This Land Is Our Land: A History of American Immigration  by Linda Bar-
rett Osborne
493 • Highly Illogical Behavior by John Corey Whaley
497  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
For up-to-date pricing information, please visit the journal webpage at: http://www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/bulletin_of_the_center_for_childrens_books/pricing.html. Volumes available in microfilm 
from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in micro-
fiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should 
be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2016 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Nobody Likes a Goblin © 2016 by Ben Hatke and used by permission of First 
Second Books.
May 2016 • 453
the BIg PICture
Nobody Likes a Goblin
written and illustrated by Ben Hatke
Geez, no one ever thinks about things from the goblin’s perspective. Sure, adventure 
gamers (whether they are using a video game, board game, or dice and story-based 
format) know that you’ve got to level up to get to any real excitement, and you level 
up by taking out a bunch of low-level guys, like goblins, to gain XP. Fantasy buffs 
will also understand the reference, as goblins repeatedly turn up there as one of 
the lowest forms of life, seeming to be present only to serve as a way to provide the 
gamer with experience and to steal from to amass your questing materials. Which 
is exactly what happens in this picture book, except this time we are seeing it from 
the point of view of the wronged goblin. 
Even for little guys who don’t know the tropes, it’s impossible not to 
instantly empathize with the little, round-eyed goblin who is just minding his 
own business before his life is upended. Goblin’s got boots to gnaw on, a skeleton 
friend, and an all-around good life, until the adventurers come. The D&D-inspired 
invaders plunder and wreck, leaving peaceful Goblin with no belongings or friend 
(they even took Skeleton). Off Goblin goes to save his friend, and after some near 
escapes he finds him, piled onto a cart with typical bonus items in any fantasy 
adventure game: gold, a goose, treasures, a cranky woman who was probably in 
the wrong place at the wrong time. Goblin also has picked up a sturdy number of 
allies along the way, and the bunch of tiny, determined guys make quick work of the 
human-sized adventurers, arriving back home in time for an inclusive, giant feast. 
Young viewers will cheer heartily for the triumph of the little over the 
big, and for the clear suggestion that goodness, fairness, and justice win out. Adult 
participants, or older kids who know the games, may even feel a twinge of guilt for 
how many notches on their belts they’ve amassed from tiny creatures like this, never 
giving a thought to how those beings were probably just running around, doing 
their own goblin-y thing, before their fictional existences were ruined. 
Creamy watercolors mix with scratchy line drawings to offer intriguing 
details set against a warm, cozy palette. Liberal use of black backgrounds reinforce 
the dark of the dungeon scenes, creating vignettes that show highlights of Goblin’s 
happy life; the depiction of this existence contrasts sharply with the pages that follow, 
where it’s clear he has no routine, safety, and not even much of a plan other than 
“save my friend.” The wider world also emphasizes Goblin’s diminutive stature, with 
our hero barely knee high to those who consider him expendable and occupying 
a tiny portion of the page against sweeping landscapes. 
Hatke’s got an impressive gift for capturing the forlorn with little to no 
words, as in his recent gem of a graphic novel, Little Robot (BCCB 11/15), and he 
454 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
does so again here, as brief, simple descriptive sentences are paired with quiet but 
powerful visual representations of Goblin’s heartbreak and fear. This is a book where 
viewers will be fiercely on Goblin’s side from the first page, and they’ll fervently 
hope he can recapture his quiet cheer of the beginning before the “heroes” ruined 
the day. (See p. 469 for publication information.)
April Spisak, Reviewer
AlexAnder, KwAme Booked. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-544-57098-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Nick has a fraught relationship with his father, so it’s particularly 
hard on Nick when his mother leaves. He tries to hold it together, and things seem 
to be going pretty well when his soccer team gets invited to a national tournament 
and a girl he likes starts showing signs that she might like him back. Tensions 
between him and his father escalate, though, and when Nick gets into a fight with 
some bullies who steal his bike, an overwrought online post brings his mom back 
to town so they can all go to family counseling. Her return is only temporary, 
however, and even though she returns again when Nick’s appendix bursts, it doesn’t 
erase the fact that his parents are really splitting up. While the poetry in this verse 
novel doesn’t offer quite the energy and pop of The Crossover (BCCB 2/14), it still 
rings true to the emotional highs and lows of a tween boy grieving the breakup 
of his family, negotiating his first crush, and finding his courage. The aural starts 
and stops of the poetry effectively convey the angry set of a jaw, a sullen eyeroll, 
the easy closeness of a mother and son, the awkwardness of approaching a smart, 
attractive girl, and the hesitations of achieving détente with a brusque father. De-
spite Nick’s protests over his father’s insistence that he, as a black kid, must have an 
extraordinary vocabulary if he wants to stand out, he puts his lessons to good use 
in school and out; his footnotes, in their wry, vernacular imitation of his father’s 
more scholarly work, introduce some obscure but useful terms in a friendly way. 
A rap-star-turned-librarian ups the cool factor for bookish types who may or may 
not recognize all of the novels and poems alluded to; indeed, that character is one 
of many sly tricks Alexander uses to get sports-minded guys thinking about the 
social advantages of being well read.  KC
May 2016 • 455
AlexAnder, SArAh The Art of Not Breathing. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2016 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-544-63388-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
When Elsie turns sixteen, she knows that her birthday will be occasion not for 
celebration but mourning: her twin, Eddie, disappeared in the North Sea the day 
they both turned eleven, and his body was never found. Her parents insist that she 
stay away from the water, but Elsie is drawn to it, leaping at the chance to join a 
freediving group—who descend into the water on held breath alone—when she’s 
invited by a handsome guy. As she gets closer to the boy, Tay, it becomes increasingly 
clear that there are secrets surrounding the day of Eddie’s death, secrets that Tay and 
Elsie’s older brother, Dillon, know. The setup here is compelling and atmospheric: 
a small coastal Scottish town, a long-held grief, a damaged family, and a lurking 
secret. The freediving is an unusual dimension, and Elsie’s experiences in the cold 
depths, both her explorations of this new activity and her revealing underwater 
flashbacks to the day of the tragedy, are intriguing. The book is overloaded, though, 
with details about Elsie’s supernatural bond with Eddie, Elsie’s bullying at school, 
Elsie’s brother’s anorexia, Elsie’s mother’s affair and drinking, etcetera, and the se-
crets about Eddie’s death are ultimately confusing and unsatisfying; Elsie herself is 
not, beyond her suffering, a particularly appealing character. Tragic loss and family 
secrets remain an enticing draw, though, and readers may find the moody setting 
and the intriguing details of freediving enough to satisfy.  DS
AnderSon, lily The Only Thing Worse Than Me Is You. St. Martin’s Griffin, 
2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-07909-1 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-9172-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R  Gr. 9-12
When senior Beatrice “Trixie” Watson eavesdrops on her friends, she’s shocked to 
hear them claim that Benedict West is secretly in love with her. After all, Trixie and 
Ben have a longstanding love-to-hate-you relationship, fed by competition over 
class rankings at their elite high school and marked by a daily exchange of geeky 
barbs and nerdy insults. A burgeoning romance between their respective best friends 
forces them to call truce, which quickly leads to friendship, flirtation, and more. 
The path of true love never runs smooth, though, and soon an academic cheating 
scandal rocks the school and the two new couples, especially when Trixie’s best 
friend is accused. Now, with their futures, their friends, and their hearts on the 
line, Trixie and Ben must uncover the true culprit. Shakespeare’s Much Ado About 
Nothing becomes a sweet tale of frenemies-turned-lovers here, as a cast of likable 
academic overachievers takes the stage. The adaptation to modern high-stress, 
high-stakes high school life is spot on, the witty banter is quoteworthy, and there’s 
just enough underlying romantic tension to make the speedy evolution from the 
enmity to adoration feel plausible. Academic cheating replaces chastity as the story’s 
central point of conflict, and that plot’s sleuthing element is likely to please readers 
who like their romantic leads to do more than swoon. The unceasing flow of geek-
related pop culture references reads as name-dropping but still adds an amusing 
flair. The novel ultimately succeeds, then, as brain candy for the brainy crowd.  AM
456 • The BulleTin
Avi School of the Dead. Harper/HarperCollins, 2016 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-174085-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223151-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Uncle Charlie evidently did some string pulling before his death, and now his 
twelve-year-old nephew Tony has been admitted as a legacy student to the elite 
Penda School in San Francisco. The teachers are a little weird, but Tony’s happy to 
be distracted from any strangeness by the two girls who show an interest in him. 
Lilly is nice and reassuringly ordinary, with a circle of friends who are friendly, silly, 
and accepting. It’s tall, lovely, mature Jessica, though, who seems to be the catch, but 
her attention comes fitfully as flirtation and aggression, and her two buddies, both 
members of her school sanctioned Weird History Club, aren’t exactly welcoming. 
Add sightings of departed Uncle Charlie and of the “Penda Boy” who is rumored 
to haunt the school, and it seems as though Tony’s got far more to figure out than 
how to adjust to his new milieu. This mystery/ghost tale is overladen with well-worn 
tropes such as hidden staircases and rooms, an evil uncle, a girl who isn’t what she 
seems, and a protagonist who spouts every possible reason why he shouldn’t just 
change schools and be done with it. Although there are some genuine thrills and 
shivers along the way, Tony’s propensity to review all the facts—often—and share 
his every doubt and suspicion—often—quickly wears thin. Nonetheless, this could 
still make for a satisfying adventure for middle-graders who prefer to read under 
the covers by flashlight in the dead of night.  EB
BAKer, JeAnnie Circle; written and illus. by Jeannie Baker. Candlewick, 
2016 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7966-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
“The bar-tailed godwits . . . in this story make the longest unbroken journey of 
any animal in the world.” And that’s the journey that Baker follows, focusing on 
a single bird, distinguished here by a white-patched wing, as he joins a flock and 
makes his way from shore of Australia to the wetlands along the China Sea, rests 
and eats for several days, and then continues to mating grounds in Alaska. Breed-
ing is successful, but only one chick survives a fox’s raid. Hopefully that chick 
will grow and thrive, but by then its mother and the white-patched father will 
be long gone, having again fed heartily for the long, uninterrupted return flight. 
An author’s note, accompanied by a map, underscores the almost unimaginable 
lengths the godwit traverses without rest. Mixed-media collage, notably delicate 
and detailed, incorporate natural materials among finely textured cut paper and 
paint, and their photographic reproduction conveys a sense of depth. The slight 
framing story, featuring a boy in a wheelchair who observes the godwits and wishes 
he could fly with them, is poignant but it isn’t necessary—the drama of the bird’s 
arduous migration is fully engaging in its own right.  EB
BArrAclough, lindSey The Mark of Cain. Candlewick, 2016 [496p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7864-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
In 1962, the teenaged Cora and her younger sister Mimi are forced to return to the 
dilapidated family estate where, four years ago, they were terrorized by the kidnap-
May 2016 • 457
ping, child-eating demon Long Lankin (Long Lankin, BCCB 9/12). Unfortunately, 
Long Lankin is only a half of the ghastly story that haunts Guerdon Hall: the spirit 
of Aphra, the witch who was Long Lankin’s lover, has returned to take her revenge on 
the heirs of Lord Guerdon, the man responsible for Long Lankin’s death and Aphra’s 
burning at the stake five hundred years ago. Guerdon Hall is yet again a character 
unto itself, suffocating and oppressive, resisting any attempts at modernization as 
plaster cracks and wallpaper peels off to further reveal the house’s tragic history. 
Barraclough manages the almost impossible feat of making Aphra both horrifically 
evil and yet sympathetic; the witch shares narration with Cora and Roger, and in 
a chillingly cold voice she relays the appalling sins that were wrought upon her, 
Long Lankin, and their child by Lord Guerdon. Still, Cora and Roger are clearly 
innocents in this whole ordeal, and their raw fear at having to yet again face down 
a supernatural terror is weighted with an exhaustion and resignation that makes 
their story as heartbreaking as it is horrific. As in the previous novel, the tension 
builds slowly, almost painfully so, until the spectacularly frightening scene in which 
the girls come head to head with Aphra. Readers who were hungry for even more 
gruesomeness after reading Long Lankin will find their appetites sated here.  KQG
BecKer, helAine Worms for Breakfast: How to Feed a Zoo; illus. by Kathy 
Boake. Owlkids, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-77147-105-3 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Feeling peckish? This book has a solution for you, at least if you’re a bat, fish, el-
ephant, or parrot. Each spread cheerfully describes a particular animal or feeding 
problem (how do you nourish a sick koala? What do you do with an overweight 
elephant?) and offers a genuine zoo recipe, complete with helpful details such as 
“heads and intestines removed” and “dried ants to taste.” Sidebars include brief 
interviews with zoo nutritionists, occasional puzzles, and additional information. 
This is a nibble where the Scientists in the Field approach is a meal, but it’s a fasci-
nating buffet; the recipes give a you-are-there verisimilitude, and the book is open 
and informative about the challenges of feeding animals in captivity, in different 
climates, and sometimes in ignorance of their actual diets. The layout is showily 
over the top, with loud borders, multiple fonts, and the recipes tilted and layered 
with drop shadows. The art itself is a high-impact mixture of amusingly manipu-
lated photocollage for the animals and digitally created humans; while it’s at the 
expense of clearly showing the actual featured critters, the result is entertainingly 
surreal as cartoonishly distorted animals cavort together. Animal lovers, especially 
the reluctant readers among them, will delight in the browsable approach and the 
window into zookeeping; you might even want to encourage them to whip up one 
of the less nauseating recipes. End matter includes animal advocacy tips, a glossary, 
a key for the puzzles, and an index.  DS
BiShop, Jenn The Distance to Home. Knopf, 2016 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-101-93872-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-101-93871-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-101-93873-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
The summer before sixth grade will be Quinnen Donnelly’s first one without her 
older sister, Haley, who died in a car crash. Her parents are doing everything they 
458 • The BulleTin
can to help her, and although Quinnen hasn’t been able to face rejoining her Little 
League team, the Donnellys hope that having a player from her beloved minor 
league team, the Bandits, stay with them for the season will be a pleasant distrac-
tion. Unfortunately, their guest, Brandon, seems too full of himself to bother with 
Quinnen, and his Dominican teammate, Hector, whom she much prefers, has been 
assigned to a different household. Even her one reliable delight, going to see the 
Bandits games, is ruined when she discovers Zack, Haley’s boyfriend who survived 
the accident, working the concession stand. Quinnen’s narration alternates between 
this summer’s and last summer’s events; as the tales converge, it becomes clear that 
she blames herself—not for the accident, but for having failed to reconcile fully with 
Haley after a petulant prank, and having choked during her Little League team’s 
championship game. Quinnen’s emotions are raw and convincing, and her rapport 
with friends and parents is realistically muddled by half-processed grief that she 
tries too hard to handle on her own. The supporting cast is credible, with parents 
who have limitless love for their remaining daughter, and Quinnen’s sixth-grade guy 
buddy who is sensitive to her heartache but is still a sixth-grade guy buddy. Even 
Brandon is a better man than Quinnen was first willing to believe. With appeal to 
both sports- and drama-minded girls, this will make a good book club selection 
and pass-it-among-your-friends read.  EB
BlAKemore, megAn FrAzer The Firefly Code. Bloomsbury, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-636-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-637-8 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
This creepy, memorable novel is a welcome addition to the relative few utopian/
dystopian books for pre-YA readers. Soon Mori will turn thirteen, which means 
she’ll find out if she is “natural” or cloned, and she will have to choose a skill to 
have surgically enhanced. She’s a little nervous about these prospects, but otherwise 
her life in her corporate-created utopian city is pretty easy and happy. When Ilana 
arrives, Mori’s small group of friends is shaken by this strong, sharp girl who has 
some odd quirks, but Mori, at least, is thrilled for a new friend who pushes her to 
try new things. It is to the author’s credit that some seriously dark stuff about the 
way this city considers children a commodity is introduced with such grace and care; 
readers are immersed slowly enough to actually take it all in, just like narrator Mori 
herself, who learns that her caution and timidity are not innate but an adjustment 
her parents made to her. The suspenseful tale concludes just as the kids leave their 
cozy, “safe” hometown to search for a place where Ilana, an android but still their 
friend, can be protected from those who consider her just a product to be recalled; 
it’s an ending that will have readers eagerly anticipating the next installment.  AS
Bolger, Kevin Fun with Ed and Fred; illus. by Ben Hodson. Harper/Harper-
Collins, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-06-228600-0 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. K-2
Two big-nosed, blobbish figures—little orange Ed and larger, purple Fred—are 
trotted through a variety of comparative scenarios (most of them detrimental to 
poor Fred) in this amusing easy reader. Ed, for example, gets to play with a friendly 
pup (“Ed has a little dog”) while Fred has a more intense canine experience (“A big 
dog has Fred”). After this oppositional pattern is established, readers will chuckle 
May 2016 • 459
at the spread that opens with “Ed is out of the tornado” while Fred, in a speech 
bubble, protests, “Come on. You must be kidding” and sure enough, poor “Fred is 
in the tornado.” Despite Fred’s objections, he gets the short end of the stick every 
time, resulting in multiple injuries and close calls from the dog and the tornado, a 
horse, and a meteorite, and the book ends with Fred’s narrow escape from a large 
(and hungry) monster. The pattern of Ed’s good luck and Fred’s bad luck encour-
ages novice readers to predict and anticipate the text, and even a few trickier words 
(“meteorite”) can be tackled with a bit of decoding and the help of the illustrations. 
Hallmarks of animation (motion lines, puffs of dust, wavy lines and flies to indicate 
an emanating stench) punctuate the lively, cartoonish art, which tends toward the 
generic but nonetheless maintains energy. Educators and parents will appreciate 
the plentiful sight-word practice afforded by this modern equivalent of Eastman’s 
classic Fred and Ted series, while primary-graders will embrace the cheeky tone 
and humorous situations.  JH
BreSlAw, AnnA Scarlett Epstein Hates It Here. Razorbill, 2016 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-835-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Scarlett Epstein is what’s known in fandom communities as a BNF—a Big Name 
Fan—who regularly writes fanfic and livetweets during episodes of her favorite show, 
Lycanthrope High. When the show is taken off the air, she’s determined to continue 
its life through writing a “fix-it” fanfic that takes up where the show left off but with 
characters she creates and develops. What she’s really trying to fix, however, is her 
own life: she has only two real-life friends, her grades are terrible, she lives on the 
wrong side of town with her overworked mom, and the only emotional language 
she knows is acerbic snark. One of her friends is her seventy-three-year-old neighbor, 
Ruth, a pot-smoking retired professor who is, if possible, more caustic than Scarlett 
herself. Scarlett represents what’s happening in her life as a fanfic about teen girl 
robots being introduced into a high school community; that story echoes her real 
life as she moves from trenchant sarcasm to uncomfortable insight as events hit 
the raw nerves of grief that she has been avoiding for so long. The theme here is 
the emotional blindness and snobbery of smart people; Scarlett is sharply critical 
and, though bullied, gives back far better than she gets as her verbal finesse cuts 
straight to the insecurities of the popular kids. Her observational wit isn’t always 
mean, however, and it’s often very, very funny. Moreover, the redemption that she 
constructs through her fanfic and seeks in her eulogy for Ruth bodes well for what 
she can accomplish in real life. Perfect for fans of Rowell’s Fangirl (BCCB 11/13), 
this will also be a hit with readers who enjoy snappy humor laced with pop culture 
references.  KC
chung, Arree Ninja!: Attack of the Clan; written and illus. by Arree 
Chung. Holt, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9916-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
In this sequel to Ninja! (BCCB 9/14), Max just wants his family to embrace the 
ninja lifestyle as much as he has. Unfortunately, his mom is cooking, his sister has 
a date with some blocks, and his dad only promises to play along because he’s too 
deep in his own work to hear what he’s agreeing to. It’s enough to break the heart 
of even the most intrepid ninja, a fact that his family thankfully realizes, so they 
460 • The BulleTin
plan a sneak attack that will push all of Max’s developing skills to the limit. As in 
the earlier book, a loose comic-book style alternates with dramatic full-page and 
full-spread art, providing variety and cues to the young audience when a significant 
plot point is happening. The mixed-media illustrations combine acrylic paint, paper 
elements, and digital work to make a rich, warm home that has effective shadows 
when needed but is also clearly a safe place. The lush reds and golds contrast effec-
tively with the heavy grays of both Max’s disappointment and the eventual hiding 
scene. While real life isn’t likely to offer a full-on, rice-flying, costume-wearing 
battle to brighten a bummer moment, it’s a joyful notion that kids will obviously 
embrace with full enthusiasm.  AS
cotter, Bill Beard in a Box; written and illus. by Bill Cotter. Knopf, 
2016 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50836-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50835-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50837-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Our young narrator has determined that the only thing he needs to attain his father’s 
level of awesomeness is a beard, which must be the source of Dad’s height, speed, 
strength, and musical chops. DIY efforts at beard acquisition not only fail but also 
annoy the family pet (cat hair and glue do not a beard make). The loud, slick, and 
suspiciously smooth-faced TV announcer has the answer: Scam-O Beard in a Box, 
guaranteed to produce results in five easy steps. The boy sends in money and follows 
the first four steps of style selection, beard-seed application, watering, and facial 
exercises. Nothing yet. Dad arrives on the scene just as his son goes into meltdown 
over Step 5: “Repeat steps 1-4 for 10-15 years.” His father’s now clean-shaven state 
temporarily makes matters worse, but a few words on the true nature of awesome-
ness and a little extra attention to shared activities save the day. A little predictable? 
A trifle treacly? Just stick around for Cotter’s coda, in which the bald-spotted cat 
responds via cellphone to an ad for “Scam-O’s new Fur-Ever! The spray-on fur that 
lasts a lifetime!” Cotter’s spindly little cartoon tyke, whose huge round eyes betray 
Dad-worship bordering on idolatry, milks the humor of every scene, particularly 
as he imagines his new and improved life with facial hair (lumberjack, pirate, rock 
star with a missing front tooth). Pair this with Heos’ Mustache Baby (BCCB 6/13) 
or Barnett’s Mustache! (BCCB 12/11) to keep the giggles rolling.  EB
crow, KriStyn Hello, Hippo! Goodbye, Bird!; illus. by Poly Bernatene. Knopf, 
2016 28p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50991-5 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50990-8 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50992-2 $10.99   
R 4-6 yrs
Everyone’s got one: a friend who is, by turns, lovable and annoying as heck. For 
cantankerous Hippo, that friend is sassy, motormouthed Bird. Sure, Bird is helpful 
on occasion, like when he uses his beak to snap up bees that Hippo has inadver-
tently unleashed, but Hippo can get along just fine without him . . . right? That’s 
what Hippo thinks until a big storm hits and Hippo is all alone; a wail for Bird 
brings the feathered friend—and the umbrella he creates with his wings—back to 
Hippo’s (back)side. While Hippo feigns indifference, it’s clear that Bird is right: “I 
May 2016 • 461
told you we make a great team.” The unlikely-friends trope is employed to good 
effect here, and the pair’s oppositional personalities are amusingly and succinctly 
expressed through the dialogue (displayed in contrasting fonts) that comprises the 
narrative. Bird’s jokes in and of themselves are pretty darn funny (“‘So . . . what is 
a hippo’s favorite thing to sit on?’ ‘I dunno. A pesky bird?’ ‘His hippo-bottomus’”), 
and they will likely be a hit with young listeners. Bernatene’s lively mixed media 
artwork (which utilizes pencils and digital coloring) captures the colors of the wild 
setting, with sunny oranges and golds offset by cool watery blues, jungle greens, 
and occasional swaths of clean white space. Ruddy terracotta Hippo is a hoot with 
his prominent teeth, expressive ping-pong-ball-like eyes, and whiskery visage, and 
his rotund form mirthfully contrasts with blue Bird’s slender, spindly-legged shape. 
This could easily fit into a storytime about friendship or into a lesson on animal 
partnerships.  JH
depAolA, tomie Andy & Sandy’s Anything Adventure; by Tomie dePaola and Jim 
Lewis; illus. by Tomie dePaola. Simon, 2016 28p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4157-5 $8.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4158-2 $8.99   
Ad Gr. K-1
  When Andy Met Sandy; by Tomie dePaola and Jim Lewis; illus. by Tomie 
dePaola. Simon, 2016 28p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4155-1 $8.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4156-8 $8.99   
Ad Gr. K-1
When Andy Met Sandy, the first in dePaola’s new beginning-reader series, features 
a dark-haired boy, Andy, who encounters a red-headed girl, Sandy on the local 
playground. The pair takes some time to ponder each other’s friend potential until 
their joint interest in the seesaw—clearly a two-person activity—establishes their 
newfound friendship. In Andy & Sandy’s Anything Adventure, Sandy comes over 
to play at Andy’s house, and the two enjoy trying on the contents of a costume 
trunk and even dressing up as each other: “I am you! And I am you! And together 
we are always friends.” Authors like Mo Willems have hoisted high the bar for the 
beginning-reader genre, and these entries pale in comparison to such dynamic recent 
works; the action here is pretty tame and neither of the two texts really achieves 
much momentum. The controlled and decodable vocabulary, short sentence length, 
and large font definitely support beginning readers, however, and readers who enjoy 
gentle storylines may find Andy and Sandy’s activities perfectly satisfying. dePaola’s 
trademark acrylic and colored pencil artwork is as tidy and attractive as ever here, 
and the smaller, light-brown-skinned Andy and taller, bespectacled Sandy, with a 
mop of Orphan Annie curls, are an amiable pair. Primary-grade fans of dePaola’s 
picture books will likely be pleased to follow him to the next reading level. JH
dillowAy, mArgAret Momotaro: Xander and the Lost Island of Monsters; illus. by 
Choong Yoon. Disney Hyperion, 2016 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-4847-2487-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Sixth-grader Xander just wants to get to spring break so he can draw comics and 
relax. It turns out, though, that Xander, who is half-Japanese, comes from a long 
line of Japanese heroes called Momotaro, and now his dad has disappeared and 
462 • The BulleTin
Xander must save him. Like all good Momotaro, Xander needs allies, and he finds 
them in his loyal dog, Inu, his best friend, Peyton, and a girl, Jinx, who plays the 
role of guide while also clearly hiding a significant secret about her own identity. 
After being transported into a parallel universe, the kids encounter a variety of 
Japanese creatures, all developed with depth and fearsomeness. Xander is an effec-
tive narrator, as his own bewilderment requires much exposition, which helpfully 
conveys background information to the reader as well. Adventure buffs and fans 
of folklore will find that both genres are well developed in this series opener. Final 
illustrations not seen.  AS
dinerStein, eric What Elephants Know. Disney Hyperion, 2016 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-4847-2854-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
The only home eleven-year-old Nandu knows is with his adoptive father, the chief 
of the elephant stable in the wild borderlands between Nepal and India, and with 
Devi Kali, the elephant matriarch he considers his mother. He is therefore devastated 
when the king of Nepal commands that the stable soon be closed and the elephants 
be sent far away to the remaining royal stable. Though other events—being sent off 
to boarding school, getting attacked by bandits, meeting a wandering holy man, 
even mourning the passing of his dearest Devi Kali—occupy Nandu, he remains 
determined to find a way to save his beloved stable and way of life. It’s a plot that 
could have been reduced to colorful travelogue, but Dinerstein, a wildlife scientist 
who has spent extensive time in Nepal, makes it into an absorbing and original 
story. There’s definite debt to Kipling in Nandu’s foundling status and wildlife 
communion (in fact, he reads The Jungle Book with delight at school), and the 
portrait of life amid tigers, rhinos, and peacocks as well as atop elephants is filled 
with evocative but not heavy-handed detail. At heart, though, this is a realistic 
tale, based in the Nepal of the late twentieth century and the intersection between 
the ancient and wild and the new. Nandu’s narration has an episodic pulse, but 
each episode is gripping; the suspense about the stable’s fate adds tension, and the 
characterization is nimble and effective. The conservationist message, while clear, 
never overtakes the lively and compelling story of Nandu’s journey, and readers 
will want to clamber up on an elephant and join him.  DS
donwerth-chiKAmAtSu, Annie Somewhere Among. Dlouhy/Atheneum, 
2016 [448p]
Trade ed. IBN 978-1-4814-3786-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3788-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Tokyo native Ema feels keenly the stares of the Japanese who see her as a foreigner 
because of her white mother, and she’s uncertain about the plan for her to spend 
the summer with her father’s parents due to her mother’s difficult pregnancy. Her 
grandmother, Obaasan, is stern and formidable, and while her grandfather is sweet, 
he is ruled by his wife. Ema’s summer of discontent under her grandmother’s strict 
rules turns into fall at a new school where her biracial appearance makes her a target 
for the school bully. Meanwhile, her increasingly frail grandfather has become glued 
to the television, fretting over the simmering aggressions between North Korea, 
Japan, and China in the summer of 2001, and then devastated as the 9/11 attacks 
May 2016 • 463
are replayed over and over. This elegant and melancholy verse novel captures the 
sensibility of a culture haunted by repeated tragedy and grief; between the bombs 
of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the regular earthquakes, typhoons, and tsunamis, 
the people of Ema’s neighborhood live in a perpetual state of formal remembrance 
and resigned preparedness for the next disaster. A dangerous stranger lurking near 
the school, Ema’s mother’s false labor, and her grandfather’s heart attack add to the 
tension, which is relieved somewhat with the birth of the baby and the melting of 
some of the ice that has formed between Ema and Obaasan. The sense of forebod-
ing and sorrow will resonate with many young readers, especially those who deeply 
feel the weight of their own sorrows.  KC
dowell, FrAnceS o’roArK 
Trouble the Water. 
Dlouhy/Atheneum, 
2016 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2463-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2465-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Callie is an intrepid reporter, writing articles for “the colored folks’ 
newspaper that came out every Friday.” Wendell is a white boy hoping to find the 
cabin his father remembers from his boyhood. The two would ordinarily have little 
to do with each other in 1950s Kentucky, but they cross paths in the nearby woods 
while tracking an old yellow dog that’s roaming near the river and clearly looking 
for something. As their awkward friendship grows, they work together to solve 
the mystery of the dog and run into unresolved disappearances, town history, and 
social tensions of their own era. Dowell interweaves this story with that of Jim, a 
boy who can’t figure out why he can’t touch or communicate with anybody, and 
why everybody seems so much older than they should be; it soon becomes clear 
that Jim is a ghost, that the old dog Callie and Wendell follow was once Jim’s, and 
that Jim’s story is at the heart of the mystery that the kids pursue. The two stories 
have sufficient weight on their own that they don’t blend as well as they might, 
but they’re both skillfully wrought. Callie and Wendell’s is the heftier of the two, 
with a third-person narration that offers nuanced reflections about Wendell’s 
ignorance of the African Americans and their experiences in his town, in history 
(in fact, Jim has a fellow ghost, a young boy who died escaping slavery) and in his 
own time. The story is never didactic, though, with Dowell carefully crafting her 
vivid characters and detailed locale in conversational, gently countrified language. 
Jim’s story has a poignant end that’s sure to bring tears, while Callie’s pauses at a 
moment of determination that could mean better things for the future. From the 
title to the mystery to the personalities, this is eminently teachable, but it’s also an 
emotional, thoughtful tale that will grab pleasure readers right up to the end.  DS
elAnd, lindSAy 5 Times Revenge. Greenwillow, 2016 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-239730-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-239732-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Hill Parmar is a bully, and he’s got the run of the Anderson Middle School’s 
eighth-grade class because his dad, a smug jerk who is equally intimidating, is the 
principal. Adam and his pal Perk consider themselves prank connoisseurs, and 
they’re ready to serve up some righteous vengeance in the name of Hill’s victims, 
464 • The BulleTin
but they know they’re going to need a crack team to do so. They recruit Ray, a big 
guy with a mind for engineering who can be both the brawn and the brains; Pearl, 
Hill’s former girlfriend and a skilled observer of the school’s elite circles; and Dutch, 
Hill’s favorite target and an expert in imitation. They’ve got big plans for Hill and 
Mr. Parmar’s comeuppance, but they’ll have to sort through their own issues and 
figure out a way to get along to get moving. Eland strikes just the right balance of 
humor and heart as she gives each character enough depth to flesh out their identi-
ties without ever losing sight of the bigger (and comedic) scheme at hand. As the 
Ocean’s Eleven–like plot unfolds, readers will be cheering the team on and laugh-
ing at their antics as the group manages one epic takedown, bringing justice (and 
plenty of satisfied snickering) to the school’s downtrodden and oppressed.  KQG
elmendorF, dAnA South of Sunshine. Whitman, 2016 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-7568-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Kaycee is trying her best to keep her attraction to girls under wraps, but when savvy, 
hot Bren moves to Sunshine, Tennessee, it’s all over. The two move from flirting 
to being close more quickly than Kaycee can really handle, as she’s nowhere near 
ready to come out. This, of course, leads to hurt feelings on Bren’s part, as Kaycee 
pretends multiple times that their connection doesn’t exist. There is believable ten-
sion created on both sides—of course Kaycee is scared given her strict mother and 
the southern town in which she was raised, and of course Bren would like their love 
to be acknowledged. Unfortunately, side characters are flat, and they are often used 
as foils rather than fully developed humans, particularly Kaycee’s two best friends, 
wisecracking gay boy Van and quick-to-judge Sarabeth. In addition, there’s an 
awful lot of idealized happy ending stuffed into a book where tolerance has always 
been the name of the game more than full, open acceptance. Even with these is-
sues, romance fans will find plenty of gauzy lesbian love, and if things end a bit on 
the too-perfect side, well, who wouldn’t wish that for a town called Sunshine?  AS
FAlKSen, g. d. The Transatlantic Conspiracy; illus. by Nat Iwata. Soho Teen, 
2016 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-61695-417-8 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
It’s 1908 and Rosalind is reluctantly ready to serve as her father’s representative 
on his new underwater railway as it makes the first passage from Europe to the 
United States. She’s a bit of a rebel, pushing gender boundaries of the era, but 
mostly, she’s a sheltered girl who longs for a bit of safe adventure. She gets much 
more than that when people start dying on the train, it becomes clear that spies and 
espionage are involved, and she’s aware that she’s literally trapped, underwater, on 
this deadly voyage. Rosalind is a nice mix of American can-do attitude (with a dash 
of steampunk ingenuity) and nonconformist teen girl. She’s memorable even in 
what quickly becomes a mess of a plot, with no single person being who he or she 
first appeared to be, and no clear resolution offered at the end of it all. There’s also 
just the wrong amount of political background—not enough to fully understand, 
but too much to just look past it to the simple joys of a nifty setting and murder 
mystery. Even with those concerns, there’s still death, intrigue, and cool machinery 
in a zippy, steampunk-friendly read. Final illustrations not seen.  AS
May 2016 • 465
FAriSh, terry Joseph’s Big Ride; illus. by Ken Daley. Annick, 2016 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-55415-806-7 $18.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55415-805-0 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
All Joseph longs for, in his refugee camp, is a chance to ride the bike belonging to 
an older boy, Daau, but Joseph’s too small to reach the pedals, and Daau always puts 
him off with “Tomorrow, hey.” When Joseph and his mother travel to America, he 
is thrilled to see a bike that could fit him outside his apartment building. The bike 
belongs to a girl Joseph calls Whoosh, for her “whoosh of big, curly hair”; Joseph’s 
attempts to bargain with her for a ride on the bike lead him instead to friendship, 
and when he fixes the bike for her after it gets damaged, he finally attains his 
longed-for ride. Farish, author of the irresistible The Cat Who Liked Potato Soup 
(BCCB 6/03), provides a sturdy and direct text that still leaves room for dimension 
in character elements such as Whoosh’s penchant for exclamations and Joseph’s 
persistence in getting a chance at his dream. The full-bleed illustrations are intensely 
expressionistic, with thick, painterly strokes creating an immersive view of Joseph’s 
new neighborhood. While the drafting of the faces is stilted at times, the motion of 
the bike (aided by textual sound effects) is invitingly speedy, and both kids radiate 
palpable joy at Joseph’s achievement. The sophisticated look combines with the 
spry text to make an inviting reading experience for uncertain as well as confident 
developing readers, and the viewpoint will be welcoming to refugees and other 
immigrants as well as informative to kids just learning about the experience.  DS
FArley, BriAnne Secret Tree Fort; written and illus. by Brianne Farley. Candle-
wick, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6297-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Mom’s perky command, “It’s a beautiful day! Go play outside!” elicits opposite 
responses from her two daughters. The scowling elder plunks herself under a tree 
and carries on reading, just as she did inside. The ebullient younger craves action, 
and launches a campaign designed to get her sibling off her behind and have some 
fun. The result is an extended exercise in reverse psychology: “FINE! I can play 
by myself. . . . I know just where to go. I HAVE A SECRET TREE FORT, AND 
YOU’RE NOT INVITED!” As details of this awesome fort get bigger and bigger, 
Farley depicts older sister immovable in a dusty gray-green patch of trees, while 
younger sister’s imaginings take on colors as vibrant as her imagination. The plat-
form tree house expands, growing a roof, balconies, pulley system with “a basket 
for snacks and other emergencies,” a signal flag system to ward off pirates and 
monsters, a tunnel to an underwater viewing window for whale watching, and, oh, 
the whole thing’s made of candy. That is one detail too many, and big sister calmly 
remarks, “That doesn’t exist,” launching a heated argument. Whether good nature 
or exasperation wins out, big sister puts down her book, picks up paper and pencil, 
and starts sketching: “Maybe we just need to build it!” The mixed-media fantasy is 
a visual delight, and big sister’s relentless reading through her sister’s ravings is an 
effective counterpoint. The reconciliation between the bookish and the boisterous 
hits just the right note, with the younger child conceding she made it all up, and 
the older realizing there might be some pleasure in making things happen rather 
than just reading about them.  EB
466 • The BulleTin
FArrell, dArren Stop Following Me, Moon!; written and illus. by Darren Far-
rell. Dial, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4159-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 3-6 yrs
The sun’s going down, and Bear is really hungry. Fortunately, he lives in a forest 
with a multitude of treats, such as berries, honey, grubs, and, of course, campers’ 
food stores, and he hoards as many delectable delights as he can find as he moves 
through the woods. When the moon catches his eye, though, he’s guiltily indig-
nant (“Hey, stop following me, Moon”). The moon staunchly persists, and Bear’s 
comments grow increasingly defensive and even evasive (he attempts a diversion 
with “Hey, look over there, it’s Bigfoot!” to which an irked Bigfoot replies, “Not 
cool”). When the moon hides behind the clouds, however, Bear panics at the 
dark and then welcomes the moon back with open arms and a moonlit feast for 
everybody, animals and humans alike. Bear’s exclamations, embedded in the art, 
are streamlined but comedic, making for crowd-pleasing reading aloud and acces-
sible reading alone; his transition from cocky to suspicious to conciliatory makes 
him an endearing figure. Farrell uses the pencil and digital art to create a hilarious 
and original wild world, a cross between the round yet airy toy-ness of Tao Nyeu 
(Bunny Days, BCCB 2/10) and the detailed landscapes of Mitsumasa Anno, which 
is slightly tamed by the cool teal and brown palette but remains divertingly, quietly 
weird. It’s well worth poring over the illustrations to find amusing details (Bigfoot 
hanging out amid the trees several spreads before Bear outs him; the foxes collect-
ing a boom box and having a dance party), even if some—the recurring motif of 
animals’ possessing one huge and one small eye, for instance—remain unexplained. 
Whether as an offbeat bedtime story or simply an entertaining tale about a goofy 
bear, there’s great imagination-seizing potential here.  DS
FiSher, AnnABelle The Secret Destiny of Pixie Piper; illus. by Natalie Andrew-
son. Greenwillow, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-239377-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-239379-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Fitting in at school is Pixie Piper’s most fervent desire; unfortunately for the fifth-
grader, her homemade clothes, her embarrassing parents, her acorn-shaped house 
sitting next to a museum of toilets, and her tendency to spout verse pretty much 
doom her to social ostracism. At a Renaissance Fair (yep, her parents are that type 
of embarrassing), a Mother Goose imitator and apparent fortune teller prophecies 
that Pixie will be a Goose Girl; later that night, Pixie’s mom admits that they are, 
in fact, descendants of Mother Goose and that now it’s up to Pixie to keep MG’s 
legacy of rhymes, wishes, and hope from falling into the hands of the Sinister 
Sisters. While Pixie’s narration could stand to lose a few exclamation marks, her 
bubbly enthusiasm is pretty darn charming, and it serves her well when she must 
face down the evil Raveneece Greed. Various subplots—one about the new toilet 
in the toilet museum, one about a school bully—offer comedic relief as Pixie sorts 
out her new role as a Goose Girl. Sweet, silly, and just scary enough to give the 
story tension, this will please readers both familiar and unfamiliar with Jack and 
Jill or Humpty Dumpty. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley.  KQG
May 2016 • 467
FurStinger, nAncy Mercy: The Incredible Story of Henry Bergh, Founder of the 
ASPCA and Friend to Animals; illus. by Vincent Desjardins. Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt, 2016 178p
ISBN 978-0-544-65031-2 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 4-7
The name of Henry Bergh may not be well known today, but the nineteenth-century 
activist was the leading opponent of animal cruelty; he founded both the Society for 
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty 
to Children, both of which still exist. Furstinger traces Bergh’s life from his child-
hood as the offspring of a wealthy New York family, to his failed career as a writer, 
to his taking on the cause of the animals that provided the machinery and the en-
tertainments for industrialized New York. Furstinger is a thorough documentarian, 
and her focus on specific scenes (Bergh regularly accosted offenders in the street, 
often arresting them) makes for a dramatic and absorbing account. The writing 
is sometimes disorganized, though, a problem accentuated by the introduction 
of frequent sidebars, which range from the helpful to the tangential; though the 
author has done extensive research, the book includes occasional factual glitches, 
including a misquote of Charles Darwin. Animal lovers looking for an impassioned 
origin story may overlook these challenges, however, and they’ll certainly see Henry 
Bergh as a hero to emulate. Line and watercolor art is stiffly drafted but provides 
some helpful looks at the problems Bergh attempted to solve.  DS
gArrett, ginger The Last Monster. Delacorte, 2016 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53525-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53524-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53526-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Whether she likes it or not, Sophia is a new Guardian of monsters. She could re-
fuse the role, but her heart is drawn to the monsters, who need her protection and 
help despite their ferocity; the position is also a good distraction from her recent 
cancer and her new prosthetic leg. It becomes clear that there was good reason to 
choose Sophia: she is so powerful, whether she knows it or not, that she created 
a monster out of her own anxiety and insecurity. There is a villain of sorts, Alex-
ander the Great’s mother (just go with it), but she is developed enough to make 
her sympathetic and a rich foil to Sophia’s goodness. Endearing illustrations and 
the monsters’ clear loyalty to Sophia keep things from getting too scary—though 
they’re based on global monster legends, these are monsters with giant eyes and 
hearts of gold rather than a taste for humans. Sophia herself is amiable, handling 
indignities of cancer and monsters with equal aplomb. A quick cultural guide to 
the various creatures would help orient curious readers; librarians will just have to 
be on their toes and know their monsters from around the world.  AS
gerStein, mordicAi I Am Pan!; written and illus. by Mordicai Gerstein. Roar-
ing Brook, 2016 80p
ISBN 978-1-62672-035-0 $18.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Gerstein describes Pan as the “silliest” of the Greek gods and therefore the “perfect 
deity for kids, because, though fully grown, at heart he was one of them.” Culling 
the customarily consulted mythology sources, from Ovid through Graves, Gerstein 
468 • The BulleTin
limns Pan as a noisy but good-hearted sower of confusion, who both delights and 
irritates his Olympic superiors, and years later, is still wreaking “panic” among us 
on especially “bee-buzzing, bird-singing spring mornings.” Short chapters cover 
episodes ranging from the Battle of Marathon to Pan’s “marriage” to Echo; rendered 
mainly in sequential panels, they are narrated by Pan himself with zesty, boastful, but 
childlike naiveté. Artwork is pleasingly zany, with particularly spot-on caricatures 
of Greek gods and comically beleaguered humans. This will be a strong addition 
even to the bulging mythology collections, as well as a good readaloud choice for 
any young listeners who delight in chaos.  EB
griFFin, pAul When Friendship Followed Me Home. Dial, 2016 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3816-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
For most of his life Ben bounced from foster home to foster home, but two years 
ago, the then ten-year-old boy was taken in by kind Ms. Coffin, and his life has 
been tremendously better since. When Ben brings a scraggly little alley dog home, 
she happily accepts him and the little guy turns out to be quite the charmer. He 
introduces Ben to Rainbow Girl (aka Halley), a girl at the library in rainbow clothes, 
who shares Ben’s love of sci-fi. When Ms. Coffin dies suddenly, Ben is sent to live 
with his aunt and alcoholic uncle who hits Ben and kicks the dog; Ben runs away, 
and then Halley’s cancer returns. The plot is overstuffed, to say the least, as Grif-
fin zips through predictable tropes (including the manic pixie dream girl) while 
never allowing any element to breathe and develop by itself. The result is a messy 
book that holds readers at arm’s length even as it tries to tug at their heartstrings. 
It’s Ben who really saves the novel: his stoic demeanor in the face of loss after loss 
seems authentic for someone who’s never really known stability, and his voice has 
the hesitant excitement of a kid who’s hoping for the best but expecting the worst. 
The dialogue between Ben and Halley is snappy and smart (think John Green 
for middle-graders), and the sci-fi story the two friends write together reveals the 
emotions behind their wit. Hand this to kids who like their bittersweet endings to 
come only after a heap of tragedies.  KQG
hArtnett, SonyA Golden Boys. Candlewick, 2016 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7949-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
Freya is twelve when the Jenson family moves into her Australian neighborhood, 
bringing with them startling class sensibilities and financial privilege. Freya’s begin-
ning to question her family’s accepted ways, and as she starts to rage against her 
drunken father and her complicit mother, she turns to the warmly amiable Dr. Rex 
Jenson as a confidante. Meanwhile, Colt Jenson, Freya’s agemate, is going through 
a similar epiphany about his father’s stealthily power-hungry emotional dynamic 
and his showering his sons with fancy toys (“His father spends money not merely 
on making his sons envied, but on making them—and the word seems to tip the 
floor—enticing”). As the families and other neighborhood kids intermingle, most 
often at the Jensons’ backyard pool, the attentions of Colt’s father to the local boys 
become more clearly questionable, sending reverberations through the kid com-
munity and intertwining with and twisting the family dramas. Hartnett’s writing 
hums with intelligence as the third-person narration focalizes through the various 
May 2016 • 469
child characters, following them as they begin to see their domestic worlds anew. 
There’s a subtle whisper of unease right from the start, and the book deftly orches-
trates it, letting it swell and die back as events unfold. While the era (details place 
it in the 1960s or 1970s) isn’t a focus, it’s important for making Rex’s molesting 
tendencies a neighborhood issue and not a police one. But while this was initially 
published as an adult novel in Australia, it’s mostly about the kids, and how they 
deal individually and collectively with the sins of the adults. Readers starting to see 
through to the many falsehoods of the adult realm will appreciate the realism and 
the sophisticated subtextual work, and there are curricular opportunities aplenty 
for discussion here.  DS
hAtKe, Ben Nobody Likes a Goblin; written and illus. by Ben Hatke. First 
Second, 2016 [36p]
ISBN 978-1-62672-081-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 4-8 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 453, for review.
henKeS, Kevin When Spring Comes; illus. by Laura Dronzek. Greenwillow/
HarperCollins, 2016 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233140-3 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233139-7 $17.99   
R 3-5 yrs
In brief, occasionally spare lyrical text, Henkes describes the seasonal changes that 
herald the advent of spring, from the gradual disappearance of snow to the arrival 
of flowers, green grass, newborn creatures, and a deluge of rain. Spring “changes its 
mind a lot, but when Spring is finally here to stay, you will know it. . . .There will 
be buds and bees and boots and bubbles. There will be worms and wings and wind 
and wheels.” The waiting isn’t over, then, though because “now, you have to wait 
for Summer.” The brevity and content of the text, simplicity of the vocabulary, and 
large, comfortable illustrations make this a solid storytime title and a potentially 
enjoyable read-alone selection for primary-grade readers. Henkes creates a childlike 
and child-friendly cadence with the rhythms of his writing, and the robust, thickly 
outlined art carries plenty of kid appeal as well. Rendered in brushy acrylic paint, 
children and critters engage with the flower-flecked verdant landscape while skies 
alternate between stormy and clear. Expect this to see heavy use in classrooms and 
library story hours; the trio of white kittens that appear on the cover and within 
the pages will also ensure that it easily partners with Henkes’ popular Kitten’s First 
Full Moon (BCCB 3/04) as well.  JH
hood, SuSAn Ada’s Violin: The Story of the Recycled Orchestra of Paraguay; illus. 
by Sally Wern Comport. Simon, 2016 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3095-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3096-8 $10.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Hood recounts the story of young Ada Ríos, a Paraguayan child who grew up in 
a slum alongside a huge mountain of trash, and whose family were among the 
gancheros who made or supplemented an income sorting through the refuse for 
anything salvageable and salable. With a strong desire to learn the violin but no 
real chance for her family to finance instrument and lessons, she became a member 
470 • The BulleTin
of the core group to benefit from an innovative program begun by Favio Chávez, 
an environmental engineer whose work with the gancheros inspired him to invent 
musical instruments from recycled materials, offer lessons to local children, and 
ultimately found an orchestra. Through Ada’s story, readers learn about the Recycled 
Orchestra itself and the “worthless” instruments (made from paint cans, crates, etc.) 
that held no temptation to desperate thieves but became invaluable both to owners 
and audiences worldwide who attend the traveling orchestra’s concerts. Comport’s 
mixed-media collage illustrations inventively integrate snips and scraps as well, and 
readers who cheer the musicians’ globe-trotting success never lose literal sight of 
the humble materials upon which that achievement was built. Photographs of the 
players and several violins accompany Hood’s final note, and a list of websites and 
videos available online is also included.  EB
huey, loiS miner Floodwaters and Flames: The 1913 Disaster in Dayton, 
Ohio. Millbrook, 2016 56p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-4677-9432-9 $33.32   
R Gr. 3-6
The tremendous rainfall of spring, 1913 that swept through the upper Midwest 
and eastward and took the lives of a thousand Dayton citizens was wedged between 
two higher profile calamities, the sinking of Titanic and the onset of World War 
I, and it therefore ended up as little more than a historical footnote. Huey calls 
attention to the tragedy, following events over three days through the experiences 
of a varied group of Daytonites as they fought for their own lives and those of 
neighbors and strangers. John H. Patterson, owner of the National Cash Register 
Company, promptly put employees and property at the service of those who needed 
food, shelter, or medical aid, and also set aside rooms for a makeshift morgue. 
John Bell kept telegraph service running throughout the storm, African-American 
baseball player Bill Sloane “borrowed” a boat at gunpoint to rescue neighbors and, 
ultimately, even the boat’s reluctant owner. Orville and Katharine Wright were 
separated from their aged father; librarian Mary Althoff tried but failed to save 
her collection; Clarence Mauch helped strangers escape from rooftop to rooftop 
ahead of fires caused by gasline explosions. Huey’s approach is nicely attuned to 
a middle-grades readership, with just enough featured participants to represent a 
range of experiences, but not too many to sort out. Plentiful period photographs 
capture the enormity of the disaster, and a timeline, source notes, glossary and 
bibliography will assist report writers.  EB
JAcKSon, richArd Have a Look, Says Book; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. Dlouhy/
Atheneum, 2016 44p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2105-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2106-5 $10.99   
R 4-6 yrs
A laptime read becomes the story itself in this rhyming blend of metafiction and 
concept book. First a cozy chair entices the viewer, then the book calls; then a little 
girl clambers up into the chair for a read with her father that takes her through a 
landscape of tactile, self-introducing things and critters: “I am wooly, says Sock.// I 
am wet, says Mitten.// I am fleecy, says Flock (stock-still on a rock).” After the girl 
encounters the sequence of items, she calls for a break, which pleases her senses with 
hot cocoa, crumbly cake, and, of course, the comfy chair. The adjectives are lively 
and often unexpected, and the direct address, simple format, and playful touches 
May 2016 • 471
of lyrical ornament will make this inviting for a young audience. There’s a solidity 
to Hawkes’ gouache illustrations, mostly vignettes against a white background, 
that gives the fantasy entertaining heft as the girl is tucked into the woolly sock, 
protects herself from the drip of the wet mitten, and sits comfortably on the curved 
tail of the cloudy y of “fleecy,” and so on, always accompanied by her kitten. All 
the adjectives are hand-drawn, often incorporated into the figures: “hard” gets its h 
from the shape of an igloo, for example, and the o in “hot” is formed by steam rising 
from the cocoa. Lapsitting youngsters will delight in the girl’s journey, and they’ll 
be easily tempted into a game of tactile adjectives for things in their own lives.  DS
JoneS, cArrie Time Stoppers. Bloomsbury, 2016 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-861-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-862-4 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Annie Nobody has lived in a series of horrible foster homes in rural 
Maine, while twelve-year-old Jamie Hephaistion Alexander has been trapped in just 
one home with his fiendish, child-eating troll of a grandmother. One magical night 
turns both their lives upside down when they are rescued by a teenage dwarf in a 
flying snowmobile. Arriving in the magical village of Aurora, the pair are embraced 
by an overflow of quirky townspeople who hail Annie as their prophesied savior and 
offer Jamie a place of refuge. The promise of a safe, loving home is soon dashed, 
however, because the town’s protective totem has been stolen and the minions of a 
long-time enemy are attacking. Soon the children are caught up in the battle between 
good and evil and, with two stalwart sidekicks beside them, set off to recover the 
stolen statue and prove themselves the heroes everyone believes them to be. This 
first in a new series of fantasy adventures gets off to a slow, awkward, sometimes 
repetitive start but ultimately sticks the landing with an action-packed third act 
that almost makes up for the stilted beginning. The world building is engaging, if 
overly binary, emphasizing the contrast between the characters’ awful home lives 
and the eccentric magical village, between the decidedly wonderful residents and 
the terrifying monsters who plague them. Annie’s eventual heroism is assured by 
prophecy, which means Jamie, who may turn into an evil troll, emerges as the more 
compelling character. Both, though, are often outshone by secondary characters, 
particularly the hilariously outspoken teen dwarf Eva Beryl-Axe. On its own the 
novel achieves only mixed results, but there’s enough potential here to give readers 
hope for exciting future installments.  AM
Jung, miKe Unidentified Suburban Object. Levine/Scholastic, 2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-78226-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-78228-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
In her lily-white town, seventh-grader Chloe Cho attracts a lot of attention for her 
Korean heritage. She frequently encounters thoughtless comments and insensitive 
stereotyping, making it ironic that she knows nothing about her family’s history, 
as her parents sidestep all her questions and discourage her curiosity. Only when 
her new social studies teacher assigns a project on lineage do Chloe’s parents tell 
her the truth: they are actually aliens from another solar system who escaped the 
destruction of their home planet and came to Earth because of their near identical 
472 • The BulleTin
genetic match to humans and their close physical resemblance to Koreans. It’s a 
wallop of a plot twist, so fun in its implausibility that it helps compensate for the 
novel’s flaws. While Chloe’s anger—about the subtle but constant racism, her par-
ents’ vagueness, and the revelation that she isn’t even human—is believable, Chloe 
vents her feelings in ways erratic, unproductive, and alienating (no pun intended) 
that make it difficult to bond with her as a character. Chloe’s experience of and 
reaction to Jung’s smartly observed microaggressions are more than understandable, 
though, and they make this novel one worth passing along to readers with mixed 
feelings about their heritage—or those who could use a little sensitivity training.  AA
KeAting, lucy Dreamology. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2016 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238000-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238003-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Ever since she was a little girl, Alice has been having fantastic dreams where she 
is accompanied by Max, the companion she knows only while asleep; along the 
way, they have grown up and fallen in love. After she moves to Boston, Alice is 
completely freaked out when she meets Max, her Max, in the flesh at her new high 
school. Even more distressing is the fact that he has a girlfriend, doesn’t seem to 
know her, and is in fact mean to her from the minute they meet. The only clue she 
has to the mystery is a set of birthday postcards that her grandmother has saved 
for her over the years from a place called the Center for Dream Discovery at MIT, 
which turns out to be run by an oddball who, like Max, initially won’t admit to 
knowing her. When Max inadvertently reveals that he does know who she is, and 
that their dream adventures are as familiar to him as they are to her, the two set 
out to figure out what’s going on, but more importantly, whether what they feel 
for each other in dreams will survive a waking relationship. There is absolutely no 
attempt at a scientifically plausible explanation here—the scientists are quirky and 
evasive, built for rom-com rather than sci-fi—but that matters not one whit given 
the chummy charm of Alice’s wit, the delightfully drawn secondary characters, and 
the compelling fantasy-scapes of Max and Alice’s dreams. Max and Alice’s romance 
has its requisite ups and downs, and this story of the ultimate meet-cute just gets 
cuter and cuter, in a completely non-smarmy way, as it goes along.  KC
Keil, meliSSA The Incredible Adventures of Cinnamon Girl; illus. by Mike Law-
rence. Peachtree, 2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-56145-905-6 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Even though Alba lives in a remote part of Australia, she’s managed to find a great 
group of friends, a lovely job in her mom’s bakery, and time to develop her artistic 
abilities, so it’s little wonder that she didn’t want high school to end. She’s not sure 
what she wants to do now, and she definitely doesn’t want any of her pals to head 
off into the world to take their next steps toward adulthood. All of her musings 
are derailed, though, when an apocalypse prediction suggests that only Eden Val-
ley, Alba’s tiny town, will be spared, so droves of hippies descend on the town to 
be part of the salvation. For the most part, Alba’s too smart for end-of-the-world 
nonsense, though the addition of new people does shake up her life, forcing her 
to acknowledge that she can’t just keep everything the same. What she’s clueless 
May 2016 • 473
about is the undying, ever-increasing love of one of her best friends, a detail that 
readers will likely spot instantly and then spend a significant portion of the book 
waiting for her to catch. Some romance, some apocalyptic drama, a sardonic nar-
rator, and cool interspersed illustrations that add superhero flair to small town life 
combine effectively here. The result is a worthy addition to the fairly crowded YA 
field of teens who have found a little pocket of earthly heaven and don’t want a 
single element to change, even if it could mean good things on the other side.  AS
Kelly, erin entrAdA The Land of Forgotten Girls. Greenwillow, 2016 304p
ISBN 978-0-06-223864-1 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Left behind in Louisiana when her father returns to their native Philippines, twelve-
year-old Sol is now at the mercy of her bitter and abusive stepmother, Vea, while 
trying to buoy her increasingly troubled little sister, Ming. Sol’s is a life without 
luxuries, so as an escape she concocts imaginative stories (much as her fanciful 
mother did when alive) for herself and her sister. When she passes on to Ming 
their mom’s stories of her pretend sister Auntie Jove, though, Ming latches onto it 
as reality and begins planning for the day when Auntie Jove will show up to rescue 
them. Meanwhile, Sol’s encounter with a girl from the wealthier school in the 
neighborhood leads to a tentative friendship, and Vea’s vocal assaults on the girls 
prompts a neighbor to intervene and offer her apartment as a temporary refuge. This 
stirring and original story ends on a credibly hopeful note while remaining firmly 
rooted in reality, and readers who have embraced Sol will be cautiously optimistic 
for her future. Sol, Ming, the neighbor (Mrs. Yeung), and even nasty Vea are care-
fully shaded and developed into dynamic characters, and Sol’s central struggles are 
gripping. Fans of Rita Williams-Garcia’s family stories and of the recent cinematic 
remake of Annie may particularly enjoy spending time with Sol.  JH
KhAn, JoShuA Shadow Magic; illus. by Ben Hibon. Disney Hyperion, 
2016 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-4847-3272-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Thorn is a royal squire who wants to find his missing father, while Lily Shadow is 
the heir apparent who knows her family is dead and wants to find a way to lead 
a faltering kingdom in their absence. Ruler of a land that embraces all aspects of 
the dark, including necromancy, Lily is promised to a boy she hates as a bid to 
unite warring kingdoms, so she desperately needs a friend. Lily and Thorn, along 
with a misplaced royal from another land, work together to solve the mystery of 
Lily’s parents’ murder, all while trying to keep Lily alive when it becomes clear that 
someone wants her dead as well. While more background detail into the sorcerers 
and their kingdoms would have been welcome, the action stays firmly on Thorn 
and Lily, keeping the exposition to a minimum and the heart-wrenching tension 
high. Occasional black-and-white illustrations highlight significant moments, 
emphasizing the dramatic twists of the plot. The core premise of a kingdom that 
embraces dark and death with open hearts, while still loving life and (at least in 
this generation) not being evil at all is a grabber. The addition of Thorn, a rural 
kid whose family has always struggled to make ends meet, is a smart one, as it pairs 
two kinds of intelligence, scrappy and privileged, to solve formidable obstacles and 
gives readers two engaging protagonists to root for.  AS
474 • The BulleTin
King, BArt The Drake Equation. Disney Hyperion, 2016 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-4847-2552-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Seventh-grader Noah is an avid birdwatcher, keeping his binoculars and his field 
notes close at hand. This attention to scientific detail comes in handy when he finds 
a mysterious disc in the woods. He quickly realizes the device is far too scientifically 
advanced to be from Earth, and it also draws the attention of those who would 
to use its power for less than noble purposes—and those who lost the device and 
want it back. The story quickly becomes a lot of plot to sort out with aliens, bullies, 
birds, and the fate of the whole planet in the balance, but Noah’s a strong enough 
character to snag interest and keep it. His narration, often as clueless as readers might 
feel, allows for them to get caught up as he fumbles along trying to understand his 
rapidly changing life. However, the fictional field notes interspersed throughout 
are distracting (and may not even evoke bird-watching for the unfamiliar), feeling 
more like a cheap way to sneak in some easy character development, particularly 
when they interrupt Noah’s own voice. Nevertheless, if it is too much book to fit 
comfortably between the covers, there’s at least some clever humor and a great 
central protagonist to carry readers along through to the end.  AS
Kuenzler, lou Princess DisGrace: A Royal Disaster; illus. by Kimberley 
Scott. Random House, 2016 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53777-2 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53775-8 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53776-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
There are only supposed to be twelve princesses entering the Tall Tower Princess 
Academy on Coronet Island, but Lady DuLac makes an exception and accepts 
Grace, despite the girl’s clumsy ways and utter lack of decorum. Grace’s cousin, 
queen bee Precious, is none too happy about this arrangement but she’s sure Grace 
will fail the first test: being claimed by a magical unicorn. Grace, however, finds a 
pal in Billy, a unicorn just as bumbling as she is, and she also manages to befriend 
fellow princesses Scarlet and Izumi. Even after being fussed over and dressed in a 
beautiful gown, Grace isn’t sure she’s cut out for the princess life, especially when 
the chance to joust presents itself. This is a goofy little tale with a goofy, absolutely 
lovable protagonist who has just the right amount of sass and tenderness. There’s a 
charm and a subtle message in her cluelessness, as she casts an innocent eye at the 
arbitrary qualities that define a princess and decides for herself which ones she’ll 
keep and which ones she’ll throw to the wind. Precious is clearly one note but 
Scarlet and Izumi add warmth and depth to the story, along with a bit of diversity. 
Scott’s cartoonish black and white illustrations match the charming silliness of the 
text. Readers who’ve already discovered how to be a witch in Pounder’s Witch Wars 
(BCCB 1/16) may want to learn the ways of royalty as well.  KQG
May 2016 • 475
lAidlAw, roB Elephant Journey: The True Story of Three Zoo Elephants and 
Their Rescue from Captivity; illus. by Brian Deines. Featherstone/Pajama Press, 
2016 40p
ISBN 978-1-927485-77-4 $19.95   
Ad 6-9 yrs
When three elephants at the Toronto Zoo—two born in the wild and one in 
captivity—showed signs of physical distress in their relatively cramped and cold 
surroundings, animal welfare advocates urged the zoo to relocate them to the Per-
forming Animal Welfare Society sanctuary in California. The journey itself, however, 
was not without risk, and customized cages were devised to transport the animals 
on flatbed trucks from Toronto to the West Coast. Startled border crossing agents 
and overheated brakes caused some delays, but the elephants arrived safely and 
seemed to take amiable interest in other elephant residents, with whom Laidlaw 
hopes they will one day be allowed to mingle. Deines’ oil paintings cast a gauzy 
haze over the proceedings, making it a somewhat difficult for children interested 
in technical aspects of the transport to catch the visual details, but snapshot-style 
photographs accompanying end matter mitigate that problem. Laidlaw’s lengthy 
endnote expands the account but never explains why some zoo staff were reluctant 
to send the elephants to PAWS, or why the Toronto Zoo elephants have not been 
allowed to come into contact with the other elephants for the two years they have 
been at the site. Although three particular elephants are the focus here, Laidlaw’s 
implicit critique of confining animals in inhospitable habitats will promote thought-
ful discussion between zoo lovers and skeptics. An index is included.  EB
lAKe, nicK Whisper to Me. Bloomsbury, 2016 [540p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-456-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-457-2 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Cassie has a lot of explaining to do to the guy whose heart she broke during her 
traumatic summer. In a long email to him, she tells the story, starting with her 
finding a severed foot that belonged to one of the prostitutes killed by a serial mur-
derer. That event triggers the emergence of a voice only she can hear that tells her 
to hurt herself. Convinced that it is the voice of the murdered woman, she thinks 
that if she can find the killer, all will be well. Instead, she ends up in the hospital, 
where she meets a kind, effervescent fellow patient named Paris who helps her find 
a therapist who might diminish her voice’s hold. When Paris disappears, Cassie has 
to finally come to terms with the real source, power, and meaning of the voice. All 
of this transpires while she is falling in love with a boy who is renting the apartment 
over her garage, the boy to whom she’s trying to explain everything. Cassie’s story 
is completely absorbing, and her stylish, lyrical voice, sparked throughout with 
moments of self-abnegating wit and moving allusions to classical myth, creates an 
intimacy that puts readers utterly on her side. The romance is almost extraneous 
to what’s really going on here, which is a fascinating exploration of the possible 
residues of trauma and the painstaking work of recovery required when a mind 
turns against itself.  KC
476 • The BulleTin
lAne, KAthleen The Best Worst Thing. Little, 2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-25781-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-25783-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
The middle of three close sisters, Maggie seeks safety in the heart of her family, 
especially as she’s entering middle school, a place where the rules are different and 
her friend Kelsey is drifting away into a world of make-up and popularity. Mag-
gie’s fears are heightened when a murder occurs at a nearby convenience store and 
a neighbor boy, Gordy, crows that his father is giving him a gun for his twelfth 
birthday. Maggie concentrates her anxiety about violence and death on a problem 
she thinks she can solve—freeing the rabbits a neighbor raises to sell to a restau-
rant. Her failed attempt results in her getting hurt, but in the process she gets to 
know Gordy, she lets go of Kelsey and gets a new friend, and she and Gordy get 
pet rabbits to care for together. Maggie shows clear signs of obsessive-compulsive 
disorder: her constant worries and subsequent defenses against anxiety, which 
consist of repeating her pleas for safety twice, ensuring that all gifts, kisses, etc., 
come in even numbers, double-checking all windows and door locks in a precise 
order, and holding her breath for sixty seconds, comprise much of the text. There 
are indications that at least her mother and one sister are aware of her problem of 
zoning out to perform her rituals, and that Maggie herself knows that her symptoms 
are something she should keep to herself, but spending so much time in Maggie’s 
head makes the ending, where all is well and she is miraculously freed from her 
anxieties, somewhat pat. Until the end, however, Maggie’s voice, melodramatic 
and obsessive as it is, is clearly and consistently developed, and it grants a kind of 
intimacy that middle-school readers with their own set of sometimes overwhelming 
fears will appreciate.  KC
legrAnd, clAire Some Kind of Happiness. Simon, 2016 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6601-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6603-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
The stories that eleven-year-old Finley writes about Everwood—the magical forest 
kingdom that she invented four years ago—help hold back her secret sadness and 
fear. When she spends the summer at her grandparents’ house, she finds (or pretends 
to find) Everwood in the forest behind their house and enlists her rambunctious 
cousins to help explore the woods. Soon, however, their game becomes all too 
real when a tragic moment in their family’s past comes to light. Finley’s efforts to 
uncover her family’s history enfold what could have been a rather purposive book 
in adventure and mystery, and the two plot strands coalesce easily in a satisfying 
conclusion. Depression and anxiety are usually reserved for YA fare, so it’s refreshing 
to see those matters brought to younger readers and especially to those kids strug-
gling to voice emotions they don’t yet understand. Legrand handles the topic with 
sensitivity and compassion: Finley’s narration gives immediacy and authenticity 
to her overwhelming feelings, but she’s still a clever girl who pokes fun at and runs 
wild with her cousins. Finley’s Everwood stories, included in italics, have an appeal-
ing folkloric feel while serving as accessible metaphors for her inner turmoil—the 
image of an inky dark blackness poisoning the forest is particularly vivid and apt. 
This covers a broad audience, including fans of adventure, mystery, and fantasy, 
May 2016 • 477
and it’s certain that a few of those readers labeled “sensitive” will take comfort in 
Finley’s tales and realize they are not alone.  KQG
lord, emery When We Collided. Bloomsbury, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-845-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-846-4 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Vivi is well-named—everything about her screams exuberant vivacity. She breezes 
into the coastal town of Verona Cove like a breath of fresh air, bringing joy and 
laughter back into the lives of Jonah Daniels and his five siblings, who are grieving 
the death of their father and holding their lives together in the face of their mother’s 
depression. While Jonah frets about his awkwardness and tries to hide how hard 
things are at home, Vivi assures him that she’s acquainted with dark times and she 
won’t be scared off as Jonah and she fall in love. She’s not being completely honest, 
however, with herself or Jonah: she is bipolar and has stopped taking her lithium, 
with the result that her manic pixie energy is increasingly tinged with hypomanic 
symptoms. Eventually, her mania builds to a crisis that forces her to realize that she’s 
not ready to be the girl Jonah needs in the long term, even though she has been 
undeniably good for him up to this point. Alternating narration enables readers 
to get to know Jonah and Vivi as intimately as the pair knows themselves, which, 
as troubled sixteen-year-olds, isn’t all that well. Their kindness and likability shine 
forth clearly, though, and render their love story all the more poignant. Earnest 
Jonah responds heroically to both his mother and Vivi while remaining absolutely 
credible as a character who is exhausted, worried, and committed to keeping his 
family safe. Vivi is who we wish we were on our best days, making her fears that 
her disorder will ruin her life nothing short of heartbreaking. These are definitely 
two teens worth rooting for in a tale that’s several clicks above the usual frothy 
summer romance fare.  KC
mArtin, lAurA The Ark Plan. Harper/HarperCollins, 2016 [352p] (Edge 
of Extinction)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-241622-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-241624-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
In a future where bioengineered dinosaurs dominate the earth, twelve-year-old 
orphan Sky Mundy survives, along with the rest of the supposed last of the human 
race, in rigidly controlled underground compounds. A message from her presumed-
dead father, though, soon sends her out into the dangerous upside with best friend 
Shawn in tow, but the pair quickly realizes they aren’t prepared to survive the great 
outdoors. Fortunately they are rescued from a T. rex attack by young Todd, who 
leads them back to his hidden village in the trees. After being attacked by marines 
from the compound, the three adventurers journey north, but their expedition 
may uncover more secrets than they expected, including clues to a dangerous truth 
compound leaders will kill to keep hidden. This gripping survival adventure offers 
readers a potent mix of creative setting, edge-of-your-seat plotting, and admirable 
heroes. The world building is particularly strong, balancing the campy, the ter-
rifying, and the dystopian, with plenty of engaging details like dinosaur pets and 
a treehouse worthy of the Swiss Family Robinson. Sky and friends are equally 
478 • The BulleTin
appealing, bringing their own strengths and foibles to the mix. Perfect for readers 
who have carried their love of dinosaurs into middle school, the novel is also a 
strong fit for readers who want dystopias but aren’t quite ready for the bleakness of 
The Hunger Games. Unresolved mysteries and a few surprising last-minute reveals 
leave plenty for the adventurers to learn in expected sequels and will leave readers 
hungry for more.  AM
mcclure, niKKi Waiting for High Tide; written and illus. by Nikki Mc-
Clure. Abrams, 2016 [42p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-1656-0 $19.95   
R Gr. 2-5
There’s no rushing the tides, and while the narrator waits with his parents and 
grandmother for the water to rise above the wide, muddy shore, he has plenty 
of time to think and plenty to think about. Uppermost on his mind is the raft 
he and his family built by hand from a log they found drifting near their beach. 
Chainsawed into three lengths, hatchet notched to receive the poles that would 
be lashed to the log sections together, fitted out with a plank for diving (or pirate 
confrontations)—the raft promises no end of recreational delight. But it’s not going 
anywhere until the tide comes in, and in the meantime the narrator realizes he’s not 
the only creature dependent on the sea’s measured rhythms. He watches the wading 
and diving birds, listens to the silence or crunchy sounds of barnacles, ponders the 
sculpins camouflaged under rocks in the dangerous shallows. Everything along the 
shore times its activity to the tides, and that now includes the family, as they cannot 
force the beached raft out into the water but must wait patiently for the sea to do 
the job for them. McClure’s text is by turns slyly funny and gracefully poetic, and 
her bold pictures, in woodcut-style black cut paper and ink touched with dusty blue 
and sparing splashes of pink, offer enough complexity and detail to keep readers 
patiently exploring while they, too, wait for the raft’s launch. In a brief closing note 
McClure comments on the raft she built with her family on the coast of Olympia, 
Washington, and offers two websites for readers to check the tides.  EB
mccreight, KimBerly The Outliers. Harper/HarperCollins, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-235909-4 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-235911-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
When Wylie gets a desperate text from her estranged best friend, Cassie, she over-
comes her nascent agoraphobia and takes off with Cassie’s boyfriend, Jasper, to 
find her friend. She and Jasper attempt to follow Cassie’s enigmatic messages, but 
Jasper’s car breaks down. They persuade a seemingly kind couple to give them a 
ride, but Wylie’s intuition alerts her to danger, and from that moment on, noth-
ing that seems right or helpful turns out to be what it appears. Wylie and Jasper 
eventually find Cassie at a compound full of scientists who explain that they are 
trying to protect research into emotional intelligence that would be useful, and 
therefore dangerous, in the wrong hands. It turns out that one of the girls is what 
is known as an Outlier—a kind of hyper-intuitive person who can sense other 
people’s emotions. By the time they find out what’s going on and who the bad 
guys really are, however, it’s too late for all of them to escape. A cliffhanger ending 
augurs more chases and escapes to come in the proposed series, but readers may 
May 2016 • 479
have already become hopelessly lost in the confusing morass of twists and turns, 
as well as unconvinced by an obscure scientific anomaly that seems more than a 
little trumped up. Wylie’s problems will be all too familiar to veteran readers of 
YA—she’s grieving the recent death of her mother, her best friend has been lost 
to the popular crowd, and she is dealing with crippling anxiety—but the sugges-
tion that her anxiety might be due to an undiagnosed asset is something new and 
intriguing. Between that development and the well-paced action/adventure, this 
may find its readers among mystery fans as well as sci-fi devotees.  KC
mcghee, AliSon Tell Me a Tattoo Story; illus. by Eliza Wheeler. Chronicle, 
2016 28p
ISBN 978-1-4521-1937-3 $16.99  
R 2-4 yrs
When a little boy begs his affectionate father to relate the story of Dad’s tattoos, 
Dad obliges. In what’s clearly a family ritual, Dad talks one by one about the tattoos 
that are reminders of his mother’s love, his father’s advice, his first meeting with 
his wife, his military service, and, most important of all, the birth of his son. The 
text verges on being too tranquil, but the narrating father’s lulling bedtime-story 
voice is apt for a tale of a sleepytime tradition. Gently detailed line and watercolor 
art focuses on the family, especially father and son, as they go through the evening 
wind-down from washing the dinner dishes to the nighttime bath to bedtime; the 
visual storytelling is clear and effective for young viewers, with the illustrations mov-
ing helpfully from each tattoo memento to its inspiration. Despite the prevalence 
of tattooed parents, tattoos are surprisingly absent from the picture-book world, so 
it’s pleasing to see a book redress the deficiency; this could give kids an opportunity 
to learn about their own parents’ epic designs.  DS
miller, pAt The Hole Story of the Doughnut; illus. by Vincent X. Kirsch. Hough-
ton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-544-31961-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
The real answer to the urgent question, “How was the doughnut invented?” is, 
truth be told, a little disappointing. The teenaged assistant to a ship’s cook noticed 
that the sweetened dough dropped into boiling lard tasted pretty good but tended 
to be undercooked in the middle. Remove the middle, and it cooks more evenly. 
Yummy. The end. Here Miller finds a clever way to stick with the facts, however 
bare, and yet wring a fair amount of drama out of this modest tale. First, she relays 
events in the life of Hanson Crockett Gregory, from his earliest seafaring days, to 
his command of a clipper ship, to his rescue of “seven Spanish sailors from certain 
death in a frigid sea.” One of the drowning sailors cries out from the roiling waves 
in a speech bubble, “But what about the pastry?” and the text shifts to italics and 
the tone shifts to breathless legend. Miller now regales her audience with several 
legends and lies that have passed for truth over nearly two centuries, wrapping up 
with Gregory’s own bland assessment, “No more indigestion—no more sinkers—
just well-done, fried-through dough.” Littlest listeners will be quite happy to hear 
where doughnuts came from and admire the full-page photograph of Gregory posed 
with his creation, but older children will appreciate how a dinghy-sized episode 
spawned a boatload of apocrypha. Kirsch’s ebullient watercolors underscore the 
humor, and no current doughnut devotee could be more enthusiastic than the cast 
480 • The BulleTin
of ravenous sailors stuffing their treats down the hatch. An author’s note and list 
of sources are included, as well as a timeline which ends, appropriately enough, in 
1982, when Dunkin’ Donuts replaced Gregory’s missing gravestone. Really.  EB
mirAndA, megAn The Safest Lies. Crown, 2016 [368p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53752-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53751-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53753-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
After seventeen years as a virtual prisoner to her mother’s pathological fears, Kelsey 
Thomas is beginning to chafe at all the strict routines and constant lectures about 
dangers. When a near-fatal car accident brings unwanted press attention, though, 
Kelsey comes home to find her mother has vanished and suddenly faces the pos-
sibility that her mother’s fears weren’t irrational after all. Now, to save her mother’s 
life, she must conquer her own compulsive anxieties and uncover the secrets her 
mother has been desperately hiding—even as someone is definitely hunting Kelsey. 
This captivating nail-biter will get hearts pounding with well-wrought suspense 
and a sweetly romantic subplot. As with Miranda’s other novels, the pacing is 
key: a perfect mix of steadily building intensity and well-placed moments where 
readers can catch their breath. While the power and appeal may lie primarily in 
the plot, the novel doesn’t shrink from creating likable, relatable characters, and 
readers will appreciate Kelsey’s struggle to relate to the world outside the shadow 
cast by her mother’s worldview. The story’s resolution undermines the power of its 
premise somewhat, but not at the expense of the novel’s action or Kelsey’s growth. 
Resembling a Lifetime movie of the week (in the best way), it’s a good read-alike 
for novels like Laurie’s Death Date (BCCB 2/15) and a strong fit for readers who 
want fast-paced stories about girls learning to fight back.  AM
olSon, norAh What the Dead Want. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-241011-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-241013-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
In horror, inheriting a mansion is never as good as it sounds. Indeed, sixteen-year-
old Gretchen’s “new” mansion is decaying, haunted, and tended by an old aunt 
who promptly commits suicide in front of her by drinking film-developing fluid. 
On top of all that, Gretchen’s somehow supposed to be helping release the spirits 
trapped in the house, even though some of them are cruel to her. The situation 
basically bites, even if it does finally give her some closure on her mother’s disap-
pearance years before (yup, the reason was supernatural). Gretchen is pure teen 
throughout most of the book, mocking things that could be important as old 
fashioned, snarking about the accommodations, and feeling certain that three teens 
(two neighbors join her after her aunt dies) should fare just fine against haunted 
forces. Interspersed letters from a distant relative show that this house has quite 
the troubled history, tied in with racism, abuse, and even murder. Sharp character 
development means that ghost fans will attach to Gretchen (and Hawk and Hope, 
the neighbors) quickly, investing in their ultimate success while also enjoying the 
creepiness of the haunted house.  AS
May 2016 • 481
oSBorne, lindA BArrett This Land Is Our Land: A History of American Immigra-
tion. Abrams, 2016 124p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-4197-1660-7 $24.95   
R Gr. 5-9
The melting-pot model of the American immigrant experience—that newcomers 
tend to embrace a recognizable American culture and blend into the furniture, so 
to speak—has generally been abandoned in favor of a less rosy but more realistic 
view that stresses plurality over a straight trajectory toward full assimilation. Here 
Osborne presents this nuanced approach and emphasizes a persistent pattern of 
initial American resistance to immigrant, regardless of place of origin, followed by 
the newcomers’ tendency to join in established biases as soon as they finally regard 
themselves as mainstream. It’s a depressing pattern for readers to follow, yet Osborne 
offers considerable supportive evidence as she chronologically traces the experiences 
of Germans and Irish; Italians, and Eastern Europeans, including Jews; Asians; 
Latin Americans; and most recent waves of refugees. Outline and structure have a 
textbook aura, but a wealth of photographs and frequent inclusion of immigrant 
voices enliven the text. With source notes, a bibliography with youth resources 
noted, and an index, this will best serve as a starting point for students getting their 
bearings on a complex issue and could make a counterpart to Osborne’s examina-
tions of forced migration of slaves and the internal Great Migration in Miles to Go 
for Freedom (BCCB 3/12) and Traveling the Freedom Road.  EB
penney, mAry Eleven and Holding. Harper/HarperCollins, 2016 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-240547-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-240549-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Macy’s dad has been gone for months, off on some secret work after being discharged 
from the Marines, but Macy refuses, absolutely refuses to turn twelve unless he’s 
there for her birthday. None of the adults is giving up any info on Dad’s where-
abouts, so Macy has taken matters into her own hands and bought a bus ticket to 
Los Robles, the last place she heard from him. In the meantime, she gets caught 
up in a different kind of search with a woman named Ginger, and she finds a 
friend in a runaway on his own quest. Macy’s voice has a biting edge to it, and her 
fury at her mother, whom she believes is keeping her father away from the family, 
is palpable. Not one to budge on anything, Macy’s unlikely to acknowledge the 
signs that her dad, a man she idolizes, was perhaps hurting people with his erratic 
behavior. It’s clear, however, that this is a girl whose foundation has been rocked 
to the core with the recent changes in her life, and she’s clinging to the idea of one 
person she loves while tossing emotional bombs at the actual people around who 
love her. Ginger and Stitch, the runaway, act as foils to Macy’s flailing approach at 
grief as they each have their own heartbreak to deal with. Macy’s final realization 
about her father is a tearjerker for sure, so be ready to hand out the tissues.  KQG
QuicK, mAtthew Every Exquisite Thing. Little, 2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-37959-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-37958-8 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
When a teacher gives high school junior Nanette O’Hare a copy of his favorite 
book from his teenage years, she knows she’s found a kindred spirit, and she’s 
482 • The BulleTin
thrilled when he introduces her to the book’s author, Nigel Booker. Inspired by 
the book’s disaffected teen character and carried away by the freedom he seems to 
represent, she attempts to kiss her teacher, a mistake that marks the beginning of 
a downward spiral in her life: the teacher leaves the school, Nanette quits soccer 
and cuts off her team friendships, and her father moves out. She finds solace in 
her friendship with Booker, and he plays matchmaker by introducing her to Alex, 
another young fan whom he has befriended. Alex was once bullied but now puts 
his newly developed bulk to use defending kids who remind him of his younger 
self, and he and Nanette quickly become involved. When he punches the father 
of a bully and gets arrested, Nanette melts down, and her parents finally start to 
pay attention to her angst, which has gotten out of control. This is literary fiction 
about the power of literary fiction, but there is a whiff of irony to the proceedings, 
as Booker turns out to be no wiser or more temperate than an average teenager, 
and all of Alex’s attempts at grand and romantic gestures end in tragedy. Nanette’s 
therapy-inspired experiment of referring to herself in third person is as fascinat-
ing yet annoying in the storytelling as it would be in real life; the estrangement it 
produces will give readers lots to chew on as they join Nanette in sorting out angst 
from general privileged malaise.  KC
reed, JAime Keep Me in Mind. Point/Scholastic, 2016 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-88381-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-88383-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Ellia and Liam are deeply in love and supportive of each other’s dreams; Ellia wants 
to get out from under the expectation she’ll follow in her father’s engineering 
footsteps as an engineer, and Liam wants to pursue a career as a writer, something 
his working class father doesn’t understand. When sixteen-year-old Ellia has an 
accident that leaves her with no memory of the last two years, Liam is devastated; 
her entire memory of him and their relationship has been wiped clean, and their 
fathers, who never approved of their relationship in the first place, are elated. The 
problem wasn’t race—Liam is white and Ellia is black—but class, and, as Ellia 
learns from her friends, a misguided notion that Liam was encouraging Ellia to 
party and do other crazy things. In truth, it was Ellia who coaxed Liam along on 
her wild adventures as he displaced his grief over his mother’s abandonment. As 
they struggle to see if they have a future without this shared past, Ellia comes to 
realize that their relationship was built on the shaky ground where her rebellion 
met his need. Reed develops her teen characters with style as well as substance; Ellia 
and Liam are given distinct, believable first-person voices in alternating chapters, 
and their friends vary between playfully goofy and helpfully pushy in realistic suc-
cession. The introduction of a character who has anterograde amnesia offers an 
informative counterpoint to Ellia’s retrograde variety as well as a potential site of 
romantic tension, but what Reed pulls off here is far more interesting than a clichéd 
love triangle: a scenario where a mature reflection on an immature first love makes 
plot sense and still leaves room for seeing a path forward.  KC
riBAr, lindSAy Rocks Fall Everyone Dies. Dawson/Penguin, 2016 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-5254-2868-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
The secret ancient rituals performed by the Quick family are the only thing that’s 
May 2016 • 483
preventing the Cliff from collapsing and crushing their small town of Three Peaks—
at least, that’s what seventeen-year-old Aspen Quick has been told. He’s pretty good 
at the role he plays in the spell; he “reaches” into someone, steals something—like 
their ambition, their sensitivity, their grief, etc.—and offers it up to the Cliff. He 
also uses his gifts outside the ritual: he makes his two best friends break up, so he 
can finally make a move on Brandy, his longtime crush, and he relieves Theo of his 
jealousy. A cousin’s death a few months ago seems strange, though, and a meeting 
with his cousin’s friend makes Aspen realize his family is involved in a heckuva lot 
more than “saving” a cliff and his powers may be doing more harm than good. 
Aspen’s pretty much a jackass from the get go-but it’s understandable; this is a kid 
with the ability to manipulate others’ emotions, who has been raised by people who 
have no scruples about it—so neither does he. It takes Heather, a brassy, clever, 
and formidable force, to finally shake Aspen’s total faith in the righteousness of his 
family’s magic, and his belief is further broken when he realizes they’ve been using 
their magic on him. The mind games are acrobatic in their twists and turns, and 
as Aspen is revealed to be an unreliable narrator, all of the events, the flashbacks to 
his childhood, and any knowledge of his family’s past are brought into question. 
Readers who relished the black magic wielded by amoral families in Black’s Black 
Cat (BCCB 9/10) will find similar satisfaction here.  KQG
ruSSo, meredith If I Was Your Girl. Flatiron, 2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-07840-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-07842-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
After attempting suicide a few years ago, Amanda has fully transitioned from male 
to female, and after enduring a beating at her old high school, she has decided to 
make a fresh start by moving from Georgia to Tennessee to live with her father 
and attend high school as a senior. Here she meets a stalwart group of girls who 
welcome her into their circle, as well as a closeted bisexual girl, Bee, who befriends 
her. She also meets Grant, a boy whom she soon finds herself in love with despite 
her desire to just keep her head down, finish high school, and avoid drama until 
she can move to a northern city. The love and friendship stories, though somewhat 
clichéd, work well here, but Amanda’s conversations with Bee read like infomercials 
chock full of questionable statistics, and the climax trots out every shopworn trope 
of LGBTQ+ lit: a rejected Bee gets wasted at prom and publicly outs Amanda, 
violence ensues, and Amanda’s father kicks her out. The aftermath, however, holds 
a few pleasant surprises, including a repentant father, a tentative but still interested 
Grant, and the girl group more than willing to defend Amanda against a would-be 
rapist and welcome her back into their fold. These surprises save the story in more 
ways than one; while the book is unarguably purposive and makes heavy weather 
of Southern, religious, and homophobic stereotypes, it features parents and teen 
girl characters that are compassionate, loyal, and more than a little badass when 
someone tries to hurt someone they love.  KC
484 • The BulleTin
Schmidt, tiFFAny Break Me Like a Promise. Bloomsbury, 2016 [416p] (Once 
Upon a Crime Family)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3783-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-983-6 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
When Carter Landlow was killed in a war between crime families for control of 
black-market organ harvesting (in Hold Me Like a Breath, BCCB 7/15), his secret 
girlfriend Magnolia Vickers was shattered. Months later, her continued grief threat-
ens her future as the heir to her own crime family’s empire and nearly causes her 
to expose the Family’s operations. Desperate to fix things, she turns to Alejandro 
“Alex” Cooper for help, but Alex exacts a promise in return: a new kidney. Now 
Maggie’s stuck babysitting Alex until a match can be found, but as they sit together 
through his dialysis, they slowly grow closer. Just as she’s starting to care, though, 
the Family pulls out of the illegal transplant game for political gain, forcing Maggie 
to decide between her family’s business and Alex’s life. Less action-packed but more 
deeply emotional than the first volume, this second in a continuing series retains all 
of the original’s gangsters-meet-fairy-tales appeal while offering a sassy new heroine 
to root for. Maggie is a compelling mixture of broken and tough, grappling like 
her predecessor Penny Landlow with emotional trauma and unexpected romance, 
and the novel emerges as both familiar and fresh as a result. Fairy-tale allusions 
are again subtly wrought, drawing here on the underlying “Princess and the Frog” 
tale. The novel works well for readers who like their sweet romance mixed with 
spicy suspense and a twist of The Godfather. No knowledge of the previous story is 
necessary, since this novel functions more as companion than sequel, but readers 
will likely want to read the prior book first in order to avoid the many spoilers.  AM
SelF, JeFFery Drag Teen. PUSH/Scholastic, 2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-82993-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-82994-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
JT knows that being gay is in many ways the flavor of the new millennium, but 
he still feels like an outsider. His handsome, popular boyfriend, Seth, has no such 
worries, and his fat best friend, Heather, seems to embrace her outsider status 
with a vengeance, but JT wants nothing more than to feel comfortable in his own 
chubby skin. When Seth finds a drag teen contest in New York that offers a full 
college scholarship to the winner, JT allows himself to be persuaded to lie to his 
parents and join Seth and Heather on a road trip to destiny. JT is a wobbling mass 
of insecurity, so the plot addresses that with some genre clichés: an aging drag queen 
teaches JT how to glam up, and when the car has a fortuitous breakdown, they land 
in the lap of a former country singer who sends them on their way with a new tire, 
a suitcase full of sequined gowns, and a song she wrote that is perfect for the talent 
competition. Of course both Seth and Heather have their own moments of crisis, 
disclosure, and personal growth, of course they lose all of their money in the big 
bad city, and of course there is an evil diva who tries to sabotage JT’s chances, but 
the kindness of strangers and his own epiphany lead to JT’s over-the-top happy 
ending. It’s predictable the way a fairy tale is predictable, and that’s essentially what 
this is. As long as no one is expecting realism or depth here, there is much good 
fun to be had.  KC
May 2016 • 485
SKye, evelyn The Crown’s Game. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2016 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-242258-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-242260-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
In this alternative version of Imperial Russia, each generation produces a single 
enchanter who is called upon by the tsar when the country is threatened. This 
generation, however, has two such spell casters, and the tsar is forced to commence 
the Crown’s Game to determine which enchanter will serve Russian—and which 
one will die. Vika Andreyev and Nikolai Karimov have never met, nor do they have 
any desire to kill each other, but the Game demands that they prove themselves in 
strategy, cunning, and endurance over the course of five turns each at spell cast-
ing. Nikolai almost kills Vika with a puppet show, then she nearly bests him with 
a lightning storm, and each is impressed by the other’s strength. That admiration 
soon turns to love (or at least attraction), but Russia still calls and there is no get-
ting around the rules of the Game. For such a high stakes outcome, the pace here 
is surprisingly languid and the sense of urgency between the two players is mostly 
nonexistent. Replacing that, however, are lush descriptions of St. Petersburg and 
vivid, cinematic imagery of the magic performed by Nikolai and Vika within the 
city. The pieces of the plot are jarringly divided, though; several subplots end up 
being key in the Game’s conclusion while some awkwardly included threats never 
go anywhere, muddling the story’s focus. Still, readers who love themselves a good 
doomed romance may find magic and satisfaction here.  KQG
SpAlding, eStA Look Out for the Fitzgerald-Trouts. Little, 2016 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-29858-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-29859-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
It sounds like every kid’s dream: driving around a beautiful tropical island and 
sleeping on the beach with no adult supervision and no parents to answer to. 
Eleven-year-old Kim, the oldest of the four children in the very blended Fitzgerald-
Trout family, would say it’s not so fabulous, especially when a tiny green car is their 
cramped home; the family’s one terrible mother occasionally stops by to throw a few 
coins your way; and their other terrible mother saddles them with another baby. 
The Fitzgerald-Trouts need a home ASAP, and Kim is determined to get one: she 
tries to get her mother, Mrs. Fitzgerald, to give the kids her house when she’s jailed 
for embezzling, but the police have sealed off the bejeweled mansion. They try an 
overnight stay in a store (a thinly disguised Ikea) but the alarms go off. Finally, in 
desperation, Kim drives their car though the forest of flesh-eating iguanas to find 
a beautiful, unused cabin. But when will the owner be back? The Boxcar Children 
meet Dahl in a Hawaii-like setting here and it’s all sorts of fun, with just enough 
snarkiness to add edge to the charm and wonder. The four kids each have distinct 
and witty personalities, and their connections to each other, while not always blood 
(two moms, two dads), are genuinely loving and tender, with all the bits of annoy-
ance and exasperation that comes with family ties. A clever but subtle twist at the 
end adds even more amusement, and the overall effect is as pleasing as a tropical 
breeze. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley.  KQG
486 • The BulleTin
StevenS, roBin Poison Is Not Polite. Simon, 2016 [336p] (A Wells & Wong 
Mystery)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2215-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2217-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
When a suspicious death occurs at Daisy Wells’ family home over the Easter holiday 
break, the Wells & Wong Detective Society (from Murder Is Bad Manners, BCCB 
7/15) leaps back into action as young teen Daisy and best friend (and narrator) 
Hazel Wong endeavor to solve the murder of unpleasant houseguest Mr. Curtis. 
Fellow Deepdean students and visitors Kitty and Beanie join them as assistants, and 
the quartet searches for clues throughout Fallingford House as heavy rains flood the 
area and cut off both escape and outside help. Suspicion falls primarily on Daisy’s 
family members—her mother was having a fling with the deceased; her uncle is 
acting peculiarly; and her great-aunt (a known kleptomaniac) had been eyeing 
Mr. Curtis’s gold pocket watch—but Daisy’s governess is also observed behaving 
unusually. Daisy’s relationships with the suspects make the groups’ detective work 
an emotionally charged effort, but careful deduction and perseverance serve the 
young detectives well in solving the crime. Stevens continues to satisfyingly scratch 
the English murder-mystery itch with this delightful second installment in the 
Wells & Wong series. The supporting cast is fairly formulaic, but Hazel and Daisy 
are nuanced, three-dimensional characters, and their bickering but loyal friend-
ship rings true. The mystery itself is solidly constructed, and the solution is both 
surprising and logical. Fans of the first book will find this just as rewarding, and 
kids on the cusp of embracing Agatha Christie will enjoy testing their deductive 
skills here as well.  JH
SteveSon, nAnci turner Swing Sideways. Harper/HarperCollins, 2016 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-237454-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-237456-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Annie’s summer is to include “minimal structure, no spreadsheets, and lots of 
independent decision making”—doctor’s orders. While her parents are on board 
in order to ease their daughter’s panic attacks and help her overcome an eating 
disorder, it’s a fight for her schedule-loving, rigid mother to watch Annie disap-
pear out the door of their summer home every morning, just as it’s a struggle for 
Annie to assert herself and not agree to tennis or sailing or any of the trappings 
of summers past. Annie uses her newfound freedom to roam with California, the 
granddaughter of a reclusive and disliked neighbor. Although California is there 
to care for her grandfather as he goes through cancer treatment, she’s the one who 
gets dark circles under her eyes and becomes increasingly fatigued as the girls spend 
the summer traipsing field and stream, saving an injured dog, building a chicken 
coop, and searching for clues to the estrangement between California’s mother and 
grandfather. Steveson drops hints along the way as to California’s deteriorating 
condition but allows the readers to encounter the characters as they encounter one 
another: just as they are and just what the other needs. The book focuses more on 
feeling than details, and the emotions are there and keenly felt, from the palpable 
tension created by Annie’s mother’s helicopter parenting to the love between friends 
and between parent and child—love that makes the heart “swing sideways.” This 
May 2016 • 487
will please country girls at heart, those needing to be brave, and those wanting a 
good summer story of friendship and growth.  AA
Street, pAt You’re Pulling My Leg!: 400 Human-Body Sayings from Head to Toe; 
by Pat Street and Eric Brace; illus. by Eric Brace. Holiday House, 2016 48p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2135-0 $18.95   
R Gr. 2-4
There are more idioms in the English language than you can shake a stick at, and 
Street and Brace present four hundred body-centric ones in this entertaining catalog 
of colorful phrases. The book is organized from the top of the body downward, 
with idioms about heads, skulls, brains, and hair leading the pack, and eventually 
landing on (ha!) feet, heels, toes, and toenails. When taken in summation, the 
accumulated list of lingo is rather overwhelming—this is more a title to be shared 
or pored over a few pages at a time than one to be read cover to cover in one sit-
ting—but the straightforward format (each phrase receives a brief definition and 
an illustration) coupled with the appealingly goofy art make it a diverting choice 
for browsing. Brace’s comical cartoonish illustrations are scattered over two-page 
spreads, with each small illustration existing both independently as a demonstra-
tion of a single (or occasionally more than one) idiom and corporately as part of 
the larger, entire scene. One spread devoted to brains, heads, skulls, and hair, for 
example, features green zombie bunnies engaged in various ridiculous activities 
while defining such expressions as “two heads are better than one.” It’s a fine line to 
walk illustratively, clarifying the idioms’ meaning while also milking the humor of 
a literal interpretation, and while the meaningfulness and lucidity sometimes suffer 
in service to the literal joke, the art is more often helpful than it is a hindrance to 
comprehension. Kids already familiar with American idioms will have the upper 
hand with this handy title, but most kids will find it a rib tickler, even if some of 
the content goes over their heads.  JH
Svingen, Arne The Ballad of a Broken Nose; tr. from the Norwegian by Kari 
Dickson. McElderry, 2016 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1542-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1544-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Bart Norum’s calm demeanor and good nature have most of his acquaintances 
fooled, but he’s masking a world of hurt and uncertainty—living in a drug-infested 
apartment building, unsure of when his alcoholic mother will come up with a pay-
check or his next meal, and pondering whether finding his long-lost father would 
make a positive difference in his life. In the meantime he controls what he can, 
taking boxing lessons at his mother’s bequest (and someday he might even get up 
the gumption to throw a punch) and singing to himself in his best operatic voice, 
emulating his idol, Welsh baritone Bryn Terfel. Classmate Ava takes a sudden inter-
est and plows right into his life, offering him friendship and a bit of hope, but also 
spreading the word of his situation among their peers and putting the pressure on 
him to sing at the end-of-year talent show. Unfortunately, every time he tries to sing 
before another living soul, he balks and croaks. As he musters the nerve to take a 
swing at a bullying classmate, to organize a building-wide cleanup, to pay a surprise 
visit to Terfel, and to possibly locate his father, maybe singing for an audience no 
longer looks like an impossible dream. Only a couple of fleeting references clue 
488 • The BulleTin
readers to the Norwegian setting, and American kids who miss them are unlikely 
to suspect they are anywhere other than in Middle School, USA. Rooting for a 
genuinely good kid is universal, and readers will warm to Bart’s quirkiness even as 
they cheer his well-earned success.  EB
tAmAKi, mAriKo Saving Montgomery Sole. Roaring Brook, 2016 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-62672-271-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Sixteen-year-old Montgomery doesn’t like a lot, which is why she is so fiercely 
protective of the small list of things she does love, like her lesbian moms and her 
Mystery Club, a tiny group of teens who meet at her high school to explore in-
explicable phenomena. She’s resistant to change even when she is the agent of it, 
as when she acquires an amulet that appears to have magical powers, or when her 
successful running of the group means that someone new actually wants to join. 
Monty narrates the story herself, which is both endearing and, on occasion when 
she is clearly wrong, exasperating (as when she mistakenly prejudges a friendly 
boy as being homophobic). While snarky teen girl narrators who judge their vapid 
peers while also feeling the sting of being outsiders aren’t uncommon, Monty is 
exceptionally well developed and spot-on in her observations. Even if Monty’s 
not always right, she is correct in her awareness that homophobia exists and her 
protectiveness of her family is warmly conveyed. Tamaki certainly has an eye for 
conveying awkward, well-intentioned stumbles toward maturity, as she did in her 
graphic novel, This One Summer (BCCB 6/14). Readers will find similar satisfaction 
in following Monty’s halting steps toward a more nuanced understanding of the 
world and toward greater vulnerability but also more grace and love.  AS
tASh, SArvenAz The Geek’s Guide to Unrequited Love. Simon, 2016 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5653-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5655-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Graham Posner is desperate to declare his love for long-time best 
friend Roxana Afsari, and now he has the perfect plan: obtain impossible-to-get 
tickets to see their favorite reclusive author at the New York Comic Con and use 
them to sweep her off her feet. Graham’s carefully laid strategy quickly falls apart, 
though, when he fails to get the tickets and a few extra friends tag along to see 
how the proclamation of love goes down. Worse yet, an ill-advised foray into the 
Con’s speed-dating scene brings two new people into the mess: the sweetly geeky 
Amelia, and Devin, a flirtatious Brit with eyes for Roxy. Readers will quickly realize 
that Amelia is Graham’s true match, but the series of foibles and failed attempts at 
wooing the wrong girl will keep them hooked until Graham finally gets a clue near 
novel’s end. Early on, Graham is little more than his crush, but in the wake of his 
broken heart, he gains a personality that is truly endearing. The Con, meanwhile, 
emerges as more than just a geek-friendly setting and gives the novel a chance to 
revel in the pain and pleasures of fandom. This isn’t a standard friends-turned-lovers 
rom-com à la Stephanie Perkins, but despite the novel’s platonic conclusion there 
are plenty of romantic sparks flying between other characters to make up for it. 
Pair this with Katcher’s The Improbable Theory of Anna and Zak (BCCB 9/15) and 
May 2016 • 489
Anderson’s The Only Thing Worse Than Me Is You, reviewed above, for a (long-titled!) 
summer reading list any geek would love.  AM
tAvAreS, mAtt Crossing Niagara: The Death-Defying Tightrope Adventures of the 
Great Blondin; written and illus. by Matt Tavares. Candlewick, 2016 [36p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6823-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-9 yrs
Nineteenth-century French tightrope walker Jean François Gravelet, known (in a 
tribute to his golden hair and reputation) as the Great Blondin, found in America a 
challenge worthy of his renown—Niagara Falls. Problems in securing sites and per-
missions dictated that his crossing point be downstream from the Falls themselves, 
but the one hundred and sixty foot drop to the Niagara River would nonetheless 
provide plenty of thrills for spectators and, as Tavares points out, plenty of lucre 
for gamblers. Not only did the Great Blondin wow the crowd with a successful 
international walk, but he threw in a bonus feature, dropping a rope down to 
Maid of the Mist directly below him, hauling up a bottle (contents unidentified in 
the book, though in reality it was wine), and toasting his fans. Tavares’ narration 
emphasizes the Great Blondin’s showmanship as well as his daring, particularly as 
he carried his manager on his back on one crossing, as the main section of rope 
sagged under the added weight and a supporting guy wire snapped. Given the theme 
of agility and flamboyance, the rendering of figures are disappointingly stiff and 
stodgy, but there is compensation in the varied and dizzying angles at which the 
performer’s antics are captured, as well as double foldout spread of multiple stunts. 
Though there’s a frustrating lack of source notes, an author’s note and a selected 
bibliography are included.  EB
teele, elinor The Mechanical Mind of John Coggin; illus. by Ben White-
house. Walden Pond/HarperCollins, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-234510-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-234511-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
John and Page have suffered with their dreadful aunt for years, with John learning 
to make caskets so that he can carry on the family business, and Page mostly being 
ignored. Finally, faced with a choice to sign a contract and commit his whole life 
to caskets or flee, John digs deep and decides that uncertainty is better than known 
awfulness, and the two kids run away. What follows is a rollicking delight, though 
it doesn’t always go well for the sibs—they join a circus, they make inventions, 
they find a baker who loves them, they are chased by their formidable aunt, and 
they ultimately find a much better life than they left behind. John’s sharp brain 
and fierce love for his sister make him a memorable protagonist, and readers will 
be rooting for him even when he messes up multiple times. Surrounding him are 
an excellent mix of bumblers, villains, tricksters, and pure-as-gold good people who 
get enough attention to make them feel real on the page but don’t take away from 
the core duo of Page and John. Lovers of pastiche will find this a worthy romp 
from start to finish. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley.  AS
490 • The BulleTin
touchell, diAnne A Small Madness. Groundwood, 2016 [200p]
ISBN 978-1-55498-837-2 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Quiet Rose blossoms in her relationship with Michael, until she finds herself preg-
nant. A worried Michael seeks a plan, but he’s met with firm denial from Rose: “I 
can hide it. It’s not real.” Aside from determined attempts to starve or poison the 
growing life Rose views as an alien intruder (“I have a virus in me”), she remains 
steadfast about the pregnancy’s nonexistence or even disappearance, confusing 
Michael and Rose’s best friend Liv, the only two people who know. Her implacable 
repudiation takes a horrific turn when she delivers prematurely at home alone, 
hemorrhaging dangerously, and manages to convince Michael to deal secretly with 
the situation and the resulting infant (“It must be buried,” she insists), but that’s 
a secret it proves impossible to keep. Australian author Touchell was inspired by 
real-life events, and she imbues the inherently sensationalistic story with a nagging 
desperation and clarity of characterization that lifts events above the melodramatic. 
The third-person narration makes Rose’s dissociation both chilling and heartbreak-
ing, and Michael is realistic in his inability to push past Rose’s freeze to necessary 
action; their parents are a little overvillainized, but their portrayal gives context 
for the kids’ behavior. The book only addresses the infant itself obliquely, and it 
remains ambiguous whether it was stillborn or not; the focus is really on Rose and 
Michael, and what they do when they feel like there’s no one to turn to. Readers 
will come for the melodramatic plot and stay for the revealing characterization.  DS
vernicK, Audrey I Won a What?; illus. by Robert Neubecker. Knopf, 
2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-553-50993-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Our narrator has been desperate for a pet, so he’s thrilled when his victory at the 
fair’s goldfish game wins him Nuncio—the giant whale. Convincing his parents 
with a classic kid argument (“You promised!”), he brings Nuncio home and settles 
him in the backyard pool. The two enjoy boy-and-pet frolics, and Nuncio even 
helps with gardening (his powerful tail lowers a tree into place) and maintenance 
(a quick spray from Nuncio rinses Mom’s car right off). The boy revels in his new 
pet, and the final page reveals Nuncio’s equal delight: “I won a boy!” he thinks 
joyfully as his face is suffused with a cetacean smile. Kids and whales are a periodic 
theme (as in Davies’ The Storm Whale, BCCB 10/14), and this is a jaunty take 
on the idea; while there’s not much tension in the story, the confident absurdity 
keeps the energy high and the narrator’s happiness (“I think maybe I was meant to 
love a whale”) carries the tale. Neubecker’s sturdy pencil and digital illustrations 
have a touch of Syd Hoff simplicity in the drafting, with a contemporary richness 
of hue in the narrator’s brown-skinned family and the luminous sea-blue whale. 
While some animal fans will agitate to free Nuncio from his backyard pool, most 
will play along with the diverting pretend scenario and consider the virtues of a 
whale of their own.  DS
vivA, FrAnK Sea Change; written and illus. by Frank Viva. TOON Graphics/
TOON Books, 2016 117p
ISBN 978-1-935179-92-4 $18.95   
R Gr. 5-7
Italian-Canadian Eliot was planning a lazy summer with friends, not to be shipped 
May 2016 • 491
off to stay with family in rural Nova Scotia. It seems as though his wariness was 
justified when his first few days are filled with weird foods, bullies, getting up at 
dawn to fill bait buckets with unspeakable grossness, and just all around feeling 
lonely. All is not lost, however, and the summer ends up being as transformative 
for the twelve-year-old as his parents knew it would be: by the end of his time there 
Eliot has made close friends, stood up for himself, and even gotten his first kiss. 
A child abuse subplot is heavy, but otherwise the issues are relatively minor, and 
Eliot matures in a gradual, authentic way, with small bursts of new insight and a 
whole bunch of goofing-off time. Viva’s clever typography makes some pages works 
of art, with words arranged on pages to become rays of sun, stars in the sky, or 
even a clothesline. In addition, the interspersed illustrations are old enough for the 
audience, relying on a snappy, retro color palette and a focus on edgier portions of 
the story to make the book as a whole feel mature; overall, the title is well worth 
taking time to settle in to.  AS
vrettoS, Adrienne mAriA Best Friends For Never. Scholastic, 2016 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56149-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56152-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Her family’s recent move to a small Massachusetts town isn’t nearly as bad as Hattie 
feared. Nonetheless, when the town’s annual Harvest Festival—and its accompa-
nying jinx on those who make promises they can’t keep—results in a Groundhog 
Day scenario where her friends meet her for the first time every day, Hattie’s un-
derstandably distressed, and she must rely on two unlikely allies to navigate and 
break the curse. It’s an intriguing but thin premise, with the execution requiring 
real effort from readers to make sense of plot developments, even as they enjoy 
Hattie’s journey back to herself. Though the book foreshadows the conclusion with 
some success, some revelations along the way, such as Hattie’s homesickness for 
Brooklyn, come implausibly out of the blue, and the slapdash resolutions prove 
unsatisfying (it turns out that all those weeks Hattie suffered under the curse seem 
to her friends “like they lasted only as long as a hiccup”). Still, for those wanting a 
vaguely supernatural Halloween tale, or those needing a reminder that real friends 
won’t care if you wear cat t-shirts, this book will entertain.  AA
wASS, elizA The Cresswell Plot. Hyperion, 2016 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-4847-3043-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Castley and her five siblings live out in the woods of upstate New York, with their 
checked-out, broken mother and their religious zealot of a father, who is deter-
mined to break his children too. He’s got them paired off for eventual incestuous 
marriages to each other, he locks them up when they sin, and he kept them out of 
school until forced to enroll them. It’s clear that things are headed toward a major 
fallout, as the teens increasingly push boundaries and their father becomes more 
terrifying and unhinged; though it isn’t obvious exactly what’s coming, it’s sure to 
be grim. Castley’s narration is gripping as she vacillates between almost believing 
her father and wanting to protect her family to wishing she could run away and 
recreate herself. It’s a shame that some of her siblings get far less attention, given 
the fact that they are all vulnerable and compelling in different ways. Addition-
ally, much of the horror seems there for its own sake rather than the plot’s sake, 
492 • The BulleTin
particularly given the fact that the father’s insanity isn’t ever well explained. Even 
so, it makes sense that Castley wouldn’t put much time into trying to figure out 
her dad, as she’s been used to his particular sort of deranged all her life. Readers 
who can’t get enough of cult books may find this close enough (isolation, abuse, 
twisting of religious concepts) to satisfy that fascination.  AS
wAtSon, tom Stick Cat: A Tail of Two Kitties; written and illus. by Tom Wat-
son. Harper/HarperCollins, 2016 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-241100-6 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-241101-3 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Watson follows up his popular Stick Dog series with a new protagonist, Stick Cat. 
Stick Cat lives on the twenty-third floor of an apartment building, spending his 
days with Edith, a neighbor cat, while his owner goes off to work each day. When 
the two cats spot an emergency across the street, they know they can’t wait all day 
for human help to arrive, so they’re going to have to find a way to free a man’s arms 
from a fallen piano lid themselves. Edith and Stick Cat are delightful together, with 
SC playing straight cat to Edith’s ridiculous plans and offbeat musings. Stick Dog 
fans will likely not miss a beat as they jump species to Stick Cat as the pace, humor, 
and effective mix of simple line illustrations and clear text, all on notebook paper, 
remain the same in this outing. Watson’s knack for incredibly endearing characters 
means that readers will be invested in Stick Cat and Edith from the first page, and 
the fact that the kitties actually achieve heroism is just a bonus.  AS
wellS, roSemAry Ten Kisses for Sophie!; written and illus. by Rosemary 
Wells. Viking, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01665-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Aunt Prunella’s birthday means a party and a delicious dessert: ten pistachio-
buttercream-filled chocolate kisses, made by young mouse Sophie and her mother. 
The kisses are set aside for the party the next day, but Sophie can’t sleep that night, 
worrying that there will be too many guests for her to have a treat. To determine 
the kiss-to-guest ratio, Sophie makes place cards for each guest, keeping track of 
how many there are by making an ever-increasing number of dots on each card. A 
final count reveals that there are nine party attendees, not counting Sophie, which 
ensures that she will indeed get a kiss—at least until the surprise arrival of Cousin 
Martha from Saskatoon throws a monkey wrench into the works. Thankfully, kindly 
Granny recognizes Sophie’s disappointment and declines her own chocolate kiss so 
that Sophie may partake. Wells again demonstrates that she has her finger on the 
preschool/primary-grade pulse with this installment in the Sophie series, as many a 
youngster will heartily sympathize with Sophie and will relate to both her love for 
the fancy treats and her anxiety that she may be denied one. Descriptive, specific 
language provides both piquancy and wry amusement, and Sophie’s problem-solving 
methodology could also provide a math lesson about one-to-one correspondence. 
The cheerful ink, watercolor, and gouache illustrations are executed with Wells’ usual 
style and flair, and Sophie and her rodent relations are endearing and expressive 
figures. This could be tied into multiple storytime or classroom themes or shared 
as a satisfying grandparent-grandchild readaloud.  JH
May 2016 • 493
whAley, John corey Highly Illogical Behavior. Dial, 2016 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42818-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Solomon hasn’t set foot outside of his house in three years, due 
to his devastating panic attacks. Seventeen-year-old Lisa is determined to insert 
herself into Solomon’s life and cure him in order to get a full ride at the psychology 
program of her choice (a motivation she obviously won’t share with him). Solomon’s 
uncertainty is no match for Lisa’s determination, and the two begin hanging out 
regularly; soon Clark, Lisa’s easygoing boyfriend, joins them and they become a trio 
of genuine friends. Though Solomon does begin to improve, the relationships get 
complicated when Lisa suspects that Clark may secretly be crushing on Solomon, 
who is gay; things go from complicated to disastrous when Solomon discovers 
Lisa’s ulterior motive. All the main characters have dimension—driven, likable 
Lisa; easygoing, easy-to-underestimate Clark; funny Solomon, who’s more damaged 
than Lisa realized—and they’re all sympathetic, with understandable motivations 
for their behavior and genuine affection for one another. Whaley has a tendency to 
tell what he just showed, which is a little awkward at times but which also makes 
the book accessible to readers still struggling with subtext; the punchy, conversa-
tional narration (“He had a friend. And he was terrified of her”) is enjoyable as 
well as effective. What’s particularly wise is the way the book gives every character 
both privilege and limitations and moves beyond them to make this a story about 
friendship, missteps, and forgiveness. Plenty of readers will sympathize with Solo-
mon, and they’ll be surprised to find themselves sympathizing with Lisa, too.  DS
whAmond, dAve Frank and Laverne; by Dave Whamond and Jennifer Stokes; 
illus. by Dave Whamond. Owlkids, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-77147-145-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
In this dual-perspective look at the same relationship, perky pug Frank loves his fish 
toy, his human family, and his feline companion, Laverne; Laverne’s story reveals 
that she merely tolerates Frank while coveting his stuffed fish. When an open gate 
gives Frank the opportunity to put the neighbor dog, Carl, in his place, he quickly 
realizes he’s in over his head and flees for home with Carl hot on his tail. Luckily, 
Laverne comes to the rescue and dispatches Carl with some well-aimed claws, and 
contentment reigns, but “is that how it really happened? Close the book and flip it 
over for Laverne’s side of the story.” It turns out it was Laverne who opened the gate 
in an attempt to get rid of Frank, and she only chases Carl off out of self-interest. 
When Frank offers her his fish as thanks, she grudgingly admits that “Perhaps Frank 
might have some redeeming qualities.” The differing perspectives are presented in 
a daily log format, with frenetic Frank conducting his activities in military fashion 
(“WEDNESDAY 0600 hours: Woke up the neighborhood with lots of barking”) in 
contrast to Laverne’s more leisurely approach to her day (“I overslept this morning. 
Luckily I woke up in time for my nap”). Use possibilities abound, as the differing 
perspectives lend themselves to discussions of point of view and the value of close 
scrutiny. The tiny print and smallish pictures make this a challenge for large-group 
sharing, but viewers who can get close enough will be rewarded by small, humorous 
494 • The BulleTin
details in the cartoonish art and hints of the opposing perspective in the illustrations 
for each side of the tale. Pudgy and pop-eyed, frenzied Frank is a diverting visual foil 
to the more angular, staid Laverne. Pair this with Gall’s Dog vs. Cat (BCCB 9/14) 
or with Bruel’s Poor Puppy and Bad Kitty for further exploration of the differences 
between canines and felines.  JH
white, KierSten And I Darken. Delacorte, 2016 [496p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52232-7 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52231-0 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52233-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 10 up
Lada Dragwlya, daughter of Vlad Dracul II, may be a princess of Wallachia, but 
she’s more feral than royal. Her penchant for brutality and endurance comes in 
handy when her father pays tribute by leaving twelve-year-old Lada and her younger 
brother Radu in the hands of the Ottoman court, where the sultan’s welcome in-
cludes forcing the children to watch the horrific impalings of two so-called traitors 
to the empire. Unfazed, Lada spends the next few years planning her revenge on 
the empire that stole her home; meanwhile, the tender-hearted Radu finds comfort 
in Islam. Both siblings befriend and then fall in love with teenaged Mehmed, but 
it is a love that can never be fulfilled, as he is the ascending sultan. History and 
horror buffs will likely recognize this as a gender-swapped version of the story of 
Vlad the Impaler. White follows the timeline of historic events with clear accuracy, 
and she gives vivid detail about the atrocities committed by the Ottoman Empire. 
She deviates from the model in her portrayal of the relationship among Radu, 
Lada, and Mehmed, making Lada, rather than Radu, the one who completely 
takes Mehmed’s fancy; the wash of heteronormativity casts Radu as a yearning boy 
while the romance gives depth to both Lada and Mehmed. The heart of this story 
lies with the contrary relationship between the siblings—Lada hates Radu for his 
sensitive nature but holds a fierce sense of love and protection for him, while Radu 
sees his sister as both his tormentor and idol. The ending leaves Lada well before her 
historical model’s infamous twenty thousand heads on sticks incident, so readers 
may find sympathy for Lada in her broken heart—though such sentiment will be 
unlikely if they dive into the internet hole this book will likely lead them to.  KQG
williAmSon, liSA The Art of Being Normal. Ferguson/Farrar, 2016 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30237-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
In this British import, David is a biological male who has known she wanted to 
be a girl for years but has only told her two best friends. Leo is passing as a boy 
successfully, taking hormones and representing as Leo so well that David doesn’t 
notice, nor does a girl whom Leo starts dating. It all falls apart when the girl dis-
covers Leo’s secret, and though she isn’t vengeful, others are, and soon both David 
and Leo are relying on their tutor relationship that has turned into a friendship for 
support and companionship. There are interesting gender challenges throughout in 
this novel, as when Leo judges David for not having a knack with makeup yet (on 
an outing, David dresses as Kate, the person he has always wanted to be) or when 
David makes assumptions about Leo as a boy before knowing anything about him. 
The author gracefully folds in a sturdy amount of practical information (about how 
May 2016 • 495
hormones change a teen body, for example) without ever taking away from David 
and Leo, two teens who would really like to just be, without identifying, explain-
ing, or defending themselves. The conclusion is hopeful but not perfect, about 
right for two kids who are brave but who nonetheless exist in a flawed world.  AS
wilSon, n. d. Outlaws of Time: The Legend of Sam Miracle; illus. by Forrest 
Dickison. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2016 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232726-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232728-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
It’s difficult to sum up the plot efficiently in this clever, twisting, time-traveling 
tale. Sam’s a kid who lives on a ranch with a bunch of ragtag boys, but he’s often 
off in daydreams, or memories, of horrific Old West–style adventures where he 
and his sister are murdered again and again. In this reality, the Vulture wants him 
dead for good, Father Tiempo wants to help, somewhere in there Sam gets snakes 
to replace his broken arms (which gains him speed and shooting skill), and there 
are lots of shootouts thrown in as well. What could be a mess is a glorious mix of 
adventure, Western-style justice, and time-traveling mishaps, and Sam is a gripping 
protagonist, struggling to make sense of his baffling life on the fly even while he 
tries to save himself from being murdered once again. It’s an odd and unfortunate 
choice that most of the mysticism focuses the Native American characters and 
renders them more exotic than realistic, especially in an Old West setting; even 
with this concern, though, this is a deep, complex, and rich novel that manages to 
sneak in some intense emotional impact among the gunfire and stagecoach hijinks. 
Thoughtful readers may want to start over as soon as they finish to sort through the 
details with more care, and if broken, gritty Sam is at the helm of this new series, 
there is much worth anticipating for the next entry.  AS
wolK, lAuren Wolf Hollow. Dutton, 2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-101-99482-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Even World War II has failed to significantly disturb eleven-year-old Annabelle 
McBride’s peaceful countryside town, but the arrival of Betty Glengarry, who has 
been sent by her mother to live with grandparents, disrupts Annabelle’s idyll. Betty 
is a bully of the worst order, waylaying Annabelle along a secluded route to the 
small schoolhouse, shaking her down for money or trinkets, threatening physical 
harm to Annabelle and her brothers, and even beating Annabelle with a stick. An-
nabelle is determined to tough it out, convinced she can protect herself and her 
brothers, but the menace escalates when Annabelle’s best friend Ruth is blinded 
by a rock thrown by an unseen assailant, and her little brother is seriously cut by 
a wire drawn taut between two trees. Betty denies involvement; neighbors suspect 
the intended target was a German man and the perpetrator is Toby, a recluse who 
squats in an abandoned shack and is rumored to be emotionally damaged by past 
war experiences. Annabelle isn’t buying Betty’s innocent act or Toby’s guilt, and 
when Betty goes missing, Annabelle musters her best behind-the-scene effort to 
solve the mystery. Adult Annabelle relates the tale, and the air of melancholy and 
sad lessons learned that suffuses her narration portends an ending with much sorrow 
and little justice. Readers accustomed to happy endings that arrive on the heels of 
496 • The BulleTin
climactic vindication may not find the pat conclusion they expect, but they will, 
with Annabelle, find peace and comfort in the knowledge that being a true friend 
to Toby in his time of need carries its own reward.  EB
yArdi, roBin The Midnight War of Mateo Martinez. Carolrhoda, 2016 184p
ISBN 978-1-4677-8306-4 $17.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Look, fourth-grader Mateo Martinez knows what he saw, okay? Two talking skunks 
took off on his old trike in the middle of the night, riding away with glee. Sure, it 
sounds weird, but regardless, he’s got to convince his friend Ashwin to do recon 
with him and get Mateo’s trike back; the two friends are, after all, bold knights 
and defenders of their neighborhood kingdom (in their pretend play, inspired by 
their favorite book about medieval weaponry). To be honest, talking skunks are 
probably easier to deal with than Mateo’s other struggles, which include his recent 
estrangement from his best friend Johnny, Mateo’s jealousy of his younger sister, 
Mila, and his insecurity in his identity as a Mexican American (“Trying to speak 
Spanish makes me feel like I’m doing it wrong, and I hate that. But not speaking 
Spanish in Santa Barbara feels wrong too, so I’d rather just not think about it”). 
This is an odd but satisfying little story with an endearing hero and perhaps even 
more endearing skunks. Yes, the skunks are real, they can talk, they’re engaged in an 
all-out war with the local raccoons for rights to the school playground, and Mateo, 
Ashwin and even Mila eventually ride into battle alongside the stinkers. Of course 
it’s silly, but Yardi deftly reins in some of the goofiness in exchange for dramatic 
tension and emotional heft. Snapshots of Mateo’s other battles in daily life come 
together as a portrait of a kid teetering between a childhood he doesn’t want to give 
up and an adolescence that’s uncertain at best—he’s pretty sure a showdown with 
a raging raccoon is likely to be an easier experience than middle school. Hand this 
quirky book to kids with similar suspicions about growing up.  KQG
May 2016 • 497
Abuse–fiction: Kelly
Adventure: dilloway; Garrett; 
Hatke; Jones; Legrand; Martin; 
tavares; teele; Wilson
African Americans–fiction: Alexan-
der, K.; dowell; reed
Aliens–fiction: Jung; King
ALternAtive History: White
Amnesia–fiction: reed
Animals: Becker; Furstinger; Laidlaw
Animals–fiction: dinerstein
Animals–stories: Crow
Anxiety–fiction: Lane; Legrand; 
Whaley
Appearance–stories: Cotter
Baseball–fiction: Bishop
Beaches–fiction: McClure
Bears–stories: Farrell
Bicycles–fiction: Farish
BioGrApHies: Furstinger; Hood; 
Miller; tavares
Biology: Becker
Bipolar disorder–fiction: Lord
Biracial people–fiction: donwerth-
Chikamatsu
Birds: Baker
Birds–fiction: King
Birthdays–stories: Wells
Books and reading–fiction: Alexan-
der, K.; Quick
Brothers and sisters–fiction: spald-
ing; teele; White; yardi
Bullies–fiction: eland; svingen; 
Wolk
Cats–fiction: Watson
Cats–stories: Whamond
Class–fiction: Hartnett; reed
ConCept BooKs: Jackson
Conservation: Laidlaw
Contests–fiction: self
Conventions–fiction: tash
Cousins–fiction: Legrand
Crime and criminals–fiction: Falk-
sen; Lake; schmidt; stevens
Cults–fiction: Wass
depression–fiction: Legrand
deteCtive stories: osborne
dinosaurs–fiction: Martin
disabilities–fiction: Garrett
disasters: Huey
dogs–stories: Whamond
dreams–fiction: Keating
dystopias–fiction: Blakemore; 
Martin
elephants: Laidlaw
elephants–fiction: dinerstein
emotions–fiction: McCreight
Ethics and values: Anderson; Blake-
more; Furstinger; ribar; touchell; 
Whaley
Families–fiction: Alexander, K.; 
Hartnett; Kelly; Lord; Quick; 
spalding; tamaki; Wass
Families–stories: Chung; Wells
Fandom–fiction: Breslaw; tash
FAntAsy: Barraclough; Fisher; 
Garrett; Hatke; Jones; Khan; 
Kuenzler; olson; ribar; skye; 
vrettos; Wilson; yardi
Fathers–fiction: Hartnett; penney; 
Wass
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAps 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
498 • The BulleTin
Fathers–stories: Cotter; McGhee
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: dil-
loway; schmidt
Food and eating: Becker; Miller
Food and eating–stories: Wells
Friends–fiction: Bolger; Breslaw; de-
paola; dowell; Farish; Griffin; Keil; 
Lane; McCreight; russo; steveson; 
svingen; tamaki; vrettos; William-
son; yardi
Friends–stories: Crow; Hatke
Ghosts–fiction: Avi; dowell; olson
GLBtQ people–fiction: elmendorf; 
self; tamaki; Whaley
Goblins–stories: Hatke
Gods and goddesses: Gerstein
Grandparents–fiction: donwerth-
Chikamatsu
Grief–fiction: Alexander, s.; Bishop; 
Lord
HistoriCAL FiCtion: diner-
stein; dowell; Hartnett; Wolk
History, U.S.: Furstinger; Huey; 
osborne
HuMor: Bolger; Cotter; Crow; 
eland; Farley; Farrell; Fisher; Ger-
stein; Jackson; Kuenzler; spalding; 
street; teele; vernick; Watson; 
Whamond
identity–fiction: elmendorf; Jung; 
Williamson
illness–fiction: steveson
imagination–fiction: Kelly; Chung; 
Farley
immigration: osborne
Japan–fiction: donwerth-Chikamatsu
Language arts: street
Latinos–fiction: yardi
Letters–fiction: Lake
Literature, English: Anderson
Magic–fiction: Jones; Khan; skye
Memory–fiction: reed
Mental illness–fiction: Lake; touchell
Migration: Baker
Monsters–fiction: Garrett
Moon–stories: Farrell
Mothers–fiction: Miranda
Murder–fiction: stevens
Music and musicians: Hood
Mysteries: Avi; Falksen; Lake; 
stevens; Wolk
Mythology, classical: Gerstein
Nature study: Baker; Henkes; Mc-
Clure
nepal–fiction: dinerstein
nursery rhymes–fiction: Fisher
obsessive-compulsive disorder–fic-
tion: Lane
orphans–fiction: Griffin; Jones
parties–stories: Wells
performers: tavares
pets–stories: vernick
play–fiction: depaola
play–stories: Chung
pregnancy–fiction: touchell
prejudice–fiction: russo
prophecies–fiction: Keil
racism: osborne
racism–fiction: dowell; Jung
Reading aloud: Gerstein
Reading, beginning: Bolger; depaola
Reading, easy: Watson
Reading, reluctant: Becker
refugees–fiction: Farish
relationships–fiction: Bishop; el-
mendorf; Keil; Lord; Quick; reed; 
tash; Whaley; White
revenge–fiction: Barraclough; eland
rHyMinG stories: Jackson
romance–fiction: Anderson; Keating; 
schmidt; skye
royalty–fiction: Khan; Kuenzler; 
White
runaways–fiction: Griffin; penney; 
teele
russia–fiction: skye
school–fiction: Avi; eland; Kuenzler
sCienCe FiCtion: Blakemore; 
Jung; Keating; King; Martin; Mc-
Creight
Science: Becker
seasons–stories: Henkes
secrets–fiction: Alexander, s.; Jung; 
Legrand; Miranda; penney; ribar; 
touchell
sexual abuse–fiction: Hartnett
sisters–fiction: Barraclough; Bishop
sisters–stories: Farley
May 2016 • 499
Social studies: Huey
steAMpunK: Falksen
storytelling–fiction: Kelly
Storytime: Crow; Henkes; McClure; 
McGhee
summer–fiction: steveson; viva
supernAturAL stories: Barra-
clough; olson
survivAL stories: Martin
suspense: Miranda
tattoos–stories: McGhee
time travel–fiction: vrettos; Wilson
transgender people–fiction: russo; 
Williamson
twins–fiction: Alexander, s.
verse noveLs: Alexander, K.; 
donwerth-Chikamatsu
voyages and travel–fiction: Falksen; 
self; viva
West, the–fiction: Wilson
Whales–stories: vernick
Witches–fiction: Barraclough
World cultures: dinerstein; Hood
World War ii–fiction: Wolk
Writers and writing–fiction: Breslaw; 
Griffin; Quick
Zoos: Becker; Laidlaw
New perspectives  
that are anything 
but elementary.
JHU Press scholarly journal offerings in  
Children’s Literature:
Bookbird: A Journal of International Children’s Literature
ISSN: 0006-7377 / E-ISSN: 1918-6983
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books  
ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Children’s Literature ISSN: 0092-8208 / E-ISSN: 1543-3374
Children’s Literature Association Quarterly ISSN: 0885-0429 / E-ISSN: 1553-1201
The Lion and the Unicorn ISSN: 0147-2593 / E-ISSN: 1080-6563
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Library and Information Science:
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Library Trends ISSN: 0024-2594 / E-ISSN: 1559-0682
Portal: Libraries and the Academy ISSN: 1531-2542 / E-ISSN: 1530-7131
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
To us, the role of libraries and the 
future of information science clicks.
ONLINE REFERENCE RESOURCES
Five outstanding online references from the Johns Hopkins University Press  
deliver seminal works and cutting-edge scholarship to students and researchers.
press.jhu.edu/references
• Flexible search options, powerful results.  Results are ranked and sorted by relevance   
 
or date, with direct links to documents and related materials.
• Intuitive browsing.  Wander through entire volumes without getting lost.
• Reliable usage statistics. COUNTER-compliant usage reports let you track activity  
 
 
according to the most current standard available. Statistics are compiled and ready to  
 
 
download once a month. 
• Always available. Our collections are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week from any   
 
IP-authenticated address. No special hardware or software is required. And we offer full   
 
technical and customer support.
The Early Republic
Critical Editions on the  
Founding of the United States
Primary material documenting the 
actions, debates, and thoughts of the  
First Federal Congress (1789–1791) and 
its members. 
earlyrepublic.press.jhu.edu
Encyclopedia of  
American Studies
Edited by Simon Bronner
Interdisciplinary articles from  
hundreds of scholars cover the history 
and cultures of the United States from  
pre-colonial days to the present.
eas-ref.press.jhu.edu
The Johns Hopkins  
Guide to Literary  
Theory & Criticisim
Edited by Michael Groden,  
Martin Kreiswirth, and Imre Szeman
A comprehensive historical survey of the 
field’s most important figures, schools, 
and movements.
litguide.press.jhu.edu
The Papers of Dwight 
David Eisenhower 
Edited by Louis Galambos, Alfred D.  
Chandler Jr., Daun van Ee, et. al.
Combines the full text of all 21 
volumes—over 14,000 pages—with 
a powerful search engine and 
user-friendly interface.
eisenhower.press.jhu.edu
The World Shakespeare 
Bibliography ONLINE
Edited by Laura Estill and an  
international committee of correspondents
The single largest Shakespeare  
database in the world. 
www.worldshakesbib.org
