I LLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
I 
A
4,
t
-
.
rr 
~-· 
i-,-
Ar
Books make great gifts, but Dick-
ing the perfect books for your
favorite youngsters can be daunt-
ing. Let the expert staff of The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books help you navigate the book-
store wilderness full of shiny new children's
books.
Updated and expanded from last year's edi-
tion, the Guide Book to Gift Books contains
annotations for over 225 of the best books
for giving (and receiving) and is available as a
downloadable PDF file that you can print out
and use for every holiday, birthday, or other
gift-giving occasion on your calendar this
year.
Listed books have all been recommended in
full Bulletin reviews from the last three years
and are verified as currently in print. Entries
are divided into age groups and include au-
thor, title, publisher, and the current list price.
To purchase, go to:
www.lis.uiuc.edu/giftbooks/
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
May 2004
Vol. 57 No. 9
A LOOK INSIDE
359 
THE BIG PICTURE
Don't Cramp My Style: Stories about That Time of the Month ed. by Lisa
Rowe Fraustino
360 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
360 
* The Fire-Eaters by David Almond
372 
* Tales from the Waterhole written and illus. by Bob Graham
376 
* Actual Size written and illus. by Steve Jenkins
388 
* A Hat Full ofSky by Terry Pratchett
391 
* Why Mole Shouted and Other Stories by Lore Segal; illus. by Sergio
Ruzzier
400 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
401 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Timnah Card, Reviewer (TC)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Janice M. Del Negro, Reviewer (JMD)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Molly Dolan
Krista Hutley
Hope Morrison
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $75.00; multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each
additional; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $7.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box
1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2004 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration from Don't Cramp My Style: Stories about That Time of the Month ©2004 by
Image Source/PictureQuest.
MAY 2004 
* 359
THE BIG PICTURE
Don't Cramp My Style: Stories about That Time of
the Month
edited by Lisa Rowe Fraustino
Menarche ushers young girls into complex new worlds of strange and heightened
emotions. Menstruating girls enter a worldwide community of women, who, as
Michelle H. Martin notes in her introduction to this collection of "period" pieces,
need to "learn to be at home in their menstruating bodies." The stories assembled
here welcome the reader to girlfriend hour, complete with laughter, tears, and lots
of affirmative nods. They extend and turn into narrative art the stories girls have
always told in hushed voices on playgrounds, on the phone, to their diaries, and in
their prayers.
The mild disgust that can accompany menstruation dissolves into humor
in Pat Brisson's "Taking Care of Things." Set in a contemporary high school, this
story highlights both the absurdity and the business-as-usual ordinariness of periods
that always seem to come at the most inconvenient times, as the main character
has to cope with trying to impress the editor of her school newspaper, managing a
run-in with her crush, and being unable to find a bathroom when she really needs
one, all at the same time. Periods don't only cause uncomfortable moments for
girls, either. David Lubar's "The Heroic Quest of Douglas McGawain" treats a
guy's experience when he makes the mistake of asking his girlfriend if she wants
anything from the store besides soda. Faced with the bewildering array of tampon
sizes and brands, and precipitously abandoned by his best friend in his hour of
need, Douglas McGawain emerges as an intrepid remnant of all-but-bygone
chivalry.
The fears (and sometimes dangers) of starting your period when you
aren't ready to grow up are featured in Alice McGill's "Moon Time Child," the
story of a slave girl sold to be a breeder, and Joan Elizabeth Goodman's "The
Czarevna of Muscovy," whose main character knows that the onset of menses will
signal her confinement not only to the Kremlin, but to marriage as well. In both
stories, the girls are victims of systems that treat women as hostages to their bodies,
and yet both girls manage to find a way to negotiate their freedom, either literally
or imaginatively. Han Nolan's young protagonist in "Maroon" doesn't fare so
well. She learns too young about teen pregnancy and do-it-yourself abortions and
responds by trying to starve herself in a futile attempt to stave off periods, breasts,
and growing older.
Then there are the opposite fears of periods that won't come when you
want them to, as in Linda Oatman High's "The Uterus Fairy," a lighthearted tale
about a mother's hysterectomy and a daughter's pregnancy scare. Both mother
and daughter find themselves missing their periods in different ways and discover
360 
* THE BULLETIN
that a "ride on the cotton bicycle" isn't so bad after all, considering the alterna-
tives. Pesky emotional and technical problems like PMS and sex during your
period are highlighted in Joyce MacDonald's "Transfusion," a subtle story about
irrational anger and its rational causes, and Julie Stockler's "Losing It," a not-at-all
subtle story about not quite knowing how to tell the strange guy with whom you
find yourself naked in a sleeping bag that you're on your period. The solace that
the company of women and cultural tradition can provide finds expression in
Dianne Ochiltree's "The Women's House," about the traditions of menstruation
and birth among the Lenni-Lenapes, and Deborah Heiligman's "Ritual Purity,"
where a troubled girl finds healing in the cleansing rituals of Orthodox Judaism.
The standout piece in the volume is Fraustino's own "Sleeping Beauty,"
a darkly compelling tale of a girl whose ambition and perfectionism lead her to
believe that she can ignore the cycles of her body. Inspired by a true story about a
girl found dead in a college bathroom after giving birth and given folkloric reso-
nance through an analogy with Sleeping Beauty, this cautionary tale haunts the
others, reminding readers that however they may feel about their periods, they
ignore their bodies to their peril.
A tone of knowingness and the implicit camaraderie of the already initi-
ated permeate these stories, and some of the darker entries place quite sophisti-
cated demands on readers as they explore issues of sexuality and its various effects
on girls with admirable frankness and clarity. Hence, this is not a warm-hearted,
chicken-soupy text to give to prepubescent girls or even first-timers, though it is a
strangely welcoming one for more mature readers. The far-reaching range of emo-
tion captured by these stories synchronizes with the complexities of feeling that
accompany girls' sometimes complicated experience of menstruation. Taken as a
whole, the anthology effectively mirrors the blend of mystery, horror, humor, and
community that surrounds menstruation-it's a can't-miss with older readers. (Im-
print information appears on p. 370.)
Karen Coats, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALMOND, DAVID 
The Fire-Eaters. Delacorte, 2004 
[176p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90207-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73170-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
In the autumn of 1962 in northern England, the world becomes colder for twelve-
year-old Bobby Burns when he leaves his two best friends, working-class Joseph
and Ailsa, to attend the local middle-class Catholic school, where learning passes
from teacher to student with the authority of the strap. At home, Bobby's father
battles a sourceless cough that neither medicine nor folk magic can cure. In nearby
Newcastle, Bobby and his mother meet McNulty, a homeless veteran who, his
MAY 2004 
* 
361
mind crippled since World War II, engages horrified crowds with feats of fire-
eating and escapology. Across the world, Soviet missiles challenge American bra-
vado in a crisis that fills television screens worldwide and disturbs Bobby's quiet
British backwater of Keely Bay. Bobby faces these catastrophes with faith, defi-
ance, and compassion, joining with Ailsa to pray for a miracle to save his dad (and
the world) and teaming with an upper-class boy at school to denounce the cruelty
of corporal punishment. McNulty the fire-eater requires special care; the veteran
spends his last night alive on the beach with Bobby's family and friends, waiting
out the missile crisis, blowing flame at the beauty of a night sky none of them may
ever see again. The complex grace Almond has previously brought to his mysti-
cally touched fantasies now drives this involving anti-war novel. Realistic dialogue
in the working-class vocabulary of Keely Bay grounds the story in its specific locale
without impeding broader understanding, and the brief chapters with their short
descriptive sentences help keep the intricate plot accessible. The Cuban missile
crisis is barely a footnote to most contemporary young readers, and this strong
offering can be used to lend depth to a history lesson or fire to a unit on persuasive
writing as well as to provide a rich and imaginative literary experience. TC
ARCHAMBAULT, JOHN 
Boom Chicka Rock; illus. by Suzanne Tanner
Chitwood. 
Philomel, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23587-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
All the elements that worked so well in Bill Martin and Archambault's Chicka
Chicka Boom Boom are back in place-a preschool concept (numbers this time),
gentle naughtiness, a nonsense rhyme, and some eye-poppin' pictures. Too much
tweaking sends this title over the edge, though, and the result isn't quite as success-
ful. Twelve mice who, for some unfathomable reason, live behind the numbers in
a clock slip down from their post and sneak past a cat to make a raid on a birthday
cake that's never shown. The broad-beamed rodents romp and cavort over the
countertop until the "lion" wakes up and they scamper back to the clock so that
day can begin again. If the plot line is illogical and the references to Max the cat
and "Lion" (one and the same) are confusing, the rhyme scheme is a minefield of
tripwire scansion, defying readers to make it through alive on the first try: "Let's
all tango, do the Fandango,/ Tip-toe, tip-toe, rickety rock/ Sock Hop back to the
kitchen clock./ Zing! Zang! Boomerang!/ Tomorrow can't begin/ Till every hour
is home/ And every number's tucked in." Neon-bright, knife-edged Chicka Chicka
Boom Boom graphics have given way to shaggy torn-paper collage in muted pri-
mary and secondary colors against a background of tan and cream. There are
several spreads for number identification and undeniable pleasure in chanting the
trio of "Boom Chicka Rock, Chicka Rock, Chicka Boom"s, but don't be surprised
to hear, "Read me the other one instead." EB
AUGARDE, STEVE 
The Various. Fickling, 2004 
448p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75037-4 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75029-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Twelve-year-old Midge has been left at Mill Farm with her eccentric uncle Brian
by her musician mother, who is on tour with a respected orchestra. While explor-
ing the farm's outbuildings, Midge discovers a wounded animal-a small winged
362 
* THE BULLETIN
horse, a member of the tribes of the Various who live in the bramble-protected
woods on the edge of the farm. Midge, who already feels strangely linked to the
farm by her discovery that she was born there, feels it is her duty to save Pegs, the
winged horse. Her successful effort draws her into the world of the wood, the
habitat for the tribes of little people that have lived there for generations. Midge's
news that her uncle plans to sell the farm to developers causes consternation amongst
the tribes and even endangers Midge when some of the misguided folk consider
her to be the source of misfortune. The arrival of Midge's cousins George and
Katie both complicates and helps the situation: George bluffly accepts the reality
of the folk after inadvertently seeing one, and even the clothes-obsessed Katie rises
to the occasion when wee renegade hunters with murderous intent come after
Midge. This is a layered contemporary fantasy reminiscent of White's Mistress
Masham's Repose. While the grownups emerge at the end to resolve any practical
dilemmas (Uncle Brian can't sell the farm because it's "protected," Midge's mother
gives up the orchestra to turn the farm into a bed and breakfast), the magical
elements are successfully wrought, and Midge is a believable, engaging character.
Offer this to young readers with a taste for fantastical whimsy (perhaps even fans of
Pratchett's The Wee Free Men, BCCB 7/03) and see if they don't look at that patch
of dense foliage just a little differently. JMD
Avi 
Never Mind!: A Twin Novel; by Avi and Rachel Vail. 
HarperCollins,
2004 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-054315-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-054314-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Meg and Edward are twins, but they're polar opposites: gangly Meg is an over-
achiever trying to get into the superoverachiever's club at her high-powered sev-
enth grade at her academically intense school, while undersized, indolent Edward
attends an alternative, gradeless school. Unbeknownst to each other, both twins
create a fiction wherein Edward is a cool guy called Ted with a hot rock band called
"Never Mind," and these lies have unfortunate results: Ted's band is scheduled to
play at a party thrown by Kimberly Wu Woodson, the most popular girl in Meg's
class and the force behind the High Achievers Club, and as Ted, Edward finds
himself telephonically going steady with Kimberly, who thinks he's a tall, hand-
some rock star. The wacky-misunderstandings notion is surprisingly unsubtle and
belabored for these two talented authors, and the eventual point-that Meg and
Edward need to appreciate one another more and dreams of popularity shouldn't
blind you to what's really important-is set in stone right from the beginning.
The alternating first-person narrations help build the tension, however, and there's
plenty of perceptive yet rueful seventh-grade humor ("I felt like an idiot. Which,
when you thought about it, wasn't a wrong thing to feel, because after all, I was an
idiot"). Clueless parental good intentions weave their way through the story for
extra comedy, and the book wisely makes the climactic band appearance quite a
mitigated triumph (Edward's band is absolutely awful, but they're so loud and
having so much fun that the party is still tremendously enjoyable). Readers with a
taste for omniscience will appreciate the full viewpoint granted by the dual narra-
tives, and the lighthearted escapade of the twins would make this a diverting coun-
terpoint to heavier reading assignments. DS
MAY 2004 
* 363
BAKER, JEANNIE, illus. 
Home; illus. byJeannie Baker. 
Greenwillow, 2004 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623934-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623935-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Between the day her parents move into the tenement building (unborn Tracy
prominently present in her mother's abdomen) and the day Tracy opens her own
plant nursery across the street, a series of small, individual actions and massive
community efforts to paint, preserve, and plant change her neighborhood from a
hopeless wreck to a thriving, safe place where anything is possible-including a
wedding to the boy next door. A final view of the resurrected neighborhood shows
climbing plants inching through Tracy's old bedroom window, a symbolic prom-
ise of growth and peace to come. Realistic, structured collages tell this story; scribbled
notes, letters, and medicine labels provide the only text (and confirm the passage
of time). The story is a bit simplistic, but the theme may appeal to older readers
who enjoyed Paul Fleischman's Seedfolks (BCCB 7/97) or audiences who appreci-
ated Perkins' Home Lovely (9/95); fans of picture riddles will enjoy discovering the
details of each spread. Combine a reading of this book with photographs of urban
reclamation efforts and a seed-planting activity for a memorable summer program.
TC
BARTOLETTI, 
SUSAN CAMPBELL 
The Flag Maker; illus. by Claire A.
Nivola. 
Houghton, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-618-26757-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
When Mary Pickersgill receives an army commission for a garrison flag to fly over
Fort McHenry in the War of 1812, she and her daughter Caroline set to work on
the immense creation that would become the famed subject of a poem by Francis
Scott Key. The fort comes under attack by the British, and Baltimore residents
watch the United States colors to learn the progress of the battle and to gauge their
own safety under invasion. "There, hoisted high above the ramparts, Caroline saw
a tired flag hanging from its staff in the damp morning air.... A flag sewn full of
pride and courage and hope." There is a fair amount of undefined vocabulary
here, and readers unfamiliar with the aforesaid "ramparts" may be no clearer about
"from hoist to fly" and "reverse applique." Moreover, the concluding note sug-
gests substantial fictionalization is involved. Caroline's age has been reduced from
thirteen to twelve; servant, slave, and relatives shown working on the flag were not
known to have done so; Caroline may not have been able to see the flag from her
house; the garrison flag may not have even been flying at the time of the attack.
Still, Nivola's delicate line, watercolor, and gouache pictures are attentive to pe-
riod detail in the bustling (if overly tidy and spacious) streets of Baltimore, and
Bartoletti clearly conveys that flags were not just patriotic symbols but vital com-
munication devices in time of war. Readers who pay heed to the author's notes
will sing the national anthem with deeper understanding. EB
BASS, L. G. 
Sign of the Qin. 
Hyperion, 2004 
[224 p]
ISBN 0-7868-1918-9 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Prince Zong is born with the mark of the Qin-the outlaw-on his cheek; for this
offense, the Emperor banishes Zong's mother from the Forbidden City and plots
364 
* THE BULLETIN
to kill the baby. This mark signifies that Prince Zong is the Starlord, destined to
give up his life of privilege only to usurp the imperial throne, leading the people to
peace and justice as the previous Starlord, Emperor Hung Wu, did 10,000 years
ago. Yamu, the Lord of the Dead, also plots to kill Zong, intending to trick the
weak Emperor into freeing the demon hordes that have been entombed for centu-
ries. The Outlaws of Moonshadow Marsh are on the move, battling the demons
and corrupt bandits that are spreading, while in heaven, the Celestial Court dis-
cusses how to protect Zong and stop Yamu from succeeding. Two guardians, the
trickster Monkey and the Tattooed Monk, are sent to make sure Zong finds his
destiny. In this first novel of the Outlaws of Moonshadow Marsh trilogy, Bass
introduces the numerous characters, mortal and immortal, human and demon,
and sets in motion the events that will play out in the next two books. The inter-
weaving of the several different storylines is at first challenging to manage; a Cast
of Characters list at the front of the book helps until familiarity occurs. The writ-
ing is evocative and laden with significance, and it has the slightly detached tone of
folktales or legends; the combination of politics, magic, mysticism, and action is
absorbing, as are the characters themselves, who are complex in their past history,
motivations, and desires. An author's note explains the Chinese history and leg-
ends that inspired the story, and a key to the Chinese characters that begin every
chapter is appended. KH
BEDFORD, DAVID 
The Copy Crocs; illus. by Emily Bolam. 
Peachtree, 2004 
32p
ISBN 1-56145-304-8 
$15.95 
R 
4-7yrs
It's not easy getting a minute to yourself when you are a crocodile surrounded by
other crocodiles in a crowded pool, so Crocodile sets off on his own. He finds a
slippery pool of mud all to himself, but soon the other crocs join him. No matter
what he does, from sunbathing to floating on a log to climbing a mountain, he
finds that the problem with being a trendsetter is that others follow those set trends.
Returning alone to his old pool in frustration, however, Crocodile finds that he is
lonely without his mates, and he learns the art of compromise. Landscapes ren-
dered in textured swatches of color laid down quickly with a broad brush are child-
friendly enough to invite budding artists to do some copying of their own, while
bold black outlines and goofy expressions domesticate this herd of crocs quite
amiably. Crocodile's hot-pink hide stands out amongst the sociable copy crocs,
whose own shades of purple, green, aqua, brown, and blue make them look like
agile crayons with teeth. Their responses to Crocodile's annoyance, by turns plain-
tive and defiant, give some minimal definition to their motives, if not their charac-
ters, and help the audience understand a little bit of Crocodile's desire for privacy
as well. Youngsters experiencing similar frustration with trying to be on the van-
guard of the new, only to find themselves endlessly copied, will appreciate
Crocodile's dilemma and learn a bit about their position with respect to the crowd
as well. KC
BENNETT, 
CHERIE 
A Heart Divided; by Cherie Bennett and Jeff
Gottesfeld. 
Delacorte, 2004 
403p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90039-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32749-8 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Kate is dismayed, to say the least, to leave her New Jersey home with its easy access
to New York City culture for the Southern sleepiness of Redmond, Tennessee.
MAY 2004 
* 365
Sure enough, her worst fears are confirmed when she spies the Confederate flag
flying over the town square and encounters haughty looks as she talks with her first
new friend, Nikki, who happens to be black. Then she meets and falls in love with
Jack Redmond, whom she sums up in three words: "Oh. My. Gawd." The
yummy Jack is a conflicted guy-loyal to the town and traditions of his family
heritage, and yet ambitious for a future other than the one his mother plans for
him. Kate's love for Jack complicates her involvement with Nikki's crusade to
change the school name (Rebels) and emblem (the Confederate flag), but she man-
ages her conflicts by interviewing people and writing a play about the situation.
While Bennett and Gottesfeld rely on decidedly recognizable characters-the prim
Southern matron, the outspoken redneck boy, the bigoted ideologue, the North-
ern yuppie liberal mom-they refuse to caricature and thus dismiss these folk as
one-dimensional. In fact, that's the message of the book: regardless of your ideo-
logical position, you can still be involved in doing work that we all consider good,
like caring for your children, helping those less fortunate, responding to tragedy,
and serving your country. Kate's play manages to capture the diverse sentiments
of the various characters in their most passionate and ideal expression without
overtly passing judgment, even though it's clear where her own sympathies lie.
Encased in an energetic and idealistic teen romance, the larger issues in the book
will have decidedly regional interest because of the attention to racism and the
Confederate flag, but this title can also be used to spark discussions about other
currently embattled symbols of America's past. KC
BLACKLOCK, DYAN 
The Roman Army: The Legendary Soldiers Who Created an
Empire; illus. by David Kennett. 
Walker, 2004 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8897-1 
$18.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8896-3 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
As the opening aerial view of a map of the Roman Empire suggests, it would take
a fearsome horde indeed to whip a realm this size into submission, and readers
who meet the generals, tribunes, centurions, and legionaries herein won't want to
get on their bad side. Armor and weaponry, marching order and encampment
layout, strategies for fording rivers and charging the enemy are all discussed in
restrained text and portrayed in boxed and captioned pictures, detailed diagrams,
color coded plans, and (ooh, best of all) roiling battle scenes. There is considerable
overlap of material with Moira Butterfield's Going to War in Roman Times, and
Butterfield in fact includes information on battle tactics and religious rites missing
here, but David Kennett's signature artwork (imagine a comic strip chiseled out of
stone) is more arresting by far. Although Blacklock celebrates Rome in its nigh-
invincible heyday, Kennett's endpapers parade a host of enemies from the Gallic
warrior of the third century B.C. to the Tanukhid soldier of fourth century C.E.
Arabia. Expect this title to take up permanent residence on the middle-school
reserve list. EB
BORDEN, LOUISE 
Sea Clocks: 
The Story of Longitude; illus. by Erik
Blegvad. 
McElderry, 2004 
48p
ISBN 0-689-84216-3 
$18.95 
R* Gr. 3-5
The elementary-school set may know little and care less about the mathematical
calculations involved in plotting east-west navigational positions. They are, how-
366 
* THE BULLETIN
ever, likely to share the outrage of John Harrison, the beleaguered eighteenth-
century clockmaker who fairly met all requirements to win the prize for solving the
problem of longitude and then was, for decades, denied his reward. Here Borden
presents a most readable biography, clearly laying out the urgent need for pin-
pointing longitude (" [S]ometimes they ended up sailing in the wrong direction. ...
Sometimes ships got lost in storms; sometimes they ran aground and sank") and,
in just a few laudably clear paragraphs, outlining the benefit of a seaworthy clock.
Even math-phobes who skim over the explanation will be caught up in Harrison's
travails as he painstakingly builds a working chronometer, perfects it, submits it,
tests it, retests it, turns over all his working versions, only to be spurned by the
Board of Longitude until King George III himself intervenes on his behalf. Blegvad's
finely hatched line drawings, many washed with earth- and olive-toned water-
color, wind around and through each page, comfortably sharing the ample white
space with easily digestible stretches of text. The technical nature of the subject
allows Blegvad to revel in intricate clockwork, cat's-cradles of ship rigging, and sly
caricatures of the starchy, tight-fisted pedants of the Board. Closing notes remark
on Harrison's surviving kin and inform readers where extant artifacts are now
lodged. John Harrison should be a welcome fresh face on dress-up book-report
day. EB
BRAY, LIBBA 
A Great and Terrible Beauty. 
Delacorte, 2004 
[41 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90161-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73028-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Gemma Doyle finds herself back in England and newly enrolled at toney Spence
Academy, where she faces the dual challenge of achieving detente with a powerful
clique of snobbish girls and shaking off memories of her mother's violent death in
India. It doesn't help that she foresaw the death in a vision and that she's been
followed to England by a mysterious (and stunningly attractive) young man, Kartik,
who hangs out with a band of gypsies and warns her against using supernatural
powers she has only begun to realize she wields. Wield them she does, however,
and it soon becomes evident that Gemma's mother's murder, a tragic fire a genera-
tion ago at the school, and the diary of an ex-Spence-ite named Mary Dowd are all
inextricably connected to Gemma's power. Three schoolmates ride on Gemma's
coattails, so to speak, as she enters a portal into The Realms, where she reunites
with her mother's spirit and her friends indulge in fantasies of the power and love
and beauty that elude them in the real world. When confining their witchery to
The Realms no longer satisfies them, the girls play a more dangerous game that
could bring the magic to the outside and unleash forces of evil into the bargain.
Bray opens with a true boarding-school drama, full of cattiness, Victorian repres-
sion, and steamy schoolgirl dreams of being ravished by virile gypsies. Readers
who came for the sharpened claws and tight-laced corsets may, then, understand-
ably be jolted by the plot's sudden pivot into fantasy. Still, Bray does a creditable
job keeping the two genres in balance, and although the simmering love (well,
lust) story between Gemma and Kartik never reaches a full boil, there's enough
seductive promise in Gemma's parting line ("I want to see how far I can go before
I have to stop") to keep both romance and fantasy readers watching for a sequel.
EB
MAY 2004 
* 367
BUJOR, FLAVIA 
The Prophecy of the Stones; tr. from the French by Linda
Coverdale. 
Miramax/Hyperion, 2004 
[4 00p]
ISBN 0-7868-1835-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-8
In a future land called the Realm, three girls-Jade, Amber, and Opal-each re-
ceive a precious stone on their fourteenth birthday along with the news that they
have destinies beyond their previous imaginings. Cast out of their homes in order
to discover their true purpose, the three girls begin their journey together, know-
ing only that they cannot trust anyone-not even one another. Meanwhile, in
present-day Paris, a girl called Joa lies dying in a hospital, her fate somehow con-
nected to that of the trio. Through their adventures, the three girls learn that a war
is brewing between the people's Army of Light and the Council of Twelve's Army
of Darkness, and each girl has her appointed task: one will discover the Gift, one
will discover the King, and one will convince the two others to die. Fourteen-year-
old Bujor's story, a French import, begins with compelling mystery: Why are the
girls enemies? What are the stones? Who is the Thirteenth Councilor? Unfortu-
nately, it quickly loses its potency as it is hampered by shallow characterizations,
blunt exposition and a preachy, sentimental message about the power of hope.
Stiff, contrived dialogue and a relentless tendency to tell rather than show adds to
these problems. Furthermore, many elements of the premise that might have been
interesting are left unexamined: though the girls are told they are enemies, they
are never placed into real conflict; their true purposes are not fully tied to their
magical stones, and the connection between Joa and the trio is asserted but never
really demonstrated in the fragmented counter-narrative. Readers seeking satisfy-
ing fantasy heroines and adventure should stick to Robin McKinley, Tamora Pierce,
and other stalwarts. KH
CRONIN, DOREEN 
Duckfor President; illus. by Betsy Lewin. 
Simon, 2004 
40p
ISBN 0-689-86377-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
As previous adventures (Click, Clack, Moo, BCCB 9/00, Giggle, Giggle, Quack,
6/02) have shown, Farmer Brown's barnyard is filled with political animals. It's
therefore not surprising that Duck, rebelling against his contribution to labor,
decides that an election for the leadership of the farm should be held; nor is it
hugely surprising, given the livestock-heavy electorate, that Duck trounces Farmer
Brown in the election. Finding that running a farm is no fun at all, Duck decides
to expand his ambitions and makes a gubernatorial run, successfully winning over
the incumbent. Running a state's not much better, though, so he then campaigns
for the White House, edging out the incumbent there; unsurprisingly, running a
country proves to be just as tedious as the previous positions, so Duck hands over
the reins to the Veep and heads back to the farm. This has even more adult-aimed
jokes than previous versions (lots of evocations of specific campaigns in the text
and classic images in the art), and in light of the 2000-esque jokes about recounts,
it's a tad ironic (or pointed?) that the book relies on narrow popular-vote margins
to get Duck into office. There's still plenty of humor for the pre-voting audience,
however, such as lazy Duck's winning of all the elections and regretting it soon
after and the regular request for a recount (always made by Duck's opponent,
always resolved by the finding of ballots stuck to somebody or other, and always
performed to the opponent's detriment). Lewin's thick lines have a homey irregu-
larity in keeping with the slightly skewed reality of the world they limn, with
washes of color (often election-year red, white, and blue) decorating the pages like
368 
* THE BULLETIN
bunting; Duck himself isn't all that charismatic a figure as a candidate (a compro-
mise choice, perhaps?), but he hits his real dramatic stride when he's mournfully
overworked. This will be a natural to liven up units on the democratic process or
even to introduce classroom elections--or just as a readaloud antidote to the elec-
tion-year plethora of paid political announcements. DS
CUTLER, JANE 
The Birthday Doll; illus. by Hiroe Nakata. 
Farrar, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-374-30719-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
As Franny waits in gleeful anticipation for her birthday party, a package arrives
from some relatives she's not quite sure she remembers but who have really good
taste in dolls: this one has frills on her frills, and when you press her hand, she
sings "ring around the rosy." The party proves a rollicking success that brings
Franny even more presents, including an old rag doll wrapped in a paper bag.
After everything is cleaned up and put away, Franny tries to snuggle up with her
fancy new doll, only to find its one-liner annoying. She's sad and lonely with post-
party blues, until she realizes that the old rag doll is perfect for snuggling. Nakata's
wispy, delicate watercolors both decorate and illustrate, articulating energetic party
and household scenes and decorative motifs of flowers and ribbon with quick,
light strokes of darker colors against creamy pastel washes. They also rather uni-
formly scream pink girly-girl, which might prove a limitation on appeal. The faces
of the grownups and the partygoers are as round as balloons, with smudgy cheeks
and pin-dot eyes and noses that don't distinguish the people from the dolls. The
story goes on far longer than the subject matter warrants, and there is an inordi-
nate amount of detail regarding the party preparations and cleanup, with too little
about the origin of the rag doll. Still, birthdays are perennially exciting, and this
offers some inspiration for appreciating each present for its own merit. KC
DE ANGELIS, GINA 
Motion Pictures: Making Cinema Magic. 
Oliver,
2004 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs 
(Innovators)
ISBN 1-881508-78-1 
$21.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Where would today's Hollywood glitterati be without yesterday's technical wiz-
ards who fashioned the celluloid firmament in which movie stars twinkle? Here
readers meet seven trailblazers in the cinematic arts, beginning with W. K. L.
Dickson, a "mucker" for Thomas Edison, and the man eventually credited as the
real progenitor of motion pictures. The Lumiere brothers follow hot on his heels,
transforming his dual devices into a single mechanism for filming, printing, and
projecting moving images. Lee de Forest and his optical sound recording onto the
film, Herbert Kalmus' "glorious Technicolor," Linwood Dunn and his visual ef-
fects processes, and Michael Todd's wide-screen wonders refine and expand the
industry. Garrett Brown and the Steadicam empower the cameraman to rush
through scenes and angle into tight corners in ways previously thought impossible.
In keeping with the perspective of the reliable Innovators series, De Angelis is less
interested in hyping "firsts" than in demonstrating how each inventor builds on a
previously laid foundation; her closing essay on "films of the future" even suggests
a circular rather than linear trajectory to cinematography, with technology so ad-
vanced and accessible that independent filmmakers-such as the Blair Witch Project
crew--can return to production practices that predate the studio system. Although
plenty of black-and-white photographs are included (as well as a bibliography,
index, and glossary), color is sorely missed in the captioned scene from The Wizard
MAY 2004 
* 369
ofOz and the 1930 ad for Technicolor. When Academy Awards night rolls around
again, readers won't be so quick to step out for snacks come time for technical
kudos. EB
DOWNARD, BARRY, ad. 
The Little Red Hen; ad. and illus. by Barry
Downard. 
Simon, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-689-85962-7 
$14.95 
R 3-6 yrs
The teaching tale of the industrious Little Red Hen, who enjoys the fruits of her
labors while her lazy friends go hungry, has been told and retold for lo these many
years. Downard provides another reason to tell the tale yet again: the opportunity
to peruse his original and often hilarious images. Using manipulated digital pho-
tography, he creates a bespectacled Little Red Hen in an absurd barnyard inhab-
ited by her unmotivated animal neighbors. The duck, pig, and cat sunbathe, play
cards, shoot pool, watch television, and play checkers while the Little Red Hen
bustles about planting, growing, threshing, and baking, until, in the end, the three
layabouts gaze longingly through the kitchen window while the Little Red Hen
munches on fresh bread. The combination of photorealism with the obviously
fantastical give the pictures a sly and witty humor that will propel viewers through
the pages, only to send them back to the beginning for a closer look. Use this with
Wattenberg's similarly outrageous Henny Penny (BCCB 5/00) for a poultry pair-
ing of photographically fantastical folklore, but don't be surprised if the com-
puter-graphics kids commandeer it for inspirational purposes. JMD
FEIFFER, JULES 
The Daddy Mountain; written and illus. by Jules Feiffer. 
di Capua/
Hyperion, 2004 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7868-0912-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-4 yrs
Mountaineering may be a grueling and risky pastime, but our intrepid young nar-
rator is determined to ascend the deceptively familiar but still challenging Daddy
Mountain. After fortifying herself with fruit juice, she begins her climb, carefully
explaining each stage of the journey ("I reach as high as I can and grab the belt of
the Daddy Mountain") and the dangers she faces ("I could slip. And that could be
a catastrophe"). Safety precautions are emphasized ("Remember, the Daddy Moun-
tain must wear a shirt"), but ultimately our dogged climber makes it to the top of
Daddy's head and proudly trumpets to those below-well, to her mother-"I
climbed the Daddy Mountain!" Feiffer's focus (though fortunately not his moun-
taineer) slips a little at the end with the emphasis on Mom's response rather than
on the youngster's achievement, but this is otherwise a magnificent combination
of gleeful play and genuine intensity. The text is taut and compact yet sufficiently
clear on the specifics to guide other ambitious youngsters up the heights (and
provide some hints for complicit parental mountains), and the extreme-sports com-
mentary on the exertion ("I don't want to dawdle. I have to be brave") has its
humorous implications but ultimately avoids irony, instead giving a playful activ-
ity credit for its genuine difficulty. The Daddy Mountain's smudgy gray topogra-
phy makes it a suitably inanimate contrast to the loose-lined climber, whose ferocious
concentration and physical effort are evident in her grimly set face and her pared-
down outfit's tendency to expose bits of her as she levers herself up to each col.
The vertiginous nature of her ascent is emphasized by the layout, which balances
text-touched white space with the off-center Daddy Mountain and finally culmi-
370 
* 
THE BULLETIN
nates in a vertical foldout when our heroine reaches the summit of her proud daddy.
This will be the perfect picture book for any dad who wants to be a big man in his
child's life. DS
FIGLEY, MARTY RHODES 
The Schoolchildren's Blizzard; illus. by Shelly O.
Haas. 
Carolrhoda, 2004 
48p 
(On My Own History)
Library ed. ISBN 1-57505-586-4 
$27.93
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57505-619-4 
$5.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-3
January 12, 1888 started as an unnaturally mild day on the Nebraska plains, and
the students in Miss Freeman's one-room schoolhouse were unprepared for the
freakish storm that hurled itself through their classroom in the afternoon. At first
sitting tight around the stove seemed the wisest course of action, but when the roof
blew off and the snow flew in, there was no choice but to seek shelter a half-mile
away at Miss Freeman's home. Roping the children together for safety, the teacher
led her sixteen charges through the whiteout and was subsequently celebrated for
her resourcefulness and bravery. Although the core of this true story is positively
(ahem) chilling, Figley stretches it out with a slender, throwaway plot concerning
two sisters and their concern over some leftover birthday cake, and for the first
twenty-five pages rookie readers may reasonably wonder when something exciting
is finally going to happen. Grainy watercolor artwork ably evokes a sprawling
plain transformed from glowing gold to treacherous white; finer detail ranges from
the thoughtful inclusion of a chalkboard map that abruptly ends west of Minne-
sota to a truly hokey pose of Miss Freeman in front of a carefully draped American
flag. For start-to-finish action in the 1888 blizzard, see Wetterer's The Snow Walker
(BCCB 12/96) from the same series. EB
FRAUSTINO, LISA ROWE, ed. 
Don't Cramp My Style: Stories about That Time ofthe
Month. 
Simon, 2004 
295p
ISBN 0-689-85882-5 $15.95 
R Gr. 9-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 359, for review.
Fusco, KIMBERLY NEWTON 
Tending to Grace. 
Knopf, 2004 
[17 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92862-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82862-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Cornelia's an ardent reader with a rich inner life, but her persistent stammer makes
her so reluctant to talk that she's largely silent, refusing to read aloud in her wa-
tered-down ninth-grade English class or converse with her mother's new boyfriend.
Conversation with her mother's boyfriend ceases to be a problem when the couple
heads off to Las Vegas and dumps Corney at the rural home of her great-aunt
Agatha, whom the girl has never met. Her concern swiftly moves from her expres-
sive difficulties to her new living arrangement in a plumbingless, rickety old farm-
house with an eccentric and unkempt stranger. Gradually, however, Agatha's
hard-working country ways and life-learned wisdom begin to coax Cornelia into a
strength and self-assurance she's never known with her flighty mother, while Agatha
in turn finds a surprising opportunity for growth and trust with her great-niece.
The castoff child finding new roots with her unexpected caretaker isn't a particu-
larly new plot (Katherine Paterson's The Same Stuff as Stars, BCCB 10/02, is one
of the best recent examples), and Agatha comes pretty much off the literary assem-
MAY 2004 
* 
371
bly line of crusty old country women with a taste for aphoristic wisdom; her folksy
phraseology jars with the tendency towards poetic (and often strained) metaphor
in Cornelia's narration. The delineation of Cornelia's growth is sensitive, how-
ever, and she paradoxically becomes more sympathetic and interesting when her
troubles become more mundane (many readers will guiltily empathize with her
horrified response to labor-intensive and inconvenient rusticity), and the details of
Agatha's existence-particularly the maneuvering that allows her to evade acknowl-
edging her illiteracy-are credibly conceived. Despite its drawbacks, this is a ten-
der story of adjustment to loss and recognition of strength. DS
GERAS, ADELE 
Time for Ballet; illus. by Shelagh McNicholas. 
Dial, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2978-2 
$16.99 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Our protagonist loves her ballet class so much that her mom calls her Tutu Tilly.
It's easy to see why the class is such a hit: from wriggling into uncooperative ballet
clothes, to warming up with "good toes, naughty toes," to flitting around the
room in free-form imitations of butterflies and dinosaurs, to being introduced to
some of the more formal elements of ballet, the children obviously revel in the
expressive joy of their craft. Even more exciting for them is the pleasure of per-
forming. Tutu Tilly practices her dance at home, gets into her costume, performs,
and then delights in the aftermath of praise from her parents, thus providing a
complete chronology of the process of learning ballet. With her attention to the
pudgy proportions and perpetual motion of the child body, McNicholas' water-
color figures with their subtle graphite outlines call to mind the work of Shirley
Hughes. The compositions are busy and crowded with lots of people doing lots of
things, and the figures are so expressive that one can almost hear the noise of the
studio. Despite some energetic onomatopoeic intrusions, the prose is generally
rather pedestrian and the story lacks conflict, but if your collection needs another
pink ballet book, this one provides a nice overview of what to expect from the
experience of young beginners' ballet practice and performance. KC
GLENN, SHARLEE 
Keeping Up With Roo; illus. by Dan Andreasen. 
Putnam,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23480-2 
$14.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Gracie's mentally challenged Aunt Ruth, called Roo, has been Gracie's best friend
since her birth. Roo calmed her when she was crying, taught her to walk, and
played with her every day when their chores were done. As Gracie grows older,
they play school, and while Roo can't do much math, she is able to teach Gracie
her alphabet. At first, when Gracie goes to school, she and Roo continue their
lessons after school, with Gracie taking over the role of teacher. By second grade,
however, Gracie begins to have other interests and make new friends, and Roo
often ends up alone and lonely. When one of Gracie's friends comes over to visit,
Gracie actually ignores Roo, who embarrasses her with her wild hairdo and her
goofy dancing. As the afternoon wears on, Gracie begins to realize just how much
Roo has taught her, and she decides to share her friend with her aunt, and vice
versa. Andreasen gentles his homey farm scenes with crosshatched texturing that
mutes the colors and gives a slightly nostalgic flavor to the book. His depiction of
Roo as a baby-faced adult child (there are moments when Gracie actually looks
older than Roo) is a bit disconcerting at best (and infantilizing at worst) but since
Roo's disability is not mentioned in the text, this visual marker provides an impor-
372 
* THE BULLETIN
tant clue to fill in gaps about why Roo lives with her parents, why she doesn't have
children of her own, and why she doesn't seem to have many school skills. Adult
storytellers should be prepared to answer some questions for children who don't
have experience with adults with disabilities, but for those who do, this is a warm,
affirming picture that helps validate and explain to outsiders the depths of a mutu-
ally rewarding relationship. KC
GRAHAM, BOB 
Tales from the Waterhole; written and illus. by Bob
Graham. 
Candlewick, 2004 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-7636-2324-5 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
You know the way some neighborhoods have a spot to which everybody seems to
gravitate? In Graham's African crowd of hippos, giraffes, zebras, wildebeest, etc.,
that locale is the waterhole. Its primary denizen, from this book's standpoint, is
the young crocodile Morris, who with his younger brother, Bob, and his turtle
friend, Billy, features prominently in five easy-reading stories. Events include such
recognizable domestic happenings as an argument over Morris' mom's gaudy bath-
ing suit, a spontaneous kids-against-moms soccer match, and the trials of clothes-
shopping with parents. Australian author Graham's keen ear for authenticity and
gently imaginative blending of animal and human realities give these tales an extra
shine; young readers will recognize the reality of Morris and Billy's tussle ("Well,
they circled and shuffled and grunted, and they groaned and swished at the air"),
and even those unfamiliar with wildebeest migration will sympathize with Waldo
Wildebeest's resentment of his family's traditional "walking vacation." Though
compositions don't always effectively single out the protagonists from the assembled
waterhole crowd, the bursting scenes cheerfully convey the happy neighborhood
bustle, and the sprightly lines and soft watercolor washes create a cozy and com-
panionable crew. Reminiscent ofJames Stevenson's Mud Flat Gang (from Christ-
mas at Mud Flat, BCCB 11/00, et al.) but with its own easygoing antipodean flair,
this will provide a refreshing early chapter read or sequential readaloud. DS
HELQUIST, BRETT 
Roger, the Jolly Pirate; written and illus. by Brett
Helquist. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623806-4 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623805-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
While there's a bit of controversy over the exact origin of the piratical black flag,
Helquist has a theory. Amiable but bumbling pirate Roger is so inept at the seri-
ous business of boarding and thieving that his fellow freebooters stow him below
deck when there's action in the offing. To ingratiate himself with his shipmates,
Roger attempts to bake a cake and, mistaking the cannon for a cooking pot, lights
the fuse to fire it up and blows himself right through the planking into the middle
of a battle. The Redcoats panic at the sight of the flour- and soot-covered human
projectile and abandon ship, and a grateful crew honors Jolly Roger with a flag in
his remarkably skull-like image. The thin but manic proceedings are more silly
than hilarious, and as the resultant flag is just plain goofy, it's not easy to see how
it could come to be a feared symbol at sea. The cast, however, comprises an admi-
rable rabble of hawk-nosed, narrow-eyed villains and square-jawed, powdered-
wigged officers (only Roger breaks from the severe angularity with a ruddy round
MAY 2004 
* 373
nose), and the shipboard scenes (tightly packed but generally controlled) are domi-
nated by deep earthy hues against teal sea and sky. With a fleet of piratical picture
books plying the sea lanes, listeners may find in Cannon's On the Go with Pirate
Pete and PirateJoe (BCCB 9/02), or Laurence's Captain and Matey Set Sail (9/01)
a richer trove of wackiness to plunder. EB
HOBBS, WILL 
Leaving Protection. HarperCollins, 2004 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-051632-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17475-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Robbie Daniels can't wait to earn some cash-a commodity in short supply in
Port Protection, Alaska, where his parents scrape out a living through fishing and
sheer ingenuity. Robbie signs on with gruff Tor Torsen, a loner renowned for his
luck catching king salmon in the outer waters. Back problems force Torsen into
taking on a hand, and Robbie's experience on his parents' smaller boat is enough
to get him aboard Torsen's Storm Petrel. Once they're out for the brief season,
Robbie discovers that fishing is only part of the agenda; Torsen intends to secure
his fortune by searching for possession plaques-Russian land-claim markers bur-
ied along the coast in the late 1700s-and selling them on the black market. A
strong sixteen-year-old like Robbie will certainly be useful doing the grunt work
(and helping bring in the bumper salmon catch), but he just might, Robbie fears,
be expendable when his contribution to the job is over. Hobbs keeps readers
guessing whether Torsen is a moody fisherman with an odd hobby, a ruthless
treasure hunter with a gift for fishing, or a sad old man whose greed has driven him
over the edge. All the requisite adventure story elements are in place, from the
corny-but-cool patter ("There was sea salt in his tangled beard and piracy in his
voice") to a raging storm and a desperate run for harbor, but Hobbs excels at
conveying the claustrophobia and rising tension between two overworked, over-
tired, overambitious men who have just two weeks to grab their dreams and make
it home alive. EB
HOBERMAN, MARY ANN 
You Read to Me, I'll Read to You: Very Short Fairy Tales
to Read Together; illus. by Michael Emberley. 
Tingley/Little, 2004 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-14611-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-3
Hoberman offers a sequel to the successful and popular You Read to Me, I'llRead to
You: Very Short Stories to Read Together (BCCB 10/01) in this rhyming reimagining
of eight well-known fairy tales and folktales such as "The Princess and the Pea,"
"The Three Bears," "Little Red Riding Hood," and other familiar nursery stan-
dards. The text is designed to be used "like little plays for two voices that some-
times speak separately, sometimes in unison." To that end the verse is three-color
and three-columned: the orange left column is for the first reader, the fuchsia
right column is for the second reader, and the center blue column is for both
readers. The voices are conversational and the dialogue humorous, although best
appreciated with knowledge of the originals (Hoberman advises in her author's
note that "parents and teachers make sure that their new readers are familiar with
the original versions before going on to the stories in this book"). Emberley's gel
pen, watercolor, and dry pastel illustrations have an irreverent insouciance that
infuses the pages with energy. Clever fashion touches enliven cartoony styliza-
374 
* THE BULLETIN
tions, and expressive body language gives strikingly funny individuality to familiar
players. Prop this one in a prominent place to encourage reading pairs to nestle in
for a giggle-punctuated readaloud snuggle. JMD
HORNIK, LAURIE MILLER 
Zoo School; illus. by Debbie Tilley. 
Clarion,
2004 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-618-34204-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Ursula, Kitty, Leo, Drake, and Robin are among the sixteen students of Zoo School,
a place they all find at first to be confusing but later to be eminently worthwhile.
Here zookeepers Ms. Hummingfly and Mr. Dapple lead rather than teach, since
the motto of the principal is "Let the animals be your textbooks!" (and since the
zookeepers admit that they don't know how to teach anyway). Over the course of
several weeks, each child grows to enjoy Zoo School and even to overcome his or
her faults as a result: Robin learns to distinguish between real and imagined inju-
ries, Drake overcomes his fear of animals, Leo begins to enjoy work, Kitty develops
an emotional attachment to animals she had previously thought of only in objec-
tive terms, and Ursula sees that life skills involve more than the ability to spell.
When the school is closed by the three L.I.O.N.S. (Learned Inspectors of New
Schools), the fearless five band together to save both the institution and its newest
addition, a kangaroo joey. In addition to a lighthearted yet pointed critique of
modern school-assessment techniques, this intermediate-level chapter book pro-
vides readers with lots of human-exotic animal interaction and the enjoyable end-
of-story revelation that the school is being run by a talking elephant. Though the
adults are good-hearted and well-meaning (even the L.I.O.N.S.), the kids are smarter
than any of them, an inversion of power roles that works especially well in this
school send-up. The constant spoofing of pedagogical procedures will make this
an amusing readaloud as well as a potentially popular choice for individual read-
ing. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. TC
HOVEY, KATE 
Ancient Voices; illus. by Murray Kimber. 
McElderry, 2004 
[40p]
ISBN 0-689-83342-3 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
The author ofArachne Speaks (BCCB 3/01) returns to classic Greek myths in this
sleekly designed volume. In a series of elegantly constructed poems, Hovey gives
voice to Ganymede, cupbearer to the gods and goddesses of Mount Olympus;
Hera, "Zeus's wife,/ Queen of the Sky"; Hephaestus, the immortal smith, and
others. The verse is vivid and controlled, the rhyme scheme and structure varies
from poem to poem, and the first-person point of view adds a riveting immediacy
to each entry. The twenty-three poems are divided among four locales, Mount
Olympus, The Sea, The Underworld, and The Forest, an organizing principle that
allows Hovey to introduce each section with a quote from classical literature. Many
of the poems are emotionally powerful, whether rendering the tragedy of
Hephaestus' crippling, the violent inevitability of a storm at sea, or the heady ter-
ror of an encounter with Dionysus. Ganymede, who comments on his encounters
with the gods several times in the collection, opens and closes the book. His voice,
that of a young man dazzled by the gods yet dreaming of home, adds a quiet
pathos to the larger-than-life events of the other poems. Kimber uses a variety of
media in his representations of the foibles and furies of the gods and goddesses:
MAY 2004 
* 375
the art for "The Underworld" section are rendered in charcoal, Conte pencil, and
acrylic, while the rest of the images are oil over acrylic on canvas. There is a
weighty density to the images that is enhanced by the strongly angular, almost
geometric compositions. The personifications of the gods and goddesses combine
classical with contemporary: Ares rides a motorcycle, his sword and shield resting
behind; Hades resembles Mr. Hyde at his top-hatted best, a red pomegranate in
his hand; Diana stands in vest and boots, an image from Town &e Country. While
not all the poems and images reach the same heights (the cover image is an oddly
ineffective choice), overall this is a strong addition to both poetry and mythology
collections. JMD
JACKSON, ROBERT 
Meet Me in St. Louis: A Trip to the 1904 World's
Fair. HarperCollins, 2004 
144p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009268-8 
$18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009267-X 
$17.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Not to be outshone by her glittery Gilded Age cousin, Chicago, St. Louis hosted
its own World's Fair a decade later, and once again state-of-the-art technological
marvels vied for bragging rights with almond elephants, butter tableaux, trans-
planted ethnic "villages," and a strip of tantalizing lowbrow entertainment. Jackson's
account is cast in the verbiage of a tourist brochure, hinting at the wonders therein
but never quite tackling the details: "Another large exhibit showed off all sorts of
ancient Chinese weapons and suits of armor, reminding visitors that cultures around
the world had been making unusual and exciting products for many centuries."
Historical background is inadequate, and without some turn-of-the-century con-
text, readers are unlikely to realize what the fuss over Geronimo and electric lights
was all about. Plenty of black-and-white photographs should lure browsers, and a
suggested reading list that includes works of children's fiction as well as fact is a
nice bonus. An index and bibliography will assist report writers, but this title is
more likely to satisfy recreational readers than budding social historians. EB
JANECZKO, PAUL B. 
Top Secret: A Handbook of Codes, Ciphers, and Secret Writ-
ing; illus. by Jenna LaReau. 
Candlewick, 2004 
136p
ISBN 0-7636-0971-4 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Nineteen years after his previous book on the topic (Loads of Codes and Secret
Ciphers, BCCB 3/85), Janeczko takes a new, somewhat younger-skewing look at a
subject that's been dear to him since youth. He offers some broad philosophy
(noting that some codes, such as ISBNs, aren't designed for secrecy), helpful defi-
nitions (explaining the difference between ciphers, which are letter-by-letter en-
cryption, and codes), and historical developments and anecdotes (from ancient
Greece to World War II), but the main jackpot here is the plethora of technical
explanations that instruct readers how to make-and break-ciphers and codes
themselves. There's a wealth of information and a wide range of difficulty both in
use and in conceptual complexity, from simple substitution ciphers that entry-
level cryptanalysts can manage to more elaborate codes and steganographic tech-
niques that will delight experienced young spymasters. Explanations are generally
clear (illustrated demonstrations greatly facilitate understanding of some mecha-
nisms), but even kids not interested in working out the engineering will appreciate
these marvels of secrecy. Readers determined to forge ahead into DIY coding will
adore all the "kids, do try this at home" exercises for each method described (an-
376 
* THE BULLETIN
swers are in the back). It's somewhat surprising, in light of the book's otherwise
far-reaching coverage, that there's no discussion at all of the contributions com-
puters have made and could make for interested youngsters, and there are no pointers
to some of the excellent websites on this subject. Smudgy and shadowy black-and-
white art offers not only helpful illustrations but a pair of sample spies, whose
sharp-nosed obviousness and mismatched pairing suggests a cross between Mad's
"Spy vs. Spy" and Rocky and Bullwinkle's Boris and Natasha. The enticing sub-
ject and flexible readability will make this an indispensable companion for the
young and secretive. A "Hall of Fame," brief bibliography, and an index are ap-
pended. DS
JENKINS, STEVE 
Actual Size; written and illus. by Steve Jenkins. 
Houghton,
2004 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-37594-5 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 3-7
It's a funny thing about animals in picture books-their size is so consistent (slightly
smaller than that of their book's trim size) that the natural world appears to be a
wonder of uniformity, and even knowing better makes it hard to extrapolate to the
extremes that the animal kingdom really offers. Jenkins' inventive gallery panders
to no such misleading conventions, however, and provides views of almost twenty
mammals, reptiles, amphibians, insects, and fish at, as the title suggests, their ac-
tual size. Brief captions provide identification and measurements (additional in-
formation is provided in the back of the book), and Jenkins' imaginative paper
collages work their usual magic in transcending their medium to capture the spirit
and detail of their subjects. The real triumph here, however, is the compositions:
rather than ducking the issue of page-size limitation, the book makes brilliantly
creative use of its tight focus, resulting in startling closeups. The page turn to the
giant squid, whose twelve-inch eyeball peers out from the spread, is a wonderfully
"Yikes!"-inducing moment of literary drama; kids will literally be all over the book,
pressing their hands up against the huge palm of the gorilla and squashing their
faces up against the jaws (on a foldout spread, no less) of the man-eating saltwater
crocodile for a clear demonstration of what an easy mouthful they'd make. Small
animals have their due as well (the tiny dwarf goby fish looks like something a
goldfish cracker would turn down as an insufficient meal), but ultimately it's the
huge that humbles and horrifies here (three different subjects, in fact, have the
common name of "Goliath"), suggesting that in some aspects of zoology size does
indeed matter. This has sufficiently sophisticated eye appeal to make it an irresist-
ible browse for text-phobic older readers, and it would be a compelling and imme-
diate introduction to natural history for any group of youngsters with sufficient
sang-froid to look a great white shark straight in the gleaming four-inch teeth. DS
JONES, PATRICK 
Things Change. Walker, 2004 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-8027-8901-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Johanna is an academically accomplished junior, tired of being her parents' pup-
pet and yearning for the attentions of Paul, a senior who's the cool comedian of
the in-crowd; when he drives her home after student council, she changes both of
their futures with six little words: "I want you to kiss me." Soon Johanna and Paul
MAY 2004 
* 377
are a devoted couple, with Johanna's parents furious as her grades plummet,
Johanna's best friend hurt as she's left by the wayside, and Johanna wrapped up in
her first sexual relationship and real love affair. Paul's grand sweeping gestures of
affection, however, are increasingly tendered in apology for moments of anger and
physical coercion, coercion that rises to outright violence, leaving Johanna in an
emotional maelstrom as she's yanked between her love for Paul, her embarrass-
ment at her position, her reluctance to confirm her parents' views, and her recog-
nition that this is a dangerous situation. This isn't a new plot (Jones mentions in a
note that he actually began the book twenty years ago, when the subject was unad-
dressed in young adult literature); this title somewhat resembles Tashjian's Faultline
(BCCB 10/03) in its alternating narrative (Paul's anguish is particularly evident in
angry letters to his dead father) and its refusal to reduce Johanna's involvement to
an issue of low self-esteem. There's more emphasis here, however, on the general
changes in Johanna's life, how this relationship fits into her attempt to break away
from her parents' crushing expectations ("How can people who say they loved you
all the time make you hate them as much as I hated my mother right now?"), and
how it brings her knowledge of people she's underestimated (her old best friend
doesn't actually come running back when Johanna finally calls, and it's the girls in
Paul's popular set whom Johanna had once derided as airheads who turn out to be
a source of strength and wisdom). Even teens spared some of Johanna's more
dramatic experiences will sympathize with the turmoil of her maturation. DS
KAABERBOL, LENE 
The Shamer's Daughter; tr. by Lene Kaaberbol. 
Holt,
2004 
[240p]
ISBN 0-8050-7541-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Ten-year-old Dina Tonerre has inherited the Shamer's gift from her mother,
Melussina, and as her mother explains, few can look a Shamer in the eyes for long:
"You make them remember all the things .. . that they are secretly ashamed of."
As a result, Dina's life is a lonely one: while her family is loving, her playmates
have abandoned her and the adults avoid her. Though Dina cannot fathom a
good side to the gift that has made her a pariah, the community values Shamers for
their ability to solve crimes by identifying the guilty party. Melussina is therefore
called away to solve a triple murder at Dunark Castle, leaving Dina behind; when
a man named Drakan brings Dina a message that her mother needs her, she goes
without question because he looks the young Shamer in the eyes without fear.
Soon, however, she finds that she has been tricked and that Drakan has brought
her to the castle to help "motivate" Melussina to condemn an innocent man. In
this first novel of a quartet, originally published in Danish, Kaaberbol has written
an absorbing and fast-paced fantasy/mystery bursting with action and intrigue.
The Shamer's gift is clearly thought out yet explained to readers gradually as Dina
learns to use it. Dina's early naivete, especially her trust for Drakan, is credible,
and her unwitting discovery of his evil lends the story an unexpected punch of
immediate danger. The pacing of her resulting escape from the castle and her
attempts to clear the innocent man and free her mother alternate between stam-
peding action and tiptoeing suspense, while the story remains firmly rooted in
Dina's experience and development. The only question is: when will the next one
come out? KH
378 
* THE BULLETIN
KARR, KATHLEEN 
Exiled: Memoirs ofa Camel. Cavendish, 2004 
24 0p
ISBN 0-7614-5164-1 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
As both a good Muslim and a good son, the camel Ali takes his mother's words to
heart: "Work, but never surrender." He accepts his Allah-ordained destiny, but
that doesn't mean that the humans who claim his service will master his spirit.
The doughty dromedary, captured and trained for labor in Egypt, is sold to the
United States Camel Corps; Ali is packed off on a transport ship, where he meets
not only fellow travelers Fatinah (his love interest), Seid (a recalcitrant bull), and
Omar (an arrogant wrestling camel), but also their new trainer Hi-Jolly (Hadji
Ali), who truly understands the nature of the beast. Together the team face many
adventures common to Western humans in the Year of the Infidel 1856-arduous
labor, Indian raids, Army discipline-while pursuing their own camel-y concerns
in matters of love and one-upmanship. Admittedly, enjoyment of the book de-
pends heavily on a reader's tolerance of anthropomorphization, and the camel's-
eye view of this quirky chapter in U.S. military history is hardly well enough
developed to satisfy historical fiction fans. Ali is, however, a fully developed char-
acter in his own right, and readers with a strong faculty for suspension of disbelief
will find themselves thoroughly absorbed by his dignified narration. In a closing
note, Karr comments on the Camel Corps, the humans who ran the service, and
the fate of the camels abandoned when the Corps disbanded. EB
KESSLER, Liz 
The Tail ofEmily Windsnap; illus. by Sarah Gibb. 
Candlewick,
2004 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-7636-2483-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Emily Windsnap lives on a boat but has never learned to swim, and until seventh-
grade swim class she has never been totally immersed in a body of water. Once in
the water-an event she anticipates with great excitement-her life undergoes a
profound (and literal) sea-change: Emily discovers that when she's immersed in
water her legs fuse and become a tail; that while on land she's a human girl, in the
water she becomes a mermaid. Her adventures in the sea and her search for an
explanation of her strange gift lead her to her mother's forgotten secret, her long-
lost father, and her mer-heritage, all of which are in danger from Neptune, the
controlling king of the sea. The text suffers from too-casual language sprinkled
with bits of soon-to-be-dated slang, and the development of the undersea world is
shallow. The derivative plot owes much to made-for-television movies and that
splashy bit of'80s cinema, but there is no denying the siren-like allure of mermaid
stories for the preadolescent set. Emily is a likable if not particularly original char-
acter, and while the unfolding of events is utterly predictable, the action does
move fairly quickly to a happily-ever-after conclusion. Gibb's spot art has a fluid
delicacy that adds much to the watery ambience. JMD
KOSITSKY, LYNNE 
The Thought ofHigh Windows. 
Kids Can, 2004 
175p
ISBN 1-55337-621-8 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-10
Esther Wilinsky could read the political writing on the wall, even if her mother
could not, and the teenage girl arranged to join a group of children being evacu-
ated by the Red Cross from Berlin to Belgium, one step ahead of the German
invasion. As her narrative opens, Esther and her comrades are in Southern France.
MAY 2004 
* 
379
On the estate of the Chateau la Blaize, the children enjoy a period of relative
security, in which they can indulge their normal kid tendencies toward cliquish-
ness and mild bullying, and overweight Esther is the designated target. Her only
prospective friend, Walter, is undependable at best, since he seeks control in his
life by obsessing on the most beautiful girls at hand-which certainly do not in-
clude Esther. The invasion of France puts personal matters on hold. Older teens
are particularly in peril, and Esther, now in disguise and under an assumed name,
ends up in the Jewish Underground, where she reunites with and then uninten-
tionally betrays Walter. Esther's safety is, of course, never more than tenuous, so
her tale speeds along like a runaway train. Kositsky deftly handles the irony of
Esther's maturation-that her girlhood tendency toward self-destructive acts is
finally overcome by horrors greater than low self-esteem. The conclusion, which
finds Esther committed to the Resistance and the war still raging, forces readers to
supply their own ending; cautiously hopeful is as good as it gets. EB
KURTZ, JANE 
The Feverbird's Claw. 
Greenwillow, 2004 
[30 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000821-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000820-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
In the Delagua city that curls "like a giant wildcat in a fertile valley sheltered by the
four sacred hills," a red flag marked with a yellow feverbird whips in the wind.
The bird's claw protectively holds a silkworm, the source of the Delagua people's
wealth and strength. Moralin, royal-born through her father's line, takes her privi-
leges for granted until she is kidnapped by the Arkera, the barbaric enemies of the
Delagua. Luckily for Moralin, she has been secretly trained by her grandfather in
the martial arts and can win the respect of her captors through acts of bravery.
With guidance from her patron goddess, Moralin hopes to escape and return to
the city of her ancestors, but what she comes to know on her journey may change
her previously uncritical view of her home. The tale, told from Moralin's perspec-
tive, carefully creates her world's language and traditions, credibly portraying her
preliterate society; the heroine's many adventures make for dramatic reading.
Unfortunately, there are too many surprise elements undercutting the narrative's
direction, and the brevity of the descriptions often leave the reader without a clear
sense of place, a flaw that is ironically emphasized when contrasted with the acuity
of Moralin's perceptions of facial expressions, political maneuvering, and combat-
ive encounters. Additionally, because there is no concrete salvation for the city
until after the end of the novel, in spite of all the talk of Moralin's fulfilling a
prophecy, the reader is distanced from the emotional impact of the climax and
resolution. Nonetheless, the continuing action and doughty heroine may allow
fans of prehistoric fiction and fantasy to enjoy exploring Moralin's world even
without a high-voltage ending. TC
LAGUNA, SOFIE 
Too Loud Lily; illus. by Kerry Argent. 
Scholastic, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-439-57913-9 
$14.95 
R 
5-7 yrs
Lily, a young hippopotamus, is constantly getting into trouble for her boisterous
enthusiasm for life, and sometimes even her best friends find her just "too loud."
When a flamboyant new drama teacher in a bright red poncho comes to Lily's
school, everything changes. Miss Loopiola (with red toenails to match her pon-
cho) recognizes Lily's hidden talents and puts her in charge of "crashing the cym-
380 
* 
THE BULLETIN
bals and banging the drums for storm noises, . .. growling and roaring for the
fierce lion noises, ... [and] cackling and screeching for the wicked witch noises."
On opening night Lily the loud suddenly suffers an attack of nerves: "What if she
forgot what to do? What if she tried to speak and no words came out? Or even
worse-what if she was too loud?" Fortunately, all ends well, with the audience
"clapping and stamping and cheering" for Lily and her classmates. Laguna's tale
of loud Lily, although predictable, is succinctly and effectively told, and the hippo's
dilemma is sympathetically portrayed. Argent's animals are plump and shapely,
their characters evident in articulate faces enhanced by headlight-bright white eyes.
Each spread is a mini-drama, so make sure young listeners (who will certainly
appreciate Lily's success) take time to thoroughly peruse the pages. JMD
LAWRENCE, COLTON 
Big Fat Paycheck: A Young Person's Guide to Writingfor the
Movies; illus. by Jim Steck. 
Bantam, 2004 
[176p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-37600-4 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7 up
Lawrence is actually rather a sneaky guy: while the title and the opening of the
book are shamelessly pandering to a hunger for a piece of Hollywood riches, this is
actually a down-to-earth, witty, and genuinely informative guide to screenplay
creation. The book covers the process from the formation of the concept and
treatment through the proper formatting of and terminology within a screenplay
to the execution of draft after draft; it then addresses the thorny issue of getting
that brilliant script out of the desk drawer and into the hands of a genuine Holly-
wood player. While readers will occasionally roll their eyes at the sanitization of
the author's colloquialisms ("Johnny opens up a can of whoop"), the unstuffy and
informal approach is inviting and comradely ("Your first draft is going to suck
total butt. Revel in its depravity. Wallow in its stench"). Under that informality,
however, is a helpful approach that's filled with useful details about the genre and
about writing as a whole (rarely has the bitter truth about the importance of re-
writing been hammered home with such clarity and focus), making this a text that
could help aspiring writers in other genres tighten up their creative endeavors as
well. The author's particularly good at conveying the difference between the "this
is my baby" world of the novice screenwriter and the knee-deep-in-paper world of
those receiving such scripts, so that his strictures on formatting and on keeping
things interesting have a clear justification (convincing a jaded and overloaded
reader not to toss the screenplay aside). Additional energy and support comes
from a multitude of anecdotes and useful URLs. This could liven up all manner of
writing curricula, and it will be the salvation of any kid stuck with a dream, a blank
screen, and an ever-mounting sense of desperation. Reviewed from an unillustrated
galley. DS
LEEDY, LOREEN 
Look at My Book: How Kids Can Write & Illustrate Terrific Books;
written and illus. by Loreen Leedy. 
Holiday House, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1590-2 
$16.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Leedy breaks down into sensible steps a process for children to compose and pro-
duce their own books. Happily, nonfiction gets equal attention with biography
and fiction, and readers follow three children (well, two kids and a pooch with
autobiographical interests) as they brainstorm, draft, revise, and proofread their
texts, choose a format, decide on layout and artwork and lettering, and finally bind
MAY 2004 
* 
381
their finished works. Although the emphasis on revision and editing may not
come as welcome news to free-spirited writers bent on dashing off a masterpiece,
teachers guiding a class through a writing process will welcome Leedy's support.
Kids will probably find her treatment of format (shaped books), layout (how to
combine text and illustration), and suggestions for lines, color values, lettering,
and range of detail far more appealing. Leedy clearly practices what she preaches,
and children familiar with her work will recognize her own style of outlined char-
acters, candy colors, dialogue bubbles, and busy-but never confusing-layout.
A concluding page offers resources on writing and illustration, research skills, and
bookmaking; the list of web and print publishers of children's work will be espe-
cially valuable to teachers who want to promote their prodigies. EB
MACLEOD, ELIZABETH 
Helen Keller: A Determined Life. 
Kids Can,
2004 
32p 
illus. with photographs 
(Snapshots)
Library ed. ISBN 1-55337-508-4 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55337-509-2 
$6.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Concise chapters of short, chatty paragraphs describe the extraordinary accom-
plishments of this legendary woman, noting what she found difficult only to high-
light her determination to overcome her disadvantages. The approach is occasionally
inclined towards the adulatory and the superficial (Keller's serious and controver-
sial political activism is downplayed), but this is still a vivid introduction. Motiva-
tional quotes from Keller's writings and speeches dot the book, giving the reader a
sense of instant intimacy with the subject that other biographies sometimes lack.
Each full page of text faces a page of collaged and captioned photos and graphics,
and lavender, pink, and avocado-green backgrounds and frames enliven the sepia
and gray tints of old photographs. Illustrations of the signed alphabet and Braille
and examples of how Keller used them give amateur decoders another way to con-
nect their experience with hers. The last chapter describes the effect Keller's life
has had on services for the deaf and blind today. Photo credits are given, but no
text sources. A timeline of Keller's life, an index, and a list of places to visit are
included. TC
McCoRD, PATRICIA 
Pictures in the Dark. Bloomsbury, 2004 
[320p]
ISBN 1-58234-848-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Sarah and her older sister, Carlie, live in fear of their disturbed mother, whose
bizarre collection of rules leaves them, outside of their time at school, essentially
imprisoned in their upstairs room, often deprived of meals and subject to her
sudden violence. Their father seems either unaware or simply more interested in
keeping the peace with their mother, and there's little external help offered in their
community in 1954, so the girls rely largely on each other. Fifteen-year-old Carlie
bears the brunt of the abuse, and she begins to question the situation and expand
her boundaries, striking up a friendship with a boy who works nearby. In a fury,
the girls' mother sends her from the house, and Carlie becomes a runaway, leaving
a distraught Sarah bereft and alone, trying desperately to find her older sister and
repair her family as best as she can. The writing is more earnest than deft (it's
sometimes, especially at the book's start, a little hard to discern the referents for
some pronouns); the problem of the girls' mother (whose character and treatment
of her offspring are reminiscent of the mother in Sybil) isn't believably resolved by
382 
* THE BULLETIN
their father's sudden intervention and their mother's nervous breakdown and re-
covery. The setup is, however, a compelling one: McCord effectively makes the
girls' tension contagious, drawing both their solitude and mutual dependence with
compassion and believability. Readers empathizing with Sarah and Carlie may
realize their own homes aren't so bad. DS
MCNAUGHTON, JANET 
An Earthly Knight. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
[272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-008993-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-008992-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Jenny is the younger daughter of a minor lord in twelfth-century Scotland. She
has had to take over the running of her father's household from her disgraced older
sister Isabel, who, after running away with a knight from her father's court, returns
in shame after he reveals his nefarious intentions. With Isabel destined for the
convent, Jenny is her father's only hope for recognition at court, and he energeti-
cally promotes her betrothal to the dissolute Earl William. Jenny, however, is of a
different mind, having met-and fallen in love with-the notorious Tam Lin in
the woods of Carter Hall. McNaughton combines the plots of two different bal-
lads in this densely written but involving novel: the subplot of Isabel and her
wicked lover is the story of "Lady Isabel and the Elf Knight," while the main plot
of Jenny and her true love is that of "Tam Lin." The book effectively combines
historical fiction and fantasy, rooting the tale of the two sisters in fact before intro-
ducing the fantastical elements that drive the story forward. While characteriza-
tions are sometimes anachronistic, the relationships between sister and sister,
daughters and father, confessor and church, and servant and nobility are solidly
believable. The melodramatic elements are sufficiently controlled to allow for a
suspenseful climax and satisfying resolution while still providing all the thrills readers
desire. A glossary and historical note are included. JMD
MEACHAM, MARGARET 
A Mid-Semester Night's Dream. Holiday House,
2004 
[15 4p]
ISBN 0-8234-1815-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Seventh-grader Morgan Yates likes Ben Hennigen, who likes Cierra Sinclair-
doesn't he? Morgan's father might be dating Louise Bentley, who swats away the
family dog and talks down to Morgan. Plus, there's a dance on Friday. If only
Morgan's mom were around to give advice and hear secrets. Instead (after wishing
on a star), Morgan gets a visit from Gretta, an enterprising but reckless first-year
student from the Fairy Godmother Training Academy. Unfortunately, one of
Gretta's love charms makes Morgan allergic to Ben, and the cure turns her "blue
like a Smurf." The next spell gives her best friend, Sam, a crush on their most evil
teacher, Mrs. Grossinger. Never does a love spell actually hit Ben ... but he seems
to be interested in Morgan anyway. In spite of the promising opening sentence
("Morgan Yates was losing control of her body parts"), the novel relies on a pattern
plot from the point where Morgan observes her own "boring" image in the mirror
in order to provide the reader with a description to the inevitable announcement
that her dad is not going to marry Louise Bentley, but instead has been dating
Sam's mom on the sly. Though Morgan and Gretta develop some individual
bulges, the other characters remain plastered to the page. Nonetheless, the story
MAY 2004 
* 383
has a rapid pace and some giggly situational comedy that will involve preteens
fantasizing about their own middle-school careers or current crushes. Readers
looking for an easily ingested novel with few calories (especially those addicted to
romances and lighthearted fantasy) will gobble this up. TC
MIKAELSEN, BEN 
Tree Girl. HarperTempest, 2004 
[24 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009005-7 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009004-9 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Her name is Gabriela, but she has been called Tree Girl since the day her neigh-
bors found her up a tall avocado tree, holding off (via well-aimed avocados and
much swaying of the tree trunk) the three young men who had chased her there.
Gabi's arboreal aptitude saves her skin more than once, since an Indio in em-
battled Guatemala has no friends, neither among the guerrillas who claim to fight
for freedom nor within the ranks of the soldiers who destroy villages and torture
the inhabitants as a matter of course. These horrors can be survived, but can they
be surmounted? Gabi must do so, if she is to live as more than a shadow of the
carefree, confident person she used to be. The prose of this quick yet powerful
read is packed with imagery and metaphors. The language never seems out of
place in Gabi's voice, which is consistently that of a precocious yet inexperienced
fifteen-year-old girl unwillingly confronting the vindictive violence of civil war.
Appropriately, Gabi's response to the war, though incomplete and halting, origi-
nates at last from inside herself rather than in the advice of any other character. It's
a dramatic and compelling story in its own right, and the fact that it's based on the
life of a real person (according to front matter) and the in-text assertion that both
military training for the soldiers and humanitarian aid for refugees comes from the
United States may stimulate teens to articulate their own beliefs about the contra-
dictory nature of American foreign policy. TC
MILLS, CLAUDIA 
Perfectly Chelsea; illus. by Jacqueline Rogers. 
Farrar,
2004 
119p
ISBN 0-374-31244-3 
$16.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Nine-year-old Chelsea loves her church, with its wonderful reverend, its splendid
hymns, and its possibilities for the public display of one's goodness. She relishes
the opportunity to be an acolyte ("Being acolyte was like being a bride, with all
eyes upon you-better than being a bride, because you didn't have to have a
groom"), to act out Bible stories in Sunday school (" . . . and then Jesus would
appear and say to all the other people hanging around, 'Go, and do likewise,'
meaning, 'Go, and be like Chelsea"'), and to mark her good deeds by adding straw
to baby Jesus' manger. The main fly in the ointment is her gleefully disruptive
class- and congregation-mate Danny Repetti, but Chelsea also finds herself beset
by other trials: she's distressed that as a member of the bell choir she's producing
not musical perfection but disharmonious error, she's perplexed and angry when a
beloved congregation member dies despite everyone's prayers, and she's devastated
when Reverend Waller moves on to another church. As in her previous chapter
book, 7x9 = Trouble!(BCCB 4/02), Mills respectfully interprets her protagonist's
age-appropriate viewpoint; here she's also addressing some large and enduring is-
sues of faith while naturally weaving them among a fourth-grader's other con-
cerns. Chelsea's interest in the spiritual, an element undertreated in books for this
384 
* THE BULLETIN
age, is mixed with her love of ritual and feeling toward her community. It's all the
more genuine for that blending, however, and there's absolute authenticity in her
sorting out her loyalty to her Jewish best friend and her loyalty to her faith as she
prepares for her first experience of Hanukkah. Chelsea herself is the kind of char-
acter too often reduced to a prissy antagonist, who can indeed be irritatingly smug
about her goodness but also finds genuine enjoyment in doing well and whose
confidence is genuinely shaken when she falls below her own standards. As read-
aloud or a readalone, this will resonate with many kids' experience, and it may
actually inspire a few youngsters to find new appreciation for their own religious
life. DS
MINCHIN, ADELE 
The Beat Goes On. 
Simon, 2004 
212p
ISBN 0-689-86611-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
In this British import, Leyla is shocked and overwhelmed when she learns that her
beautiful, beloved cousin, Emma, is HIV-positive. Moreover, she feels the burden
of secrecy, since she's the only one besides Emma's mom who knows Emma's
status. When Emma finds a support center and asks Leyla to come with her, Leyla
balks, but eventually she finds the center to be a place where she can develop her
own talents by teaching drumming to people affected in some way by HIV/AIDS
and eventually helping them burn a CD to raise funds for the center. Tucked
around Emma's story are all the standard contrivances of the teen-romance plot:
though Leyla is shy and only average looking, she still manages to catch the atten-
tion of the "most gorgeous, funny, intelligent, sensitive, talented" lad in her school,
she has a vexed relationship with her staid parents, and she dreams the standard
British teen dream of playing in a band. The book is obviously agenda-driven,
with plot developments mere stages for showcasing facet after facet of living with
HIV and dialogue slipping into health department pamphletspeak. Trendy Brit-
ish slang helps liven the speech, however, and the real point here is Leyla's confu-
sion and conflicted emotions; these ring true as well as help drive home the book's
important message, and readers will sympathize with her dilemma. Resources for
American teens living with HIV/AIDS are included in this edition. KC
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
I've Seen the Promised Land: The Life ofDr. Martin Luther
King, Jr.; illus. by Leonard Jenkins. 
Amistad/HarperCollins, 2004 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027704-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027703-3 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 3-5
While report writers on the prowl for dates and places and family members may
not find all the data they seek here, readers who want to understand the signifi-
cance of Dr. King's nonviolent approach to civil-rights activism have come to the
right place. Myers opens his account with a weary King on the eve of the 1968
Memphis sanitation workers' strike: "He was tired, but he felt he had to offer his
support. Dr. King could not enjoy his own good fortune, even though he had
worked hard for it." Children who already know the story will anticipate the
tragedy around the corner, but Myers flashes back immediately to King's birth,
leaps forward to the Montgomery bus boycott of the 1950s, and proceeds onward
through the burgeoning civil-rights movement that King would help to shape.
Although Myers does not disguise his admiration for King's consistently peaceful
methods, he does respectfully acknowledge opposing views: "Many blacks were
disappointed with Dr. King's belief in nonviolence and love for all people. Some
MAY 2004 
* 385
argued that blacks didn't need people to love, they needed justice." Jenkins' art-
work is potent and explosive, freely melding finely drafted faces with almost pho-
torealistic features, broad swaths of thickly applied media, hasty swirls of streetwise
graffiti, superheated colors bursting from shadows, and Biblical imagery befitting
the man of the cloth. Do you really need yet another biography of Martin Luther
King, Jr.? When it's this one, yes, you do. EB
OLSEN, SYLVIA 
The Girl with a Baby. 
Sono Nis, 2004 
[208p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55039-142-9 
$7.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
When her mom dies, Jane tries her best to keep her family from falling into the
kinds of behavior that give Indians a bad name in her area of British Columbia.
This becomes more difficult when, after indifferent sex with her white boyfriend,
she finds herself pregnant at fourteen. She manages to hide her pregnancy until
the day she gives birth to Destiny, whose presence in her life deepens her desire to
keep her rowdy brothers on track. With the help of her family, especially her
grandmother, and some supportive friends, Jane not only shoulders the responsi-
bility of rearing Destiny but also continues to go to school and pursue her dream
of performing by seeking the lead in the school play. A note indicating that the
book was inspired by the author's daughter's experience of having a baby at four-
teen goes a long way toward explaining the thoroughly respectful and supportive
tone of the narrative. Jane has her moments when she wants to chuck it in, but on
the whole she is remarkably self-possessed, so much so that Auntie Mary decides to
give Destiny the most powerful name of their family at a traditional naming cer-
emony because she knows that Jane will rear her with a knowledge of the old ways
as well as the new. Jane's natural grace and strength of character would be a bit less
credible had Olsen not created a context of strong women in which Jane is self-
consciously embedded. The book portrays a community that both supports its
members and holds them accountable, not to values of surface respectability, but
to depths of character and loyalty to tradition and one another. Her apt use of
simile, especially when describing strong emotions, adds lyrical depth to Jane's
first-person narration; Jane quickly becomes someone a reader can both care about
and admire. KC
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
The Right Dogfor the Job: Ira's Path from Service
Dog to Guide Dog; illus. with photographs by William Mufioz. 
Walker,
2004 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8915-3 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8914-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Actually, Ira's path starts even before service dog: at the beginning of this book
he's a delectably pudgy golden retriever puppy without a care or responsibility in
the world, and it's only after he's placed in the home of his puppy raiser that he
starts learning the skills he'll be using in his eventual job assisting a disabled per-
son. After an explanation of various steps in Ira's education-and his participa-
tion in the education of his puppy raiser's human students in her sixth-grade
class-the book reveals a hitch in the plans when there's no training facility ready
to complete Ira's preparation. In an unusual move, Ira changes organizations,
careers, and even names, transforming into a guide dog for the blind named Irah
386 
* THE BULLETIN
(the school already had an Ira on their books), who adapts quickly and graduates
satisfactorily with his new human partner. This isn't the first picture book that
follows the training of a service dog, and the shift to guide dog (presumably unan-
ticipated by Patent and Mufioz) moves Ira to even more well-trodden ground.
The subject is still pretty much irresistible, however, and Patent offers some tasty
informational treats about the training process; the notion of Ira's presence in his
puppy raiser's school classroom will cause many readers to turn soulful, beseeching
eyes to their own teachers. Though the layout is rather stodgy and some of the
photographs have lighting problems ranging from excessive shadow to bleaching
out, golden Ira remains a photogenic presence, and young dog lovers will relish
seeing him go through his paces. A list of relevant organizations, with addresses
and websites, is appended, along with a rather scanty bibliography. DS
PEARSON, 
SUSAN 
Squeal and Squawk: Barnyard Talk; illus. by David
Slonim. 
Cavendish, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5160-9 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Various denizens of the barnyard get their poetic due in this collection of eighteen
poems. Pearson features pigs ("When Pigs Could Fly") and chickens ("A Chicken
Will Eat Most Anything"), ducks ("Chuck's Duck") and goats ("Goats on the
Roof') in compact verse that moves from rollicking to lilting to dreamy. Some
entries are appealingly general ("My Dog"), whereas others wittily draw on more
specific animal husbandry information ("Recite Your Chickens" weaves the names
of a multitude of chicken breeds into rhyming stanzas, and "Stomach Math" be-
moans the plight of the four-stomached cow should a bellyache strike). Slonim's
acrylic art accentuates the playful aspects of the verses, with scrabbly lines broadly
emphasizing the bleary eyes, knobbly joints, and scruffy coats of the rural resi-
dents-no pastoral idylls here, but plenty of comic caricature. This will be a bouncy
companion to Schertle's How Now, Brown Cow (BCCB 12/94) or just a clever
advance on "Old MacDonald." DS
PEARSON, TRACEY CAMPBELL 
Myrtle. 
Farrar, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-374-35157-0 
$15.00 
R 3-6 yrs
Myrtle, a charmingly bottom-heavy, long-nosed mouse, lives in a blissful surround
of familial love and good will until mean-spirited Frances moves in next door.
Frances taunts, she jeers, she invokes fear, so much so that she drives poor Myrtle
indoors-permanently. Myrtle's distressed parents call in Aunt Tizzy, returned
from her safari in Africa, to draw Myrtle out of her closet hideaway. When Aunt
Tizzy tells Myrtle how she dealt with mean lions in Africa by singing and dancing
until they were gone, Myrtle decides to try the same tactics on Frances. The
character and plot dynamics invite immediate comparison with Kevin Henkes,
and Myrtle suffers a bit thereby, as her solution lacks the creativity and redemptive
closure of a Henkes offering. Myrtle the timid is empowered, but Frances the
bully is left to her fate, ignored. Nonetheless, the jumbly, frenetic compositions
done up in watercolors that encompass the entire jellybean palette are just yummy;
Pearson manages simultaneous humor and pathos in Myrtle's countenance and
deliciously ratty snobbery in Frances. Aunt Tizzy is a visual feast as well-she is
certainly everything an eccentric relative should be. Myrtle's tale of woe is bound
to find many a sympathetic ear, and her defeat of Frances will give great satisfac-
tion to those beleaguered by their own bullies. KC
MAY 2004 
* 387
PETERS, JULIE ANNE 
Luna. Tingley/Little, 2004 
[248p]
ISBN 0-316-73369-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-12
"If Liam could wish for one thing in the world ... he would ask to be born again.
Born right, in the body of a girl." Unfortunately, only Liam's younger sister,
Regan, knows this, so she's the recipient of all his confidences and the only one
acquainted with his female incarnation, Luna, who models her secret wardrobe
late at night for Regan. Liam increasingly yearns to become Luna publicly and
always, shedding the male role he finds forced and repellent; Regan loves her sib-
ling, but she'd like to take a break from protecting him and his secret at the high
school they both attend (especially now that Regan has found a boy she likes) and
at home with their tightly wound parents. While Andrew Matthews' The Flip Side
(BCCB 10/03) treated transvestitism, this is one of the first novels for young people
to explore genuine gender transition (Liam in fact plans to obtain sexual reassign-
ment surgery when he can afford it); as with many thematically groundbreaking
novels, its sincerity is palpable but its emotionality is more notable than its execu-
tion. Liam's desperation is understandable and compelling, but his character be-
yond his longing isn't particularly sympathetic, since his dilemma makes him so
self-focused that he's quite ruthless in using Regan and even her acquaintances to
further his ends; the examinations of the nature of gender are often muddy and
contradictory, and repeated flashbacks chop up the narrative flow. Peters retains
her deftness in depicting complicated relationships between young people, how-
ever (there's a brilliantly tense scene when Liam is dangerously transfixed by the
girly activities at Regan's slumber party); better yet, in Regan she's created an in-
triguing character: a largely disaffected, academically uninterested young woman
who's brought the energy to being a good sister that more old-fashioned girls might
have brought to being a good daughter. While the treatment of the subject isn't
going to win over the dubious, those wrestling with issues of identity or family
loyalty will empathize with the siblings' trials. DS
PIERCE, MEREDITH ANN 
Waters Luminous & Deep: Shorter Fictions. Viking,
2004 
[2 5 6p]
ISBN 0-670-03687-0 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
This collection of eight short stories-loosely structured around the theme of wa-
ter in all of its forms-encapsulates Pierce's transformation from fourteen-year-
old writer to award-winning fantasy author. The stories, four ofwhich are previously
unpublished, are set in ancient, mythical worlds, from a land frozen into an end-
less winter ("Icerose"), to a world beneath the water in a neglected garden pool
("The Frogskin Slippers"), to islands ruled more by the sea than by king or lord
("The Fall ofYs" and "Rampion"). Many echo well-known fairy tales, while oth-
ers sail off into unexplored territory, but in Pierce's stories, it is almost always a girl
at the helm. Alys and Sif escape from their island homes, leaving behind the
restrictions imposed upon their sex in "Rampion," and Truzjka searches for the
wild geese to save her grandmother in "Where the Wild Geese Go." Gunther
helps her brother free the land from an evil witch in "Icerose," and Rose falls for a
princely frog that takes her to the fairy ball under the water in "The Frogskin
Slippers." Myramond defies her father, the King, to the destruction of his king-
dom in "The Fall of Ys," and the nameless queen of "Rafiddilee" learns too late
388 
* 
THE BULLETIN
what a true friend is. Even in "The Sea-Hag," narrated by a young man on a pirate
ship, it is the sea-hag herself who calls the shots. The weaker stories-such as the
sentimental, unstructured "Rafiddilee," written when Pierce was fourteen-are
balanced by the strength in the rest of the collection. What results is a surprisingly
cohesive look at Pierce's themes and imagery; this will be an important story col-
lection to any interested in her work. KH
PIETRI, ANNIE 
The Orange Trees of Versailles; tr. from the French by Catherine
Temerson. 
Delacorte, 2004 
[14 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90130-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73103-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Fourteen-year-old Marion, a natural "nose" with the gift of memorizing, identify-
ing, and blending scents, has found employment with the marquise Athenais de
Montespan, mistress of Louis XIV. Although the girl first regards her employer as
attentive and kind, she soon learns that her behaviors mask a far more devious
nature. First Marion catches the marquise in lies, claiming to admirers that her
unique perfumes have been created by Venetian professionals; later she discovers
that Athenais is invoking the devil and scheming to poison the queen and the
dauphin in hopes of ascending the throne herself. Marion joins forces with the
court doctor to thwart the plot and is rewarded, in a fairy tale ending, with atten-
tion and gifts lavished by a grateful royal family. It's difficult to tell whether the
often stilted prose ("I am sick of lying naked on a pallet while you consecrate the
host with the blood of a newborn child!") is attributable to the French original or
its translation; moreover, the occasional flub in details is somewhat annoying ("un-
derpants" are unlikely garb in the seventeenth century). Still, this is a quirky look
at a little-appreciated talent, and the author's concluding note on the importance
of perfumes among the elite is, perhaps, as fascinating as Pietri's fictional tale. EB
PRATCHETT, TERRY 
A Hat Full ofSky. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
[288p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-058661-3 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-058660-5 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Fans of Pratchett's The Wee Free Men (BCCB 7/03) will be happy to learn that the
author could not resist a sequel to the adventures of aspiring witch Tiffany Aching.
Now apprenticed to Miss Level, a mountain witch with a (literally) split personal-
ity, Tiffany comes to know that being a witch isn't all spells and glamour; most of
it is simple hard work helping folk who don't always know when to be grateful.
What Tiffany doesn't know, however, is that she's been targeted by a hiver, a
supernatural parasite that means to take over her mind and her magic. It's the
Wee Free Men to the rescue: disguised as a rather scarecrow-like human with
disconcertingly talking parts, the Nac Mac Feegle journey to Miss Level's moun-
tain where Tiffany, her will subverted by the hiver, is desperately trying to hold her
own against it. Even the banishing of the hiver is not the end, since Tiffany must
learn how to keep the being at bay, and that requires some private tutoring from
the formidable Granny Weatherwax. As in the previous book, Pratchett here lets
the Wee Free Men run riot across the pages to splendid effect. This is not a rehash
of the first book, however, but a developing story about the developing powers-
and the responsibility demanded by those powers--of a serious young witch com-
MAY 2004 
* 389
ing of age. The fantasy world combines edgy adventure with comfortable yet imagi-
native domestic detail, and readers will curl up to read with a sigh of contentment.
JMD
ROMANEK, TRUDEE 
Aha!: The Most Interesting Book You'll Ever ReadAbout Intel-
ligence; illus. by Rose Cowles. 
Kids Can, 2004 
4 0p 
(Mysterious You)
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55337-485-1 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55337-569-6 
$7.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
The latest Mysterious You entry (see also Romanek's Zzz...: The Most Interesting
Book You'll Ever Readabout Sleep, BCCB 4/02) stays true to the series' fun-follows-
function approach to the human body. Readers take a breezy tour through the
mind, focusing on both normal intelligence and deviations from the norm. Savants
and prodigies, the attention-deficient and dyslexic, the brain-damaged and the
brilliant all get their moments in the spotlight, and the emphasis is consistently on
the need for everyone to keep their mind sharp by grappling with mental challenges.
Peripatetic organization may trouble linear thinkers, and the lack of precisely and
consistently deployed terminology ("smart," "intelligent," and "talented" are, for
example, often conflated) could be a bane to report-writers. Still, such pertinent
in-the-news and in-the-curriculum issues as the questionable merits of medicinal
intelligence boosters and the importance of acknowledging multiple intelligences
are addressed. Cartoony spot art, Sweet-Tart colored backgrounds, frequent "You
Try It" breaks, and bite-size articles should please casual brain browsers, and if it's
true that "a good sense of humor is a sign of high intelligence," Aha! can sign on
with Mensa. EB
ROOT, PHYLLIS 
If You Want to See a Caribou; illus. by Jim Meyer. 
Houghton,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-618-39314-5 
$16.00 
R 
5-7 yrs
A lyrical text employs second-person narration to entice viewers on a northwoods
journey; in an attempt to view the elusive caribou, audiences travel down "trails/
churned black by caribou hooves" through evocative descriptions of local flora and
fauna to a lake where caribou gather under scented evergreens. 
Touches of
soundplay such as alliteration and consonance add resonance to the carefully ca-
denced ragged-right text, framing the island exploration in a rhythmic structure
that emerges with reading aloud. The hushed atmosphere and descriptive empha-
sis make this a little sophisticated for more wiggly audiences, but the gentle sus-
pense of the quest will help keep youngsters involved. Woodblock illustrations in
solid, earthy hues, intricately overlaid to create more softness and subtlety than the
medium sometimes allows, suggest the scents and sensations of a camping expedi-
tion and emphasize the textures of the natural elements (including a carefully semi-
hidden caribou several spreads before the official meeting). The human characters,
featureless and androgynous, are placed at a distance from the viewer, obligingly
allowing for audience projection. While the book's content is appropriate for any
unit on northern animals, nature walks, or endangered species, its serene style will
be best received by small groups or a single listener (perhaps in preparation for
Great Lakes travel). An author's note describing how the caribou came to live on
the islands of Lake Superior and explaining the endangered status of the species is
included. TC
390 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ROSEN, MICHAEL 
Howler; illus. by Neal Layton. 
Bloomsbury, 2004 
25p
ISBN 1-58234-851-0 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
The canine narrator of Rover (BCCB 6/99) has returned with another tale of his
small human pet, Rover, and her family. It all starts when Rover's mother, Cindy,
gets wider and wider, and new furniture and decorative items begin to appear in
the house that are puzzlingly useless to the current inhabitants. After a disappear-
ance, Cindy returns, having "found a small human" ("It tried to eat Cindy"). The
narrator is unimpressed, accurately dubbing the new arrival "Howler," and mourn-
ing that "no one noticed me. No one at all." After various failed attempts to
rearrange the family, the narrator seeks solace with Ruff-ruff next door; this results
in five little critters ("I thought they all ought to be called Small Me, but I wasn't
asked") who regain the attention of the narrator's human pets and also allow him
to come to a fair conclusion: since the Rufflets can stay, then Howler can stay.
The narrator's self-centeredness will tickle young audiences even as his narcissism
and doubt about the new arrival reflect the viewpoint of many reluctant young
siblings; the succinct sentences are packed with personality as well as poker-faced
humor. Layton's wild childlike scrawl is at its most anarchic in depicting the
canine protagonist, but the bubble-eyed humans are pretty outrd as well, albeit in
a happy-go-lucky and cheerful way. Helpful-and funny-diagrammatic labels
and speech balloons combine with collage inserts to add texture and even more
pell-mell feel. This is an entertaining dog-told story for those too young for Finney's
I, Jack (BCCB 4/04), and it's a highly amusing tale of dethronement and adjust-
ment for youngsters dealing with new little Howlers in their own homes. DS
ROSENTHAL, BETSY R. 
My House Is Singing; illus. by Margaret Chodos-
Irvine. 
Harcourt, 2004 
40p
ISBN 0-15-216293-3 
$16.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
A child describes her beloved house and its inanimate inhabitants in twenty-eight
concise poems. Verses follow the loose order of the girl's daily routine, from catching
the furnace's hot-air gusts "on winter mornings" to wrapping up in a quilt at bed-
time. Accompanying prints offer planes of rich, gently grainy color and clean-
edged, often geometric line; details are minimal but textures are outsized,
intensifying the impression of a cozy and safe house. The poetry's strength lies in
its double-filtered perspective: the persona of the young narrator never falters, but
the projection of thoughts and feelings onto familiar objects such as a light bulb, a
smoke alarm, and the back door remains effectively focused. Poems vary from
formal and rhymed to free verse, but they all share a quiet appreciation and won-
derment that will prompt young audiences to reassess their own surroundings. A
useful successor to Cassedy's similarly themed Roomrimes (BCCB 2/88), this can
be read as a whole by or to a child, or individual poems can be used for tempo
changes in storytime. TC
SANDLER, MARTIN W. 
Island ofHope: The Story ofEllis Island and the Journey to
America. 
Scholastic, 2004 
144p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-439-53082-2 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Ellis Island opened its doors in 1892 and, over the next sixty years, greeted more
than twelve million immigrants seeking freedom and opportunity in the United
MAY 2004 
* 391
States. The capable text draws heavily on interviews from the Ellis Island Oral
History Project, "dedicated to preserving the first-hand remembrances of immi-
grants," and for the most part Sandier lets the voices do the telling. The primary-
source emphasis yields a rich and provocative collection of reflections, memories,
and social commentary on the experience of coming to America. The decision to
feature Ellis Island itself results in a tightly focused collection of anecdotes full of
information not often included in more broad-based sources. The small details of
moving from homeland to ship to barge to the island itself fill more than two-
thirds of the text; especially strong is the middle section describing the myriad
bureaucratic procedures, the abundant fear of the new arrivals, and the remarkable
facility itself. The text loses a bit of focus when it leaves the island to provide a
general overview of tenement life, factory conditions, and westward migration.
Still, this is a noteworthy tribute to a remarkable group in American history. The
clean layout integrates archival photographs, drawn mostly from the Library of
Congress, with lengthy textual passages and boxed excerpts recalling famous Ellis
Island alum. Text and photos are well documented and the chronological organi-
zation effectively partners with the movement of the immigrants themselves. A
more text-heavy partner to Sandler's Immigrants (BCCB 3/95), this promises to
attract readers both for its curricular use and its engaging narrative tone. A cat-
egorical list of further reading and index are included. HM
SEGAL, LORE 
Why Mole Shouted and Other Stories; illus. by Sergio Ruzzier. 
Foster/
Farrar, 2004 
28p
ISBN 0-374-38417-7 
$16.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
Four stories describe the exploits of young Mole, who lives in reasonable content-
edness with his grandmother ("They would have got on well enough if he had only
remembered to always put things back where they belonged"). The happenings
are modest-Mole misplaces his glasses, rejects his grandmother's guidance on
cold-weather dress, enjoys some noise-making, and discovers the pleasures of
rhyme-but the feeling is solidly familial and affectionate. The writing enhances
the coziness with a touch of old-fashioned formality (each story opens with "Once
there was a mole" or a variant thereof) and some well-honed storytelling turns of
phrase ("He would not and would not stop"); sprinklings of gentle humor also
enrich the tales, though kids may not get the joke about a chilled Grandmother
Mole's insistence that little Mole keep bundled up. The book's tidy layout, with
its softly creamy pages, neat spot art, and solidly square shape, joins the text in
recalling mid-twentieth-century convention, and the delicately muted tones of
Ruzzier's watercolors suit the sensibility. Rather than go straight for adorability,
however, the illustrator has instead rendered Mole as an intriguingly peculiar be-
ing, with his huge glasses and oversized pink snout, hands, and feet somehow
suggesting an underwater diving costume rather than an under-earth dwelling ani-
mal; the pictures occasionally slyly add a note of impatience (Grandmother with
her arms akimbo glares daggers at a startled little Mole) or defiance (Mole waves a
dismissive hand at his grandmother's attempted help). Most of the stories could
also function as warmly supportive early reads (though the last story has some
French terms waiting to trick the unwary novice), but this book is really begging
for a snug readaloud, perhaps in the lap of an affectionate grandparent, whether
mole or otherwise. DS
392 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SLAYMAKER, MELISSA ESKRIDGE 
Bottle Houses: The Creative World of Grandma
Prisbrey; illus. by Julie Paschkis. 
Holt, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-7131-8 
$16.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Grandma Prisbrey "wasn't a regular sort of a person who did things in a regular
sort of way," so it strikes her as completely natural to use throwaway glass bottles
to build her California house. She's so enchanted with the stacked glass in myriad
colors that she goes on to build outbuildings and garden ornaments, playfully
designing with color ("She made a wishing well of blue bottles and a rumpus room
of green ones") and shape ("Just for fun she built a round house"). Eventually her
creation draws floods of visitors, and Grandma Prisbrey is surprised to find herself
called an artist. This is an inherently fascinating subject, and Slaymaker's text
deftly compacts the high points of Prisbrey's story into an accessible narrative pep-
pered with quietly illuminating quotes from Prisbrey herself. Paschkis' sometimes
intricate gouache art captures the plenitude and joyous overstuffedness of Prisbrey's
creations. Unfortunately, the draftsmanship sometimes overprettifies the scenes
and, especially, the faces, undercutting the bold if kitschy drama of Prisbrey's cre-
ated world and raising the question of why the book wasn't illustrated with photo-
graphs throughout (a final double-page spread offers some photographic images
that more effectively convey the scope and genuine grandeur Prisbrey managed to
achieve). This has obvious uses for inspiring art projects as well as discussing
outsider or folk art; most importantly, it will demonstrate that the making of art is
available to anybody, a salutary lesson that can help counteract the sobering effects
of hushed museum halls. A brief final note gives more information about Tessa
Prisbrey and her Bottle Village. DS
SZPIRGLAS, JEFF 
Gross Universe: Your Guide to All Disgusting Things under the
Sun; illus. by Michael Cho. 
Maple Tree, 2004 
[6 4p]
Trade ed. ISBN 1-894379-64-0 
$21.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-894379-65-9 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-9
While sixty-four pages might not be enough to cover all disgusting things, nobody's
going to claim that there's an insufficiency of the revolting here: all the (un)popular
bodily emissions from sweat to spit to pee to poop are examined, as well as bits of
physiology that seem inoffensive to the naked eye but offer noisome possibilities
when looked at more closely; there are also discussions of various animal habits
that make the minutiae of daily human life seem sterile and dainty. Present as well
is a cornucopia of genuine, if weird, information, resulting in a book that under-
neath its brash and effluvia-philic nature demonstrates a real fascination with the
natural world. Each spread offers several compact tidbits of thoroughly unappe-
tizing yet nonetheless intriguing knowledge; though the inclusion of at least one
dubious factoid and the absence of notes suggest that enthusiasm may have out-
stripped rigorous standards of research, keen students can doubtless explore their
favorite icky details further. Szpirglas' relish in the repugnant and in his corny
jokes is companionable rather than condescending (alert readers may notice-and
particularly appreciate-his dedication of the book to his late appendix), making
the book, if not its subject matter, inviting. Though the personification and cari-
cature sometimes obscure the actual workings of a process or animal, the deliber-
ately cheesy reality-comic style illustrations harmonize perfectly with the text's
tone. The ebullient layouts, with their screaming headlines, are loud but cleverly
MAY 2004 
* 
393
balanced, keeping the putrid three-ring circus moving hectically but smoothly along.
Reluctant readers will flock to this like flies to pages 50 through 55. An index is
included. DS
TAYLOR, SEAN 
SmallBad Wolf illus. by Jan Lewis. 
Kingfisher, 2004 
4 8p 
(I
Am Reading)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7534-5801-2 
$3.95 
R 
Gr. 2-3
The Big Bad Wolf isn't much of a father. Even when Mother Wolf convinces him
to take Small Bad Wolf out hunting dinner, Big takes all the good jobs (stealing,
snatching, and grabbing) himself and gives Small the boring job of standing watch.
When Big dresses Small up as a caramel-apple-selling granny in order to lure some
soccer-playing children close enough to catch for supper, Small has had enough.
Since soccer looks like more fun than thieving and kidnapping, Small Bad Wolf
neutralizes his father with one well-placed nip, leaves him unconscious under a
park bench, hitches up his granny skirts, and joins the game. Watercolor and
pencil illustrations of the scraggly, yellow-eyed Wolf family and their intended
prey wind around six- to ten-line text chunks, adding humor and narrative impe-
tus to the text. The plot is clever, and there is plenty of comic repetition and
humorous turns of phrase, as well as the suspense of wondering just when and how
Big Bad is going to get his richly deserved comeuppance. Small Bad Wolf is a
satisfying hero who decides his own destiny; many children under stricter "no
biting" polices will read with relish-and a touch of envy. TC
WEIN, ELIZABETH E. 
The Sunbird. Viking, 2004 
[224p]
ISBN 0-670-03691-9 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
With a few quick strokes, Wein transports the reader back to the sixth-century
Aksumite Empire she previously animated in The Winter Prince and A Coalition
of Lions (BCCB 4/03). In this third book of her Arthurian/Aksumite cycle,
Telemakos, the grandson ofArtos, fallen High King of Britain, continues his habit
of hiding among adults and overhearing information not meant for his ears. Among
the things he hears is that plague has overtaken the trade routes, giving unscrupu-
lous men the opportunity to take advantage of the rising price of salt, the major
export of the Aksumite Empire. He tells his aunt, Goewin, who has remained in
Aksum as the British ambassador, and though she immediately petitions the em-
peror to quarantine the Empire, black-market salt, and with it plague, continues to
slip the borders. Goewin asks Telemakos to use his talents for invisibility to spy on
the traders; his involvement in the dangerous plan nearly results in his death, but
the outcome opens the difficult process of healing for his family. Wein is a master
at establishing atmospheric detail in both setting and attitude; her characters enact
codes of honor and dishonor that are not of this time and place, yet remain intel-
ligible to contemporary sensibilities. Telemakos is a reluctant hero in this densely
plotted but well-paced adventure; his motives are complex and at times contradic-
tory, at once mythically brave, charmingly childlike, and resonantly human. Wein's
continuing employment of a strong female heroine does not compromise authen-
ticity; Goewin makes difficult decisions among difficult circumstances and earns
respect among men who do not give it lightly, especially to women. Jacket text
refers to this book as part of an ongoing cycle; here's hoping that Wein returns us
to Aksum early and often. KC
394 
* THE BULLETIN
WHELAN, GLORIA 
ChuJu's House. HarperCollins, 2004 
[240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-050725-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-050724-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Since the Chinese government has declared it the "patriotic duty of a family... to
have no more than two children," everyone in Chu Ju's family hopes that her
pregnant mother will give birth to a boy. Chu Ju's domineering grandmother Nai
Nai makes no effort to hide her feelings, praying loudly, "Send us a boy to care for
us in our old age and not another worthless girl." Days later her mother gives birth
to a daughter. When the family, pressured by Nai Nai, decides to sell the infant
Hua to the orphanage so that they may try again to conceive a male child, Chu Ju
decides to protect her baby sister's fate, escaping late at night and leaving behind a
quickly penned note: "Honored Parents, Now you have only one daughter. A son
may yet come." This episodic adventure tale follows Chu Ju's escape, first on a
fishing boat, where a kind family takes her in and teaches her to mend nets and gut
fish, then to a silk factory, where she spends hours in a dark room tickling the
undersides of the silkworms so they will shed, and finally to the small rice paddy of
Han Na and her son, Quan. Ultimately remaining with Han Na so that she may
care for the woman and her land when Quan takes off for Shanghai, Chu Ju dis-
covers the essential meaning of home and learns that family can be defined in ways
deeper than bloodlines. This shares with the author's Homeless Bird (BCCB 5/00)
both the sensitive tone and the convincing depiction of an exceptional young woman
who makes her way in the world despite the odds. Chu Ju is a compelling charac-
ter, and a splash of cultural commentary and character development fill out the
adventure plot. This solid story of a girl unwanted because of her gender is certain
to find its way into the hands of readers, both old fans and new, interested in the
wider world. HM
WHYBROW, IAN 
The Noisy Way to Bed; illus. by Tiphanie Beeke. 
Levine/Scho-
lastic, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-439-55689-9 
$15.95 
R 2-4 yrs
As a young farm boy decides that it is time to make his way home to bed, he keeps
getting interrupted by animals who'd like to join him. In fact, what they interrupt
is his gentle rhyme scheme: "This little boy was oh so tired/ and this is what he
said:/ 'I think I'll go home past the pond,/ because this is the way to .. .'"'//
"Quack!" interjects the interrupting duck. The delightful little surprises that pre-
vent the boy from finishing his rhyme offer a unique spin on the bedtime-stalling
tactic-the boy is the one who wants to go to bed, and the animals are doing the
stalling. The boy prevails, of course, and ultimately gets to snuggle up in bed, with
his animals at his feet. As is the case in many bedtime books, the colors move from
warm to cool on the spectrum, starting with eye-popping yellow and ending with
soothing, iced-over blues and greens. Beeke lays down wet on wet to smudge the
colors in her backgrounds without blending them; the effect is a dreamy landscape
that, like the edges of sleep, blurs the lines between fantasy and reality. The rhythms
make the text gently interactive on a second or third (or umpteenth) read, and
they may even inspire the listener to add his or her own favorite animal compan-
ions to the nighttime litany. KC
MAY 2004 
* 395
WILD, MARGARET 
One Night. Knopf, 2004 
[240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92920-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82920-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Gabe's the gorgeous babe magnet, Bram's the cool manipulator who orchestrates
famous parties, and Al's the increasingly troubled long-term friend; Helen is the
girl swept up into one of the parties, a lost soul who gets past Gabe's defenses and
whom he therefore, after the party, rejects. It's not so simple for Helen, however,
who is left with a tangible reminder of Gabe in the form of her pregnancy. When
her parents refuse to support her plan to have the baby, she moves out and finds a
job and a room of her own in a boarding house, also discovering a supportive
makeshift family for her and baby Raphael in the house's residents and landlady.
An emergency leads Helen to leave Raphael with his father's family (the first Gabe
has heard of his son), and Gabe takes the baby to what turns out to be Bram's last
party, after a drunken Al makes a near-tragic mistake with the infant. The se-
quence of free-verse poems tell these stories and more, offering glimpses into the
secret lives of Helen's and Gabe's parents and Helen's housemates and mixing
third-person views of their lives with Helen's and Gabe's first-person observations.
The result is an Altmanesque mosaic of scenes, but they never quite form an effec-
tive pattern in their own right; the one-night conversion seems externally imposed,
and the poetry tends towards the prosy. It's often quite good prose, however, with
a taut compactness of expression and some dramatic vignettes. There's a warm
and hopeful growth in the shifts of the various characters towards greater under-
standing and connection; Helen's evolution, from the patched-together outsider
(she has undergone extensive plastic surgery for congenital disfiguration) to de-
voted mother and valued household member, is particularly touchingly documented.
If you're looking for readers' theater projects, the format and dramatic subject
make this a promising candidate, and reluctant readers may also appreciate the
compact intensity of the verse narrative. DS
WILLIAMS, MARCIA, ad. 
God and His Creations: Talesfrom the Old Testament; ad.
and illus. by Marcia Williams. 
Candlewick, 2004 
37p
ISBN 0-7636-2211-7 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 2-6
She's taken on Shakespeare (Talesfrom Shakespeare: Seven Plays, BCCB 11/98)
and King Arthur (KingArthur and the Knights ofthe Roundtable, 3/96), the denizens
of Sherwood Forest and Mount Olympus, and now Williams gives eleven Old
Testament stories her signature comic-strip-style treatment. A rotund, Santa-like
God presides over earthly affairs, the pockets of his hot pink robe bulging with bits
of creation or the odd punitive lightning bolt. Having launched creation (including
a rainbow of startled humans) in fifteen frames, He's on to His first disappointment
in the Garden of Eden, sending His errant man and woman packing in some natty
animal furs, while a zaftig angel in beaded braids holds a "No Re-entry" sign.
Noah's exploits get a full four pages, with one whole spread devoted to forty postage-
stamp-sized frames decrying the monotony of an all-hay diet. It's on to Abraham
and Isaac (Sarah insists she's not moving again, whatever the Divinity says), Joseph,
Moses, the Battle ofJericho, Samson, David and Goliath, Daniel, and Jonah, finally
leaving God in a good mood-at least temporarily-and "happy with His creations."
Although there's plenty of visual humor and wry commentary among the players,
396 
* THE BULLETIN
Williams never meanders into outright silliness, and it would be a grim Sunday
School indeed that would tsk-tsk her lively condensations. Richly detailed line-
and-watercolor spreads offer fresh treats over multiple inspections, and even kids
who think they've outgrown cartoon Bible stories will find themselves pleasantly
engrossed. EB
WILLIS, JEANNE 
Naked without a Hat. Delacorte, 2004 
[2 2 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90206-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73166-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Eighteen-year-old Will finally feels his life is coming together now that he's found
a place of his own (so he doesn't have to deal with his mother's strictures and
annoying new boyfriend); he even likes his landlady, the motherly Chrissy, and his
strange housemates, compulsive, sensitive Rocko and constantly needling James.
Things get even better when he meets Zara, the youngest daughter of a gypsy
family staying in the park where Will is working; what starts as a casual flirtation
(Zara thinks he's "lovely-looking") progresses to a growing bond between the two
young outsiders who'd never thought they'd be truly loved and appreciated. Will
thinks Zara's fears about a relationship between gypsy and non-gypsy are unfounded,
but he's terribly afraid that she will discover his lifelong secret, which his mother
has made him swear never to divulge. Will's secret, revealed to readers only as it's
revealed to his friends, is that he has Down syndrome (he's undergone cosmetic
surgeries to minimize the effects on his appearance), and Willis does a skillful job
of making Will, and not the label, the point of her story. Will's narration is straight-
forward and unassuming, and it's only gradually, mainly from his own awareness
of his limitations, that readers realize that his viewpoint is curbed intellectually
and not just narratively (it's only toward the end that he, and readers, learn he's
been living in sheltered housing). This allows his romance with Zara to develop
credibly as a relationship that benefits them both despite its pitfalls, and it fore-
grounds his bitterness about his mother's resistance to his maturation, since it's
clear that that maturation is proceeding (reasonably well, in fact) whether she likes
it or not. This touches on a number of compelling issues, but it's also a story of
burgeoning independence with which many teens will identify. DS
WISE, WILLIAM 
Christopher Mouse: The Tale ofa Small Traveler; illus. by Patrick
Benson. 
Bloomsbury, 2004 
[152p]
ISBN 1-58234-878-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Young mouse Christopher learns early from his mother the hard truth that he and
his siblings are destined for pet shops or medical laboratories. Mother is right:
Christopher's three brothers go to a lab, while Christopher and his sister Anna are
bought by a pet store. After Anna is sold, Christopher struggles on alone, going
from good owner to bad owner to freedom (and near death) to a new family of
good owners. When these last owners talk of getting another mouse to keep him
company, he realizes that the planned new arrival could be his sister Anna, since
the mouse under consideration was returned to the store by its former owner. Past
adversities teach him not to hope, but he can't help wondering-and neither can
the reader, since Christopher's journal ends there. The short chapters of this tale
are filled with perceptive observations of the vagaries of human owners, which
MAY 2004 
* 
397
combine with a slightly old-fashioned first-person (well, first-mouse) narration to
recall Black Beauty; the adventures on the other hand, have an understandable
kinship with Stuart Little, and Christopher's taste for creation of verse adds hu-
morous perspective. This is darker than your basic King-Smith animal romp,
since the sun shines but occasionally on poor Christopher, but it could be a satis-
fying precursor to the mouse adventures of Margery Sharp or even Robert O'Brien.
For readers ready for a more critical view of the world-and our treatment of the
creatures in it-this novel is a good place to start. Benson's highly textured, hatch-
ing-dense drawings enhance the slightly period flavor; while the humans are some-
times awkwardly depicted, Christopher and his brethren are engagingly and
authentically portrayed. TC
WOLKSTEIN, DIANE, ad. 
Sun Mother Wakes the World. An Australian Creation
Story; illus. by Bronwyn Bancroft. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13916-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13915-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
In this creation myth from the indigenous people of Australia, Sun Mother is
called to wakefulness by a loving voice that tells her to "wake the sleeping earth."
This she does by walking: "Sun Mother began to travel. With each step she took,
grass, plants, and trees sprouted in her footprints." When her work is complete,
Sun Mother returns to the sky, coming back to earth each day to light the daytime
hours. Memories, even among the animal folk, are short: "As time passed, the
animals forgot the joy they had felt when they first received the gift of life. They
looked at each other, and they wanted what they did not have." Their cries of
discontent reach Sun Mother, who returns to shape them into their chosen, per-
manent forms. She gives birth to Moon and Morning Star, who in turn give birth
to twins, the first man and the first woman. Sun Mother exhorts the first man and
first woman to "care for the land for the sake of your grandparents as well as for
your children and grandchildren," telling them that they must "walk the land to
keep it alive." Wolkstein's lyrical adaptation has a stately but gentle pace suited to
Sun Mother's gentle cajoling of creation. The text is illumined by Bancroft's pic-
tographic art, wherein stamp-like motifs enliven the geometric shapes of the earth's
emerging life forms. Swirls of wave and cloud, circles of fish, and the flame-like
verticals of trees keep the compositions in constant motion. Swaths of opaque
blue and green are brightened by the glowing yellow of Sun Mother herself.
Wolkstein opens with a page providing cultural context and concludes with an
extensive source note on the origin of the tale. JMD
WOODS, NOAH 
Tom Cat; written and illus. by Noah Woods. 
Random House,
2004 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92497-3 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82497-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Tom Cat thinks he could be a bird, a bat, a pig, or an elephant, so he tries building
nests, hanging upside down, wallowing in mud, and running from mice. His
parents, who love him "no matter who you are," gently insist that he truly is a cat,
but Tom Cat won't believe them until the day he discovers meowing-and likes
it. "How about a 'moo' or a 'cock-a-doodle-doo'?" asks a mouse. "I just can't do
398 
* 
THE BULLETIN
it," Tom Cat replies. "I... am a cat!" Tom Cat's story is told in brief text-bites
that beg for action-packed illustrations to fill in the blanks. Unfortunately for
Tom Cat, the illustrations, in which graphic design predominates over narrative
impact, don't provide the required power. Animated circles in neo-cartoon tradi-
tion are spattered throughout the pages, Tom Cat and his parents depicted among
them in flatly geometric bodies of their own. The black-gray-magenta palette adds
contrast against the sweep of the white pages but also fails to provide Tom et al.
with any emotional zing. Tom Cat's partial transmogrification into a tiger and
then a goose peps up one page, and more of those witty visualizations of Tom
Cat's imaginative genius would have lifted this book above the level of the ordi-
nary. However, if the children clamor for identity-questioning books like Feiffer's
Bark, George! (BCCB 11/99), this is an admissible option. TC
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
Behind You. 
Putnam, 2004 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-399-23988-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Woodson seeks closure for those characters devastated by the death of fifteen-year-
old Jeremiah (known as Miah) Roselind in this sequel to If You Come Softly (BCCB
10/98). The aftermath of African-American Miah's death (he was shot by New
York City policemen who mistook him for a robbery suspect) is seen through the
eyes of those he left behind: his white girlfriend, Ellie; his mother, Nelia; his
father, Norman; his teammate, Kennedy; and his best friend, Carlton. Stories also
come from those who have gone beyond: Miah, who looks on while his family
and friends grieve; and Miah's grandmother, Desire, who rocks on some celestial
porch waiting for her grandson to realize he must move on. The book is divided
into three sections: the Ending, in which Jeremiah tells of his own death; the
Hurting, in which those who loved Miah try to cope with his senseless killing; and
the Healing, in which grief gives way to the very tentative beginnings of hope.
Woodson plays the language of feeling with an often stunning virtuosity; her crys-
talline vision makes each voice herein resonate with its own particular emotional
tone. The arc of the movement from pain to acceptance is choppily drawn, how-
ever; the number of voices overwhelms the premise, and the result is less than
cohesive and not always satisfying. Still, there are moments of real beauty in this
melancholy yet ultimately life-affirming examination of grief, and those haunted
by the sadness of Miah's death will find some comfort here. JMD
ZEISES, LARA M. 
Contents under Pressure. Delacorte, 2004 
[25 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90162-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73047-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-9
Lucy and her best friend, Allison, contemplate the fourteen-year-old-and-never-
been-groped blues as their friends are beginning to see some action. When even
Allison gets a date for homecoming, Lucy feels as if she'll never catch up. Sud-
denly, though, things begin to happen. First, her beloved older brother, Jack,
comes home from college with his live-in girlfriend, Hannah, who moves into
Lucy's room. Then she attracts the attention of a very cute junior named Tobin.
Soon she's getting lessons on love, sex, loyalty, and friendship from all quarters, as
she discovers that Hannah is pregnant and Jack is being a jerk about it, her friend
Tabitha has had sex with her boyfriend but is still interested in other guys, and
MAY 2004 
* 399
Lucy needs to learn how to set boundaries with Tobin before she finds herself in a
compromising position. Zeises does an exemplary job of capturing the many faces
and moods of fourteen, from naive Allison and Lucy, to worldly Tabitha, to the
snotty we've-got-older-boyfriends-and-don't-have-time-for-you-anymore girls.
Lucy is especially effective as a character in transition; she has a hard time manag-
ing her first kiss because of a fat lip she got in a fistfight with her younger brother,
and an even harder time negotiating girlfriends when boyfriends get in the way.
Mostly, she has to learn the hard way the differences between boys and girls when
it comes to the responsibility for sex and parenting, what questions to ask, and
whose side she's ultimately on. While not nearly as intense as the issues that haunt
the author's Bringing Up the Bones (BCCB 1/03), the questions posed here about
the challenge to heart-held ideals and the shifting alliances of adolescence are as
compellingly handled for a slightly younger audience. Refreshingly forthright and
not overly sophisticated, Lucy is a likable guide to the messy entanglements of the
early teen years. KC
In our April 2004 issue, we incorrectly stated that Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet,
adapted by Michael Rosen, contained no page numbers; page numbers are in fact
included. The Bulletin regrets the error.
400 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
MATTHEW, KATHRYN I. 
Neal-Schuman Guide to Celebrations and Holidays around
the World: The Best Books, Media, and Multicultural LearningActivities; by Kathryn
I. Matthew and Joy L. Lowe. 
Neal-Schuman, 2004 
452p
Papered. ISBN 1-55570-479-4 
$65.00
This reference work offers three ways to access materials for young people about
celebrations and holidays: a quick guide to holidays, a guide to titles useful in
social studies curricula, and an extended and annotated guide to holiday and cel-
ebration materials arranged by season (autumn, winter, spring, summer). The
third section, which constitutes the bulk of the book, is by far the most useful,
containing annotated lists of recommended books, videos, and CD-ROMs with
appropriate audience ages, spanning from grades K through 8. In addition to
these lists, brief descriptions of holidays are included for quick reference along
with suggested "explorations," which offer activities to augment the students' reading
or listening experiences. The quick guide and the social studies guide both lack
annotations and age-level information, requiring readers to use one or more of the
several indices (author, illustrator, title, subject) in order to locate the resources
listed in those sections. Although the breadth of information contained in this
volume is likely more than any individual teacher would need, school and public
librarians will want to consider purchasing this extensive guide to resources for
study and celebration of world holidays. KM
MAY 2004 
* 401
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abandonment-fiction: Fusco
Abuse-fiction: Jones; McCord
ADVENTURE: Bray; Bujor;
Hobbs; Pratchett; Wein; Whelan
African Americans: Myers
African Americans-fiction:
Woodson
AIDS-fiction: Minchin
Animals: Jenkins
Animals-fiction: Graham; Hornik;
Karr
Animals-poetry: Pearson; Root
Animals-stories: Bedford;
Downard; Laguna; Whybrow
ANTHOLOGIES: Fraustino;
Pierce
Art: Downard; Leedy; Slaymaker
Art and artists: Slaymaker
ARTHURIAN LEGEND: Wein
Aunts-fiction: Fusco
Aunts-stories: Glenn; Pearson
Australia-folklore: Wolkstein
Babies-stories: Rosen
Ballet-stories: Geras
BEDTIME BOOKS: Whybrow
BIBLE STORIES: Williams
BIOGRAPHIES: MacLeod; Myers
Biology: Jenkins; Romanek;
Szpirglas
Birds-fiction: Cronin
Books and reading: Leedy
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Avi;
Peters
Bullies-stories: Pearson
Careers: Lawrence
Cats-stories: Woods
Chickens-stories: Downard
China-fiction: Whelan
Civil rights movement: Myers
Codes: Janeczko
Cold War-fiction: Almond
Cousins-fiction: Minchin
Creation-stories: Wolkstein
Current events: Mikaelsen
Dancers and dancing-stories: Geras
Dating-fiction: Bennett; Zeises
Death and dying-fiction: Woodson
Disabilities: MacLeod; Patent
Disabilities-fiction: Fusco; Willis
Disabilities-stories: Glenn
Dogs: Patent
Dogs-stories: Rosen
Dolls-stories: Cutler
Drama-stories: Laguna
Ecology: Baker
Ethics and values: Almond;
Bennett; Jones; Kositsky;
Mikaelsen; Mills; Olsen; Zeises
Fairs: Jackson
Faith-fiction: Mills
Family-fiction: Whelan
FANTASY: Augarde; Bass; Bray;
Bujor; Kaaberbol; Kessler; Kurtz;
McNaughton; Meacham; Pierce;
Pratchett
Fathers-fiction: Taylor
Fathers-stories: Feiffer
Fear-stories: Pearson
Films and filmmaking: De Angelis;
Lawrence
Flags-fiction: Bartoletti
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Downard; Hoberman;
McNaughton; Wolkstein
Friends-fiction: Zeises
Friends-stories: Bedford
Gender roles-fiction: Peters
Gifts-stories: Cutler
402 
* THE BULLETIN
Government: Cronin
Grandmothers-stories: Segal
Growing up-fiction: Zeises
Health: Fraustino; Minchin
HISTORICAL FICTION: Almond;
Bray; Karr; Kositsky; Pietri
History, classical: Blacklock
History, U.S.: Bartoletti; Jackson;
Myers; Sandier
History, world: Borden
Home-fiction: Baker
Houses-stories: Rosenthal
HUMOR: Avi; Cronin; Graham;
Helquist; Meacham; Pearson;
Pratchett; Rosen; Szpirglas
Identity-fiction: Peters
Identity-stories: Woods
Illness-fiction: Minchin
Immigration: Sandler
Inventors and inventing: De Angelis
Jews-fiction: Kositsky
Kidnapping-fiction: Kurtz
Knights and chivalry: Wein
Language arts: Janeczko
Latinos-fiction: Mikaelsen
LOVE STORIES: Willis
Magic-fiction: Bujor
Menstruation-fiction: Fraustino
Mental illness-fiction: McCord
Mermaids-fiction: Kessler
Mice-stories: Archambault; Pearson;
Wise
Mothers-fiction: Fusco; Kaaberbol;
McCord
MYSTERIES: Kaaberbol
Mythology, classical: Hovey
Native Americans-fiction: Olsen
Nature study: Jenkins; Root
Nobility-fiction: Pietri
Noise-stories: Laguna
Parents-fiction: Meacham
Parties-stories: Cutler
Perfumes-fiction: Pietri
Pirates-stories: Helquist
POETRY: Hovey; Pearson;
Rosenthal
Princes-fiction: Bass
Prophecies-fiction: Kurtz
Readers' theater: Hovey; Wild
Reading aloud: Graham; Hornik;
Hovey; Mills; Pearson
Reading, easy: Figley; Graham;
Hoberman; Hornik; Mills; Segal;
Taylor; Wise
Reading, family: Hoberman; Segal
Reading, reluctant: Jenkins;
Szpirglas; Wild; Williams
Religious instruction: Mills;
Williams; Wolkstein
RHYMING STORIES:
Archambault; Whybrow
Romance-fiction: Bray; Jones
Royalty-fiction: Bass
School-fiction: Bray; Meacham
Science: Borden; Romanek;
Szpirglas
Scotland-fiction: McNaughton
Ships and sailing: Borden
Ships and sailing-fiction: Hobbs
SHORT STORIES: Fraustino;
Pierce; Segal
Sisters-fiction: McCord
Smell-fiction: Pietri
Snow-fiction: Figley
Social studies: Mikaelsen
South, the-fiction: Bennett
Spies and spying: Janeczko
Storytime: Archambault; Bedford;
Downard; Feiffer; Laguna; Root;
Rosenthal; Wolkstein
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Augarde; Kaaberbol
Teen pregnancy-fiction: Olsen;
Wild
Toddler books: Feiffer; Whybrow
Transsexuals-fiction: Peters
Twins-fiction: Avi
Urban life-fiction: Baker
Voyages and travel: Borden
Voyages and travel-fiction: Hobbs
War: Blacklock
War-fiction: Almond; Mikaelsen
Weather-fiction: Figley
West, the-fiction: Karr
Witches-fiction: Pratchett
Wolves-fiction: Taylor
Women's studies: Fraustino;
MacLeod; Whelan
World War II-fiction: Kositsky
Writers and writing: Lawrence;
Leedy
Congratulations, Pigeon,
0o wint1n1g a
2004 Caldecott Honor
r e,
aiy
el'^
Look for tie equally
fabulous follow-up,
available May 2004
HYPERION
BOOKS FOR CHILDREN
www.hyperionbooksforchildren.com
ol 
r't
Meet Matt the Rat!
A bilinqual series for pre-school through grade 4
Meet Matt the Rat
and be swept
away with his
adventures told
in English
cand 
Spanish.
For orders and inauiries:
TaItle 
Matt the Rat and His Sister 
Maqi: Wten 
.
Grow Up
Raton Mateo y Su Hermana 
Maqgie: Cuando 
Yo Crea
Author. Lorenzo 
Libeto Illustrator: 
Irving Torter
Library 
Reinforced 
H BindingFul Color 
Aqes48,40 p
jan,2004 ISBN: 
0 943668 1- prie:e20.00
Ims 
S 
~i 
*lU*, 
IP•Tl 
t
Harvest Sun Press* PO Box 826 * Fairacres, NM 88033
Phone:479-2834000 * Fax: 505-526-6930
Website: www.harvestsunpress.com * E-mail: info@harvestsunpress.com
OHarvest Sun
PRESS
Lincoln Park Zoo:
-is one of last remaining 'free' zoos
-began with swans bought to beautify the park
-is, at 135 years, the second oldest zoo in the
U.S (only the Central Park Zoo is older)
Illustrated. Cloth, $49.95; Paper, $24.95
With a foreword by Jack Hanna, this book
combines photographs, oral histories and
other resources to chronicle Lincoln Park
Zoo's development and chart the unique role
it continues to play in the growth of Chicago
and in the establishment of zoos and preser-
vation activities in cities across America.
Read about Mike the polar bear and how
he ripped off a man's (already artifical) arm.
Other stories introduce Rocky the parachut-
ing bear; Bushman, a lowland gorilla with
an outgoing personality; and Princess
Spearmint, a Nile hippopatamus donated by
William Wrigley, Jr.
Available at booksellers, call 800-537-5487,
or visit www. press. uillinois.edu
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS PRESS
F_ 
A 
ailalefrm 
th
STORY: FROM FlEPIACE TO CYESPACE
Connecting Children and Narrative
EDITED BY BETSY HEARNE, JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINE JENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget that
children are not simply passive receptacles for whatever
treasure or trash the adult world throws at them but are
lively agents who are continually interacting with their
environment. Children actively create meaning as read-
ers, viewers, and listeners. The 39"' Allerton Park Insti-
tute papers emphasize the critical need to connect chil-
dren and narrative as a way to affect their development
LBi5N iU-/t•'-1tO-O; 
as listeners, readers, viewers, and evaluators of litera-
Number 39; 143 pages; 
ture-and information in all forms.
paper; $21.95*
The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DFI NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSO
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin StorytellingReview contains:
* 162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
SPrice ristrihunr ajnd ryrrade level information for
each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use 
ISBN 0-87845-106-4; 99 pages;
paper; $14.95*
SCmld 1dl'St: S 
I' 
,-.lcaici 
". 
f-- ,icW xi-_-.- 501. 
"1inu t e t 
hi 13ig 
1
012.Pelf etItt( 
Lit :Vsýiýlse 1 t( ii ký c t _p(ss ic 
ra 
dchc
to [~lie nieliy l li oi)ýIcptd
Universi
1325 Sol
Champa
U.S.A.
ADDRESS
I~dFPI~
0008-9036(200405)57:9; 1 -Z
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODIC
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820 
PSTAGE
U.S.A. 
A
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
r·ra·;
~a
~
GNIL
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2003 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccb/
2. 
When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and pass-
word. This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit
number but may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
0008-9036(200·ct05)57:9;1-f
ss 
,i
I-- 
·, 
;e~.a 
-; ~a~"~ 
I 
a"~"
-- 
·r:
-~11;
.~P" 
il:-
