T H E
B U L L E T I N
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
April 2012
Vol. 65   No. 8
 
T
he Bulletin of the Center for 
Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and 
critical evaluations of current children’s 
books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding 
the ever-evolving children’s literature field. 
Reviews give an in-depth look at a selected book’s content, reading 
level, strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, as well as 
suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August).  
To order: 
Volume 65 (2012). 
Call: 800-548-1784 or 410-516-6987
$55.00, individuals (print), $58.00 (online) 
Fax: 410-516-3866 
$95.00, institutions (print), $100.00 (online)  Email: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu 
$133.00, institutions (print & online) 
Online: www.press.jhu.edu/journals
ISSN 0008-9036 / E-ISSN 1558-6766
Published by  
T h e JOhns hOpkins UnivErsiTy prEss
The BulleTin of The CenTer  
for Children’s Books: 
essenTial.
Deborah stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
April 2012
Vol. 65 No. 8
387  the BIg PICture
 
  Z Is for Moose by Kelly Bingham; illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky
388  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
406 •  Grave Mercy by Robin LaFevers
408 •  The Fairy Ring, or Elsie and Frances Fool the World by Mary Losure
411 •  Caddy’s World by Hilary McKay
412 •  Best Shot in the West: The Adventures of Nat Love written by Patricia C. 
McKissack and Fredrick L. McKissack, Jr.; illus. by Randy DuBurke
425 •  The Boy on Cinnamon Street by Phoebe Stone
433  Children’s Book AwArds 2012
437  suBjeCt And use index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Claire Gross, Reviewer (CG)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $93.00; combined print & electronic $130.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $16.50 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $11.99. Single copy rate: $10.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2012 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Z Is for Moose ©2012 by Paul O. Zelinsky and used by permission of Greenwil-
low/HarperCollins.
April 2012 • 387
the BIg PICture
Z Is for Moose 
by Kelly Bingham; illustrated by Paul O. Zelinsky
A simple “A is for Apple” abecedary should be easy to achieve, right? Not in this case. 
Clipboard-bearing Zebra is in charge of getting the players on and off the 
stage in an item-by-item alphabetical pageant, and initially it goes as planned—
Apple marches up the stairs on its little green legs (retracted once in position, of 
course), and poses obediently for the “A” tableau as Zebra peeks around the corner 
to make sure it all goes smoothly. Which, soon enough, it doesn’t—the excited 
Moose gormlessly pops onto the stage for D, leaving the distressed Duck flutter-
ing in frustration and the stage-managing Zebra exasperated. The too-eager moose 
slinks off past the Elephant but comes bouncing back quickly, poking his head into 
the frame in H in hopes that it’s his turn, peeking out from behind the Ice Cream, 
prancing across the label on the Jar, and hiding in the pouch of the Kangaroo as 
he gets ready for his big moment—which is stolen by the Mouse. Moose then 
tantrums through the rest of the book, tossing O, P, and Q (Owl, Pie, and Queen) 
head over heels, defacing other subjects with crayoned-on antlers and claiming with 
petulant absurdity that R and S are also for Moose. Zebra fends him off for a few 
more letters, plastering himself across the Truck and Umbrella to keep Moose from 
invading, until finally he relents and allows Moose an appearance when there’s only 
one more letter left: “Z is for Zebra’s friend, Moose.” 
Disrupted expectations are a particularly satisfying source of humor in 
books for young people, because that technique is deliciously inclusive, winking at 
audiences for being in the know as they get the joke. This is a particularly amusing 
example of the device: the underlying alphabet book is blandly modest, with big-
print text, bare staging, and solid-color frames; it will be immediately recognized by 
young audiences, and it’s ripe for parody. Obstreperous Moose is part Mo Willems’ 
desperate Pigeon and part Mélanie Watts’ invasive cat Chester, and he will win 
kids’ hearts with his yearning for inclusion. The art carries the story right from the 
first endpaper, where Moose hoists the bottom of the magenta curtain drawn over 
the scene, peering out at the audience and revealing the alphabetical cast waiting 
patiently in line for their cues. Zelinsky expertly presents the comic theatrics in 
friendly, guileless watercolors touched with black pencil and backed with digital 
planes of color. The illustrations cleverly provide viewers with a multiple perspec-
tives; kids will understand what genre the book is theoretically attempting, they’ll 
be amused by the behind-the-scenes “rehearsal” elements of the production (Ball’s 
teddy bear waits for him by the edge of the B tableau, biped Cat nips out of her 
tank top and shorts to pose, purring, on all fours), and they’ll revel in the disaster 
as chaos overtakes the production. 
388 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
Yet unlike many comic alphabet-based texts, this actually remains useful 
for its original purpose; viewers can enjoy the thrill of the hunt as they figure out 
which alphabetical elements Moose is obscuring or upending and match the line 
of characters waiting offstage to their relevant letters. Enterprising classrooms may 
even want to stage their own version of this, and everybody will be elated by this 
goofy new way of going from A to Z. (See p. 390, for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
AlexAnder, williAm Goblin Secrets. McElderry, 2012 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2726-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2728-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-7
A tempestuous river divides the city of Zombay into two parts: the wealthy, aristo-
cratic Northside, run by the Mayor and his gearworked Guard, and the Southside, 
whose impoverished residents are under the control of Graba, a powerful, cruel 
witch who takes in orphans to be her servants. Rownie and his older brother, 
Rowan, have been her charges since their parents were taken by the River, but 
Rowan has recently gone missing after performing in an illegal play. Rownie runs 
away to join a goblin theater troupe in the hopes that the actors might have a clue 
to Rowan’s whereabouts, and he learns that Rowan was to play an essential part in 
a ritual meant to save the town from an impending flood—so his disappearance 
means certain doom for the citizens of Zombay. The appeal here lies in Alexander’s 
careful construction of a distinctive world: touches of steampunk can be found in 
Graba’s geared-up legs and the Mayor’s automaton guards while a more ancient, 
primal magic seems to guide the goblins and their powerful brand of storytelling. 
The plot, however, sputters at points, with action scenes often limping to unevent-
ful conclusions and the River’s villainy never quite crystallized beyond a vague 
threat. Rownie is a sweet kid, however, and although he is a lifelong resident of 
Zombay, his innocence and bewilderment at the seedier sides of his town provide 
a nice access point for younger readers. Rowan’s savage ultimate fate may be a bit 
of a shock, but the bittersweet ending remains true to the story’s overall dreamy, 
melancholic tone. KQG
April 2012 • 389
Anthony, jessiCA Chopsticks; illus. with photographs by Rodrigo Corral. Ra-
zorbill, 2012 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-435-5 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
If a picture is worth a thousand words, this venture in visual storytelling contains 
volumes worth of detail. Photographs (some featuring posed actors), news clippings, 
screen shots, character-drawn sketches, and artfully arranged everyday artifacts 
(tickets, concert bills, backpack contents), aided by occasional superimposed lines 
of dialogue, present a love story between Glory, a piano prodigy whose mother died 
nine years ago, and Francisco, an artistic, lonely Argentinian immigrant who chafes 
at the condescension he encounters at his new school. Their romance is told as an 
extended flashback, framed by urgent news reports of Glory’s disappearance eigh-
teen months after the two met. As Glory’s fragile mental state becomes increasingly 
clear, however, it throws the very nature of the story into question, and a clever, 
intricate buildup of visual clues (including a neat overarching musical metaphor 
related to Glory’s repeated playing of “Chopsticks” in concert as a symptom of her 
breakdown) suggest that Francisco may not exist at all. The layout is dynamically 
composed, making the most of a single image per page; photos are saturated with 
color and light, and print excerpts set against backgrounds of varying textures and 
colors sustain visual interest. Each page conveys not just information but emotion; 
romantic scenes are warmly luminous and suffused with hope, while dark or lonely 
moments are shadowy or overexposed. Narrative clues are scattered throughout, but 
only the most observant readers will catch their implication on the first readthrough. 
For those willing to pore over each page and weigh each detail, though, this ambi-
tious, beautiful work satisfies both intellectually and emotionally. CG
BACkderf, derf My Friend Dahmer;  written and illus. by Derf Back-
derf. Abrams Comic Arts/Abrams, 2012 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-0216-7 $24.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-0217-4 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 10 up
This exploration of notorious serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer by his high-school 
classmate and sometimes friend is filled with the author’s horror, confusion, and 
anger—still fresh and powerful despite the intervening years. In this graphic novel, 
Backderf interweaves his memories of Dahmer with additional information gleaned 
from news reports, public interviews, and the memories of other classmates and 
community members. The book traces Dahmer’s progression from experimenting 
with roadkill to carving up small animals and ends with his first human victim 
just post–high school. The voice of the narrator suffuses the story, drawing the 
reader into his struggle to make sense of what he sees as a preventable tragedy, 
complete with clearly missed moments of potential intervention. Emphasizing 
that Dahmer should be an object of pity but not empathy, Backderf constructs a 
monstrous figure aware at some level of his own monstrosity, fighting it, and fail-
ing. The black-and-white line drawings have a hint of R. Crumb’s weirdness but 
offer a more clean and vaguely geometric style; they effectively convey the surreal, 
sinister atmosphere, playing with perspective and squaring human figures in a way 
that makes every scene look slightly grotesque. There’s definitely some speculation 
involved in the author’s interpretation of Dahmer’s thoughts and feelings, but it’s 
390 • The BulleTin
rooted in solid research. This is an emphatic indictment of the many adults who 
failed to act on the signs, a powerful warning to teens against dismissing their 
classmates’ pathologies (Dahmer was an obvious binge-drinker for much of high 
school, for instance), and a haunting remembrance. Substantial end matter includes 
extensive chapter-by-chapter source notes, a summary of and personal reflections 
on the events following the book’s end, where-are-they-now vignettes, and a brief 
illustrated epilogue. CG
BinghAm, kelly Z Is for Moose; illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky. Greenwillow, 
2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-079984-7 $16.99  
R* 3-7 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 387, for review.
BlAde, AdAm The Chronicles of Avantia: First Hero. Scholastic, 2012 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-545-36160-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Eight years ago, Tanner was forced to witness the brutal murder of his father at the 
hands of the evil Lord Derthsin. Now violence has come again to Tanner’s small 
village: an invading army looking for the Mask of Death—a powerful artifact that 
allows the wearer control over all of Avantia’s magical Beasts—sweeps through 
town, setting it ablaze and killing Tanner’s grandmother. Before she dies, the old 
woman charges Tanner with the task of finding the Mask himself and avenging 
his father’s death. Even with the help of his Beast, Firepos the phoenix, Tanner 
finds himself outmatched and obviously outnumbered by Derthsin’s forces until 
help comes in the form of another Beast rider and her mapmaker twin brother. 
This slim series starter is a good choice for youngsters fascinated by the struggle 
of good versus evil in the Lord of the Rings movies but not quite ready to take 
on Tolkien’s voluminous text. The premise has a classic quest feel to it, while the 
limited number of characters, all clearly designated as heroes or villains, will ap-
peal to readers just getting into more epic fantasy stories. Battle scenes make up a 
large part of the story, however, and the violence is at times unnecessarily vivid and 
somewhat repetitive. Fans of the popular series Beast Quest will recognize Blade’s 
Avantia from there, but knowledge of the other books is not at all a prerequisite 
for joining Tanner’s journey. KQG
Buzzeo, toni Stay Close to Mama; illus. by Mike Wohnoutka. Disney Hyper-
ion, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-1-4231-3482-4 $15.99  
Ad 4-7 yrs
Twiga, a curious baby giraffe, smells something delicious in the air and, despite 
his mother’s gentle reminders to stay with her (“No, little Twiga. Stay close, stay 
safe”), he sets off across the African savannah in search of the smell. Unbeknownst 
to Twiga, his mama is following close behind, and she continues to follow him all 
the way to the sweet-smelling sausage tree. Along the way Twiga encounters some 
challenges (stinging ants, a fall in the river) and passes through some potentially 
dangerous situations completely unaware (a hyena hides behind a termite mound, 
a leopard lies waiting in the sausage tree), but in the end he returns safely to his 
mother’s side, where she warmly welcomes him. Twiga’s inquisitiveness will be 
April 2012 • 391
appealing to the younger set, and parents will readily recognize the unconditional 
love and protection that his mother offers to him. The point here is confusing, 
though, since there’s much emphasis on his mother’s instruction, but his refusal 
to heed it (and the danger he thus incurs) never becomes significant to the plot. 
The illustrations are a little saccharine and the colors at times border on the gar-
ish, but audiences will warm to Twiga’s wobbly-legged cuteness and sweet smile. 
Stein’s Pouch! is a more dynamic take on a similar topic, but audiences who just 
want a chance to coo over baby animals will appreciate Twiga’s adorableness. An 
note offers more information about giraffes. HM
CAtChpool, miChAel The Cloud Spinner; illus. by Alison Jay. Knopf, 
2012 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97011-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87011-8 $16.99  
R 6-9 yrs
A young boy spins clouds into thread—golden thread from morning clouds, white 
from afternoon, and crimson from evening—then weaves the thread into cloth. 
When the king sees the beautiful cloth, he requests a scarf from the boy, then goes 
on to demand more and more clothing made from this special fabric. The boy re-
sists, but the king insists, clearly not understanding the message that the boy sings 
as he works: “Enough is enough and not one stitch more.” Fortunately, the king’s 
daughter has been paying attention, and when the king’s greedy consumption of 
the fabric results in the disappearance of all the clouds and consequently the much-
needed rain, she brings the clothes back to the spinner so that they can be reverted to 
clouds. Kids may not see the connection to current environmental and social issues 
without adult guidance, but they will likely respond well to the folkloric structure 
of the tale and to the youth of the hero and heroine. Piquant turns of phrase (the 
cloth is “a twist and twirl of gold and white and crimson, soft as a mouse’s touch 
and warm as roasted chestnuts”) add flavor to the story. Jay’s slightly surreal alkyd 
paint and crackle varnish illustrations, infused with subtle golden light and varied 
in composition and layout, lend additional whimsy to the text. JH
ChAd, jon Leo Geo: And His Miraculous Journey Through the Center of the Earth; 
written and illus. by Jon Chad. Roaring Brook, 2012 
ISBN 978-1-59643-661-9 $15.99  
R Gr. 3-6
Waving from the open hatch of a drill capsule boring into the Earth’s crust, the 
roughly humanoid figure of Leo Geo invites readers to flip the cover of this 13x4½” 
book, hold it (awkwardly) perpendicular to the floor, read the double-page spreads 
vertically, and join him as he bids his worried sister good-bye and heads straight 
down. As Leo Geo descends the tunnel via ropes, ladders, tram car, and drill 
capsule, he spouts observations in speech bubbles: “The mantle! The mantle is 
comprised of both liquid and solid rock at temperatures ranging between 700ºF 
and 8,000ºF! Onward!” Just when readers settle in to Leo Geo’s adventure as a 
quirky lesson in geology, Chad jolts them abruptly into the realm of sci-fi (“Danc-
ing Darwins! What in the world is that creature?”). Evidently there’s more to fear 
near the Earth’s core than heat, as a monster eats, digests, and expels Leo Geo and 
sends him plunging ever deeper past mortal perils, until it’s time to flip the book 
and watch him evade more monsters as he clambers back “up” to the other side 
of the world. Neither evil mantle-dwelling creatures nor fussy Rube Goldbergian 
392 • The BulleTin
devices keep the intrepid Leo Geo from completing his mission; nor can these ob-
stacles silence his motor-mouthed science lessons (“Coal, oil, and gas are all fossil 
fuels! In fact, 86% of the fuel consumed in the world is fossil fuel”). This blend of 
genre-busting text and richly detailed black-line cartoons, smarty-pants scientific 
rambling and bizarre adventure, will appeal to kids who wear their nerdiness as a 
badge of honor. Technical Sevices may regard the oddball trim size with horror, 
but Leo Geo will ultimately prevail. EB
CroCkett, s. d. After the Snow. Feiwel, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-312-64169-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Willo’s father can still remember what life was like in Great Britain before the coun-
try entered a new ice age, but for fifteen-year-old Willo, a life in the snow-blanketed 
forest scrounging for food and hiding from a repressive government is all he’s ever 
known. When his father and the rest of his family mysteriously disappear, Willo 
leaves the scant safety of home to search for them. Against his better judgment, he 
saves an abandoned girl he encounters along the way, and together they find their 
way into the city, in which a long-dormant resistance movement is preparing for a 
final desperate exodus. Willo’s journey reveals the extent to which human society, 
torn between altruism and sociopathic self-interest, has descended into animalistic 
brutality. Crockett vividly evokes the bleakness and desperation of an endless winter, 
but she is less successful at investing readers in Willo as a protagonist. It’s not clear 
if Willo, with his strange verb tenses and stream-of-consciousness narration, is an 
emblem of society’s deteriorating literacy or hampered by a disability; his confusion 
amplifies the emotional distance between reader and story, lessening the impact of 
the identity-reveal at the climax. The atmosphere of horror and fatalism is effec-
tive, however, recalling Ness’ The Knife of Never Letting Go (BCCB 10/08) in its 
fascination with the underbelly of human nature; readers interested in exploring 
those themes a bit closer to home may find Willo’s travails absorbing. CG
dAvies, niColA Just Ducks!; illus. by Salvatore Rubbino. Candlewick, 
2012 30p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5936-3 $15.99  
R 6-9 yrs
The quacking of ducks from the nearby river greets a little girl every morning, and 
she describes the behavior of the mallard flock that she’s come to know. As her 
narrative goes on, describing the way ducks feed, and interact, and settle down 
at night (“Some float on the water with their heads tucked under their wings”), 
her explanation is complemented by more factual tidbits in smaller print in the 
formatting familiar from earlier Davies titles such as Bat Loves the Night (BCCB 
12/01). The text here is particularly tonally effective, with a matter-of-fact eloquence 
(“There’s just the sound of rushing water and the stillness of the night”) and a deft 
weaving of information into the girl’s observations about animals she sees every day. 
Rubbino’s art, vigorous, informal splashes of color with the fluidity of watercolor 
and the sharp-edged smoothness of digital illustration, relies on piney greens and 
russety browns in an earthtoned palette that exudes the damp chill of a duck-rich 
river in a frigid season; the gestural treatment of the ducks conveys their motion 
as they flap and preen. With a take-a-closer-look emphasis on animals that many 
youngsters have in their own neighborhoods, this is a useful addition to Davies’ 
April 2012 • 393
excellent early nature-study titles that both answers questions and brings biology 
to kids’ doorsteps—perhaps literally. The book concludes with a brief index and a 
compact note about ducks around the world. DS
de grAAf, Anne Son of a Gun. Eerdmans, 2012 [125p] illus. with photos
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8028-5406-3 $8.00
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Nopi and Lucky, elder sister and younger brother, watch in terror as soldiers raid 
their Liberian school and kill a teacher, but the true horror begins when the children 
are herded off to fight in their country’s civil war. Nopi tries to protect her sibling 
and is knocked down, kicked in the head, and rendered deaf for her efforts. A gang 
of boys agrees to allow the siblings to accompany them when they run away if Nopi 
can procure a gun, and after she participates in a firefight the boys make good on 
their promise. Nopi and Lucky find their way back to their home and family in 
Monrovia, but there’s no peace in their immediate future. Driven from home yet 
again, the siblings are separated in the forest and end up on opposite sides of the 
war—Lucky as an armed and drugged boy soldier with the government troops, 
and Nopi as the “wife” of a rebel colonel. Years of childhood slip away in fight and 
flight until a tenuous peace brings them home and affords Lucky the opportunity 
to turn in his gun—and with it his identity as a soldier—for a few dollars and a 
chance at an education and a more normal life. Dutch author de Graaf (who created 
her own English text as well as the original Dutch) bases her story on interviews 
with child soldiers, and the alternating dialogue between Nopi and Lucky has an 
informal immediacy that draws an audience in as the kids fairly stumble over each 
other to tell the tale. A slimmer and more restrained account than Ishmael Beah’s A 
Long Way Gone (BCCB 5/07), this nonetheless conveys the atrocities suffered—and 
forcibly committed—by children abducted into the West African wars in the late 
1990s. Historical and cultural notes, as well as black-and-white photographs, are 
appended. EB 
duddle, jonny The Pirates Next Door: Starring the Jolley-Rogers; written and illus. 
by Jonny Duddle. Templar, 2012 [44p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5842-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 6-8 yrs
What do you do when pirates move in next door? Rejoice and make friends, if you’re 
young Tilda. The Jolley-Rogers family is only staying temporarily, until their boat 
is repaired; in the meantime, Tilda’s town (“Dull-on-Sea”) takes exception to the 
pirate family’s appearance, noise, and habits, culminating in an ultimatum: “The 
Jolley-Rogers cannot stay. You must make them go away!” Before things can get 
ugly, however, the Jolley-Rogers family fixes the boat and prepares to set sail, while 
Jim tells Tilda, “Whenever we stop somewhere new, the neighbors are unkind. To 
show them pirates aren’t so bad, we leave some things behind.” Indeed, after the 
pirates’ departure, the townspeople discover gifts of buried treasure in their back-
yards, and they swiftly (if belatedly) change their minds about the family: “I’m such 
a pirate fan, you know. They wore such lovely hats! I rather liked their singing. 
And I’ll miss those darling rats!” The meter of the rhyming lines is erratic, but the 
sea-shanty cadence nicely augments the nautical theme. The digital art features 
slightly exaggerated figures that could easily have stepped out of an animated film 
394 • The BulleTin
(Duddle is a concept artist for films, including Aardman Animation’s The Pirates!), 
the compositions tip from lively to overbusy, though, with strong, occasionally gar-
ish colors and a slick sheen. The real fun comes in the contrast between the visual 
minutiae of the pirate family (Dad may sport a shaggy mustache, scars, and tattoos, 
but he also wears a knitted skull-and-crossbones pullover vest and works, somewhat 
oddly, in the Town Hall) and the depiction of the “normal” people (Tilda’s dad 
has a bit of tissue stuck to a shaving nick in one scene). It’s in no way subtle, but 
pirate-wannabes won’t bat an eye patch. JH
ellison, kAte The Butterfly Clues. Egmont, 2012 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-263-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-268-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Lo (short for Penelope) has always been obsessive-compulsive, but since her brother’s 
death her need to count out patterns and collect meaningful objects has begun to 
take over her life. When a girl is killed only steps away from where she’s walking, 
she becomes obsessed with finding the culprit and motive, especially after discover-
ing some of the victim’s trinkets for sale at a flea market. The search leads her into 
Neverland, a shadowy part of Cleveland where lost kids (a mix of dreamers and 
delinquents) reside and violence is at an all-time high. Flynt, a friendly artist, is 
her guide through this underworld as she teases out a web of connections between 
the murdered girl, a shady strip club, and, ultimately, her brother, a runaway 
whose death is shrouded in mystery for most of the book. The mystery, with its 
multitude of twists, its creeping paranoia, and a protagonist whose thin veneer of 
control can’t hold up to the horrors she’s uncovering, is classic hardboiled fare, and 
and the Neverland setting itself is vividly and eerily drawn. Ellison is particularly 
skilled at drawing the reader into Lo’s increasingly frantic mindset, where numbers 
themselves can be threats and the urge to complete patterns can be life-threatening 
in the wrong situation. Readers in search of a dark, dense, character-driven mystery 
need look no further. CG
else, BArBArA The Traveling Restaurant: Jasper’s Voyage in Three Parts. Gecko, 
2012 295p
ISBN 978-1-877579-03-5 $17.95  
R Gr. 4-6
Since the Great Accident supposedly destroyed all the magic in Fontania and caused 
the remaining royal heir to go on the run seven years ago, the rule of the land has 
been left to Lady Gall, the Provisional Monarch. After witnessing the Lady’s at-
tempt to poison his baby sister, twelve-year-old Jasper, a nobleman’s son, and his 
family decide to flee the kingdom by boat. Unfortunately left behind, Jasper stows 
away on The Traveling Restaurant, a ship that contains more magic than just the 
delicious meals its crew offers and may even hold the key to ending Lady Gall’s 
tyranny. Adventure fans with a taste for fine cuisine will delight in the mouth-
watering descriptions that accompany the ship’s maritime mealtimes, while Jasper 
and company’s various run-ins with hot-tempered pirates, duplicitous journalists, 
and hat-loving monkeys make up the entertainment portion of this charming dinner 
and a show. The false monarch, the mysteriously missing heir, and the plucky boy 
at the center of it are all elements we’ve seen before, but here they come together 
in a unique way that may surprise even more sophisticated readers. The support-
ing characters, especially the willful Polly and her kindly father as the crew of the 
April 2012 • 395
Traveling Restaurant, provide additional amusement and intriguing backstories to 
round out the tale. Hand this to aspiring sailors and chefs alike—but advise them 
to take a snack along for the journey, as the focus on food is sure to inspire a few 
rumbling bellies. KQG
feiffer, kAte No Go Sleep!; illus. by Jules Feiffer. Wiseman/Simon, 2012 30p
ISBN 978-1-4424-1683-3 $16.99  
R 3-5 yrs
A determined toddler refuses to go to sleep, leading to a string of attempts to con-
vince him: first from his mother (“It’s time for you to close your eyes and think sweet 
thoughts”), then his dad (“Put your head down and fall fast asleep”), then the sun, 
the moon, the stars, a passing car, an assortment of local fauna, the front door of 
the house, the family dog, some toys, and, finally, the mommy once again (“Please 
go to sleep”). Despite the fact that they all stand by the assertion that it is time for 
the tot to rest, he still refuses . . . until, after one final “NO!” his eyes unwillingly 
close and he drifts off to sleep. There is a nice variety in reasoning presented by 
the various speakers, from the moon who ensures the baby that he’ll “keep the 
night light” to the goldfish who promise not to swim away to the teddy bear who 
is ready for a snuggle, and the gentle storyline offers lots of bedtime appeal. Feiffer 
uses brush, ink, and watercolor markers to create loopy, swirly compositions that 
sing with his familiar springy informality but still effectively convey the changing 
poses of a baby moving from resistance to capitulation. While younger listeners will 
simply appreciate the gentle lilting of the text, older listeners may enjoy contemplat-
ing what other voices might join in on the litany of bedtime encouragement. HM
foxley, jAnet Muncle Trogg; illus. by O’Kif. Chicken House/Scholastic, 
2012 209p
ISBN 978-0-545-37800-0 $14.99  
R Gr. 3-5
Ten-year-old giant Muncle Trogg is exceedingly small for his age; in fact, he is the 
size of a “Smalling,” the giants’ term for human beings, whom they loathe and 
fear thanks to the Smallings’ “killing sticks.” Muncle’s size comes in handy when 
he decides to sneak into the Smallings’ community to learn how to read so that he 
can find out the meaning of the Smallings’ Book of Magic that lies in the giants’ 
museum. His plan fails, but it brings him into contact with a kind human girl, 
Emily. When Emily is kidnapped by another giant, Muncle comes to her rescue, 
saving both Emily and the giants’ community, as the humans come perilously close 
to discovering the giants’ mountain home while they search for the missing girl. 
Muncle’s heroic acts lead him to be named the next Wise Man, and the book ends 
with a hint that a sequel may be in the works: Muncle begins to realize that the 
giants’ mountain may actually be a volcano, something he has learned about from 
Emily. Foxley’s imaginative topsy-turvy world of giants (in which ugly is beauti-
ful and disgusting is delicious) will intrigue middle-grade readers, and her crisp 
writing and quick pacing will keep kids flicking pages. There’s not a lot of depth 
to the characterizations here, but it’s the action that drives this novel anyway, and 
Muncle is an endearing and sympathetic hero to whom many similarly bullied 
youngsters will relate. Readers who appreciate Roald Dahl’s fantastical novels may 
particularly enjoy this British import. Full-page monochromatic illustrations appear 
approximately once per chapter, and their blend of scribbled lines and wide-eyed 
exaggeration adds to the easygoing humor. JH
396 • The BulleTin
frAdin, judith Stolen into Slavery: The True Story of Solomon Northup, Free Black 
Man; by Judith and Dennis Fradin. National Geographic, 2012 120p illus. 
with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0938-0 $27.90
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0937-3 $18.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0987-8 $18.95  
R Gr. 5-8
Drawn away from his upstate New York home and family in 1841 by a fake offer 
of well-paid temporary work, Solomon Northup awoke in a foul Washington D.C.  
cell, unable to prove that he was a freeman. His abductors sold him into slavery, 
and after managing to get a message off to his wife explaining what had happened, 
he was sold in New Orleans to owners who changed his name and controlled his 
fate for the next twelve years. While Solomon, now known as Platt, labored as a 
field hand, carpenter, and even occasional fiddler, his wife attempted to recover him 
under an 1840 New York law that mandated state assistance in gaining the release 
of kidnapped freemen. His changed name and the remoteness of the Louisiana 
plantation made tracing him nearly impossible, so Solomon waited over a decade 
for a chance to find an ally, a white itinerant carpenter named Samuel Bass, who 
would make contact with persons in New York who could attest to his free status 
and arrange his release. While children’s literature is rife with tales of the Under-
ground Railroad and daring, even creative, strategies of escape, the horrifying reality 
of abducted freemen who simply disappeared and were lost to family and history 
has received less attention. Northup’s experience is thrillingly told, and although it 
culminated in a happy family reunion, the Fradins make it clear that justice did not 
follow jubilation—under mid-nineteenth-century law it was virtually impossible for 
a black man to successfully prosecute a white offender, since his testimony was not 
allowed in court. The Fradins supplement Northup’s own narrative, Twelve Years 
a Slave, with print and online resources; an index and a timeline that interweaves 
historical events and Northup’s own story are also included. EB
frAnklin, emily Tessa Masterson Will Go to Prom; by Emily Franklin and Brendan 
Halpin. Walker, 2012 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-2345-1 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-2359-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Lucas and Tessa have been best friends forever, but when Lucas finally realizes he 
has feelings for her and extends a very romantic, very public prom invitation, it 
forces Tessa to finally tell him her secret: she’s gay. Hurt by her rejection and feeling 
like their entire friendship has been a lie, Lucas outs her and inadvertently creates 
a media firestorm around her prom plans, which involve wearing a tux and taking 
another girl as her date. As the story spreads to a wider audience, Tessa is harassed, 
her parents’ business boycotted, and her identity trotted out for vitriolic public 
debate. The ripped-from-the-headlines plot (complete with cancelled prom and 
ACLU intervention) provides the bells and whistles for what is at heart an affecting, 
universal story about friendship betrayed, lost, and won back, and Franklin and 
Halpin (Jenna & Jonah’s Fauxmance, BCCB 3/11) keep the focus squarely on their 
protagonists’ emotional realities. There’s a humorous edge to the critique of the 
way heteronormative expectations can blind people to what’s right in front of them, 
April 2012 • 397
but it doesn’t detract from the heartbreak of a girl being demonized by people who 
have known her since infancy. The narration alternates between Tessa and Lucas 
as they struggle to overcome misunderstanding and rebuild the friendship that is 
crucial to both their lives. With a fairy-tale prom ending, sweet romances for both 
protagonists, and plenty of plot-rich interpersonal drama, this warm, timely story of 
friendship, honesty, and forgiveness will appeal to gay and straight teens alike. CG
gAughen, A. C. Scarlet. Walker, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2346-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
The traditional players of Robin Hood’s band of thieves all make an appearance in 
this reinvention of the legend, but there’s one notable difference: Will Scarlet is a 
woman in disguise. On the run from a past she refuses to discuss, Scarlet has spent 
the last two years repaying a debt to Robin by helping his clan provide food and 
money to the Nottingham villagers, who are currently at the mercy of a greedy and 
violent sheriff. When the sheriff calls in an expert “thief-taker” from London to put 
an end to Robin’s antics once and for all, Scarlet’s secrets are revealed and threaten 
to disband the friends for good—if the bounty hunter doesn’t kill them first. A fast 
pace and cinematic fight scenes give this immediate appeal, while the gritty details 
of medieval peasant life and the nobility of Robin’s cause remain true to the original 
tale. Quick with a blade and a curse-ridden insult, Scarlet is a gruff, often unlik-
able narrator, but in between demonstrating her impressive knife-wielding skills 
and threatening to cut off various body parts of those who cross her, she reveals a 
harrowing backstory that eventually allows readers to see her as a vulnerable and 
sympathetic protagonist. Her love triangle with John and Robin serves to human-
ize all three characters while interrogating notions of romance and chivalry in a 
world where marriage is essentially a property transaction. Moral-minded rebels 
and conscientious outlaws will find kindred spirits here. KQG
geithner, CArole If Only. Scholastic, 2012 327p
ISBN 978-0-545-23499-3 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 5-7
Starting eighth grade is tough for Corinna, whose mother died of an aggressive 
cancer soon after diagnosis over the summer. She and her shell-shocked father are 
still putting together their home life, and her best friend, Joci, doesn’t have any 
idea of what Corinna’s going through or how to respond to it. As she pulls herself 
through the school year, she’s aided by a new friend, Clare, whose father died not 
long ago, and by a school group for kids who’ve lost parents, and she works her way 
step-by-step through pain to acceptance. The account of bereavement is precise, 
intimate, and accurate, with Corinna’s raw sadness exacerbated by casual mention 
of mothers and unknowing inquiries about her summer; the slow, exhausting path 
through grief is effectively conveyed by the book’s deliberate pacing. That mimetic 
realism actually ends up dragging the book down, though, in that Corinna’s plod 
through the worst of it is unleavened by external perspective and reflection; it’s so 
focused on her feelings that there’s not much in the way of characterization or ad-
ditional dimension, with even her crush on a boy too drawn out to gain traction as 
a subplot. Young people will still find Corinna’s experience illuminating, however, 
and it will be especially helpful to those struggling with bereavement themselves 
or trying to understand the grief of a friend. DS
398 • The BulleTin
giBBs, stuArt Spy School. Simon, 2012 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2182-0 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2184-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7 
When a suave, dashing man in a tuxedo shows up at Ben Ripley’s house offering him 
a slot at the CIA’s Academy of Espionage, Ben has his bags packed in a heartbeat. 
His first moments across the academy’s threshold are a clear tip-off that this will 
be a challenging educational program: the campus is deserted save for a cadre of 
terrorists who attack Ben and his guide and nearly kill the boy before he reaches the 
door of the principal’s office to discover this was only an introductory test. Then 
things get worse. Ben realizes he’s been selected on the basis of cryptography skills 
he knows full well he doesn’t have; in fact, he is only being used as bait to flush 
out a mole who threatens to undermine the academy. Ben’s pride kicks in, and 
he’s determined to stick out the program and demonstrate his merits, but this will 
require some skillful counterespionage of his own, convincing his hostile classmates 
and some staff that he’s the real deal. The plotting here is a little clunky, but there’s 
plenty of fun to be had in the spy-story archetypes that surround our hapless hero, 
from the 007 wannabe, to the butt-kicking hottie Ben adores, to the doddering 
fool of a professor who’s actually a razor-sharp tactician. Many, many kids enter 
middle school wishing they had a license to kill, but until the CIA comes knock-
ing, this exercise in wishful thinking should keep them mightily entertained. EB
gilmore, rAChnA The Flute; illus. by Pulak Biswas. Tradewind, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-1-896580-57-9 $16.95  
Ad 5-8 yrs
This original folktale is set in rural India, where young Chandra loses her beloved 
parents to the monsoon floods and then suffers the cruelty of her new caretakers, 
her brutal aunt and uncle. All she has left of her parents is her mother’s flute, which 
magically provides her with food as well as comforting her with its beautiful song. 
When floods come once again to their village, the flute not only saves Chandra 
but provides her with a new family that jubilantly welcomes her as their daughter. 
This Canadian import reflects the style and elements of folklore, especially the 
Cinderella tale, and audiences will recognize the stripped-down narrative and cool 
distance; the story doesn’t always hit the same emotional reality as folklore, though, 
with the cheer of the end seeming implausible. The illustrations are stylized, with 
a flat, blocky appearance and a reliance on a single hue (dark brownish black) that 
makes them resemble prints; smudgy textures and additional colors (only one or 
two elements per spread) add interest. Overall, though, the art lacks narrative pull; 
the faces (always in profile) are nearly identical from spread to spread, and the rough 
abstraction of the figures makes them more iconic than relatable. The Cinderella 
appeal is a strong one, however, so the title could still please those who like their 
bad guys bad and their endings happy. HM
grAhAm, BoB A Bus Called Heaven; written and illus. by Bob Graham. Candle-
wick, 2012 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5893-9 $16.99  
Ad 5-8 yrs
When an old bus is abandoned on the street where young Stella lives, the neighbor-
hood adopts it and names it “Heaven,” making it a shiny local gathering center 
April 2012 • 399
that’s parked in Stella’s front yard. When the city objects to the bus’ obstruction of 
the sidewalk and tows the vehicle away, Stella and company meet in the junkyard 
to fight for the bus, with Stella beating the junkyard rep fair and square in a foos-
ball tournament (taking place in the bus itself); the victorious crowd then reclaims 
their community center and parks it safely behind Stella’s house. There’s a lot of 
contrivance in this utopian vision, with people instantly won over and transformed 
by having a shared space, and audiences are likely to raise some awkward ques-
tions (such as why the bus wasn’t put in the backyard in the first place). Graham, 
however, anchors his sunny optimism with credible concrete specifics that make it 
seem possible rather than simply purposive. Most of that anchoring comes from the 
line and watercolor art, wherein Graham as usual manages to make the mundane 
both charming and funny, often using the pictures to humorously counterpoint the 
text. While the participants’ diversity is a little studied, the book offers a believable 
picture of a neighborhood that’s struggling a little, overshadowed by area industry 
and power lines (long-view and overhead perspectives make this clear, emphasizing 
the factory chimneys looming over the little houses and including a few wrecked 
cars in front yards) and troubled with gang activity. Ultimately, this is a sweet, if 
overly optimistic, fable; viewers will enjoy poring over the art to pick out details 
and mini-dramas, and they may be inspired to try to reclaim some shared space in 
their own neighborhoods. DS
griffith, helen v. Moonlight; illus. by Laura Dronzek. Greenwillow/Harp-
erCollins, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-203285-0 $16.99  
Ad 3-5 yrs
A little rabbit sleeps as moonlight “butters” everything outdoors; when the moon-
light trickles into his dreams, he wakes up and goes out to dance in it in this poetic 
picture book. The focus here is clearly not on plot but on the beauty and rhythm 
of language and on the magical ability of moonlight to gently illuminate every 
surface it touches. Griffith’s poetry is somewhat pedestrian at times, but at others 
(the moonlight “slides like butter” and “leaves a butter trace”) the book demon-
strates a pretty lyricism. A comparison between the moonlight and a bee (“sucks 
at twigs and branches/ like a butter bee”) falters a bit, but a later description of the 
moonlight “buttering” Rabbit’s dreams may well enchant young listeners. Dronzek’s 
accompanying illustration makes this concept very concrete, surrounding objects 
in Rabbit’s dreams with halos of luminescent yellow. Thickly brushed acrylic paint 
depicts the moonlight’s encounters with various objects and animals, and wide, 
glowing yellow brushstrokes highlight the edges of trees, plants, and critters against 
backgrounds of deep blues and greens. Unfortunately, some of the draftsmanship, 
especially in the animals’ poses, is stiff and awkward, failing to convey the fluidity 
of the text. Despite the title’s shortcomings, its poetic language would lend itself to 
bedtime reading, or it could be paired with Henkes’ Kitten’s First Full Moon (BCCB 
3/04) for a lunar evening storytime program. JH
hAthAwAy, BArBArA Letters to Missy Violet. Houghton, 2012 157p
ISBN 978-0-547-36300-4 $15.99  
Ad Gr. 4-6
In this sequel to Missy Violet and Me, eleven-year-old Viney is missing her friend, 
Missy Violet, who has gone to Florida to care for her ill brother. She writes her 
newsy letters, taking her chances that her mother won’t be too mad at her for med-
400 • The BulleTin
dling in grown folks’ business. Like the first book, much of the value and interest 
in this sequel lies in the nostalgic depiction of southern African-American rural life 
in 1929. Also like the first book, however, this is episodic and disconnected, with 
each letter or scene functioning like a stand-alone snapshot, the sequence never quite 
coalescing into a compelling narrative whole. Letters in various voices—Viney’s, 
her cousin Charles’, and Missy Violet’s—are interspersed with narration; the variety 
alone may help keep pages turning, but Missy Violet’s letters are thoroughly bland 
and didactic. A run-in with the Ku Klux Klan introduces a frightening moment 
for the children and disrupts the milder tenor of small-town life where Viney, 
following in Missy Violet’s steps, is coming into her own as a healer. Readers who 
have gotten to know Viney in the first book will likely be invested enough to want 
to follow her progress; direct patrons to that account before they pick up this to 
ensure the necessary context and emotional involvement. KC
hAutmAn, pete The Obsidian Blade. Candlewick, 2012 [320p] (Klaatu 
Diskos)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5403-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5972-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
One day Tucker sees his father disappear through a strange disk in the air and then 
come back an hour later changed—older, roughed up, and with a girl no one has 
ever seen before in tow—but offering no explanation. When Tucker’s mother starts 
to lose touch with reality and Tucker’s dad takes her away to get help, Tucker goes to 
stay with his uncle Kosh; on Kosh’s farm, Tucker sees another of the strange disks, 
and it sucks him in. He finds himself on the top of one of the Twin Towers just as 
the first plane hits; oddly, a younger Kosh is there as well. After Tucker saves Kosh, 
he realizes that his father must have taken his mother through one of the disks, 
which appear to be portals to other times and places. The disks are unpredictable, 
though, and their passages seem to lead to sites where violent, traumatic events are 
occurring, so Tucker may not survive the search for his parents. As the beginning 
of a series, this opens with likable characters confronting a set of intriguing and 
dangerous problems. Interwoven passages describe the history and original function 
of the disks, with the attendant conflicts elaborated upon as Tucker becomes more 
involved in those conflicts. Thus the stage is effectively set, but many questions 
are left to be resolved by subsequent titles. Hautman describes the series as what 
he would have liked to have read as a teen, and he’s got that right; with its blend 
of unpredictable past and future time travel, action sequences, exotic weaponry, 
mysterious villains, and an emergent band of unlikely allies, this will appeal to sci-fi 
oriented kids with gaming sensibilities. KC 
hemphill, stephAnie Sisters of Glass. Knopf, 2012 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96109-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86109-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89701-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-9
The Barovier family is struggling to uphold their legacy of making fine glass in 
fifteenth-century Murano, Italy, but they are badly in need of an infusion of cash 
to keep both furnaces working. Maria, the younger of two daughters, is the key 
April 2012 • 401
to the family’s fortune, since her late father had stipulated that she was to marry a 
senator. After rejecting a series of suitors, Maria resigns herself to the much older 
but kindly Signore Bembo as a likely match, and plans are underway for the formal 
betrothal. Maria’s sister, Giovanna, seems uncharacteristically temperamental about 
the nuptial plans (she actually wants Bembo for herself), and Maria is hesitant to 
make a final commitment because she is obsessed with the master glass blower, Luca, 
whom the family has recently hired. Oh, dear. Will the lovers all sort themselves 
out properly? Will Bembo/Giovanna and Luca/Maria live happily ever after? Yes, 
and with surprisingly little effort or drama. Although the free-verse poetry lends 
an extra dash of romance to the bare-bones plotting, the Barovier girls’ plight has 
none of the dark intrigue one might expect of a Venetian costume drama, nor the 
sparkle of a Shakespearean style comedy of switched lovers. Still, the period details 
of glassmaking and courtship may make this a pleasant divertimento for diehard 
historical fiction readers. EB
henkes, kevin Penny and Her Song; written and illus. by Kevin Henkes. Green-
willow, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-208195-7 $12.99 
 Ad Gr. 1-2
When the irrepressible Penny arrives home from school, she cannot wait to share 
the song that she made up. Upon arriving, however, she is silenced by both her 
mother and her father for fear that she will wake the babies. Penny tries desperately 
to distract herself from the circumstances until dinnertime, where she tries once 
again to sing her ditty. “‘Not at the table,’ said Mama. ‘After dinner,’ said Papa.” 
Finally, after dinner is done, Penny sings her song for her family. They like it so 
much that they ask her to sing it again, then join her in singing and, on a fourth 
round, put on silly costumes while belting the tune. In the end, it turns out that 
Penny’s song helped the babies to fall asleep, as they have both dozed off in their 
basket. Penny’s overt enthusiasm and boundless determination put her in the same 
league as Henkes’ famous Lilly, and readers familiar with his other mouse tales will 
welcome this fresh face. Penny’s story, however, is formatted as an easy reader, and 
that’s its weakness: the all-important chapter divisions don’t correlate with logical 
pauses in the story, leaving the tale awkwardly paced, and while the plot is sweet, 
it’s not very substantial. Henkes’ signature line and watercolor illustrations employ 
pastel shades of pink, yellow, and blue, and little spring-toned musical notes are 
sprinkled throughout the musical sequences. Despite the title’s deficits, Penny’s 
jubilant approach to life is somewhat contagious, and many a young reader will 
identify with her efforts to contain her inner feelings of joy when all she wants to 
do is sing out loud. HM
hiCks, fAith erin Friends with Boys; written and illus. by Faith Erin Hicks. First 
Second/Roaring Brook, 2012 224p
ISBN 978-1-59643-556-8 $15.99  
R Gr. 6-9
The youngest of four siblings and the only girl, Maggie is both excited and worried 
about starting high school after being home-schooled her whole life. Her brothers 
refuse to walk her to school, insisting that she go through this rite of passage on 
her own. It’s not surprising, then, that she makes friends with kids they don’t really 
approve of, even if they won’t say why. What is surprising in this mostly realistic 
graphic novel is the persistent presence of a nineteenth-century ghost, whom Maggie 
402 • The BulleTin
thinks appears only to her. As Maggie makes friends with a perky indie girl named 
Lucy and her mysterious brother, Alistair, she broods over the loss of her mother, 
who recently left the family without much of an explanation, and tries to figure 
out what the ghost wants from her. The characters are appealing and distinctive, 
each drawn with features that establish their personality traits, such as Maggie’s 
pigeon-toed awkwardness and pigtailed innocence, and Lucy’s large-eyed vulner-
ability set against her multiple piercings and partially shaved head. Maggie’s angst is 
clearly age-appropriate, and her problems—trying to fit in, wanting to find friends, 
experiencing self-doubt, and desiring the approval and love of her brothers—are 
emblematic of teen experience, making this a treatment on which readers can project 
their own experiences. The ghost acts as a symbol of the inner conflict that Maggie 
has to work out as she blames herself for her mother’s departure, offering an example 
of how graphic novels can explore unseen emotional states without textual exposi-
tion. Though a few details of full-page spreads get lost in the gutter, this is overall 
a highly successful graphic novel, accessible and evocative on multiple levels. KC
hopkinson, deBorAh Titanic: Voices from the Disaster. Scholastic, 2012 
290p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-545-11674-9 $17.99  
R Gr. 5-8
The Titanic centennial commemoration has evoked fresh retellings in multiple 
genres (Denenberg’s splashy docufiction Titanic Sinks!, BCCB 12/11, for instance, 
and Wolf’s YA poetry The Watch that Ends the Night, BCCB 10/11), but for pur-
ists who want a straightforward chronology of the event, supported by substantial 
primary source material, this may be the title of choice. Hopkinson begins with a 
description of the ship, emphasizing its opulent features, and introduces some of 
the passengers who embarked on its maiden voyage. The narrative shifts rapidly 
to the disaster itself with a litany of things gone wrong, from the ignored iceberg 
warnings, to the inadequate number of lifeboat seats, to the flooded bulkheads, to 
the distress flares misinterpreted by a potential rescue vessel. Most gripping, though, 
are the memoirs that are interlaced throughout the text, as survivors testified from 
their varied perspectives on the relative chaos or calm, heroism or cowardice, of 
passengers and crew on the swiftly sinking deck. A generous number of period 
photographs, often all the more immediate and compelling for their very graininess, 
visually capture the sharp contrast between the luxury and desperation that marked 
the beginning and end of the doomed voyage. Copious end matter includes the 
expected bibliography, notes, and index, as well as biographical sketches of many 
passengers and crew, statistical charts, a timeline of the disaster, a glossary, and 
excerpts from the 1912 British Wreck Commissioner’s Inquiry Report. EB
house, silAs Same Sun Here; written by Silas House and Neela Vaswani; illus. 
by Hilary Schenker. Candlewick, 2012 297p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5684-3 $15.99  
R Gr. 5-8
This epistolary novel documents the correspondence between two pen pals: Meena, 
an Indian-born twelve-year-old girl living in New York City’s Chinatown, and 
River, a twelve-year-old rural Kentucky boy, brought together by a school project. 
The letters reveal not only their developing friendship but some of the bigger is-
sues faced by each of their families, namely River’s community’s struggle with the 
environmental devastation caused by mountaintop-removal mining and Meena’s 
April 2012 • 403
family’s illegal status in their apartment and quest for American citizenship. Meena 
and River communicate with the candor that distance and anonymity often bring; 
as they grow closer, they feel they can ask each other anything (such as when River 
asks if Indian women draw their bindis on with Magic Marker) and tell each other 
anything (such as when Meena describes the embarrassment of being made fun 
of for her hairy legs at her new school). House penned River’s letters and Vaswani 
Meena’s, resulting in appropriately different voices for each kid. While at its heart 
a friendship story, this is also a celebration of writing, both as a means of process-
ing emotions and as a vehicle for making the writer more observant of people 
and places, and both Meena and River come to appreciate and value the role the 
letter writing plays in their own lives over the course of their relationship. Readers 
who enjoy differing points of view will particularly enjoy this old-fashioned yet 
contemporary letter-writing exchange. Occasional spot art and black-and-white 
photos of the kids’ surroundings are included. HM
howe, peter Warriors of the Black Shroud. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 266p
ISBN 978-0-06-172987-4 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 4-6
The prominent star-shaped birthmark on Walker’s cheek has often made him the 
target of ridicule and mockery, so when a sword-wielding, baseball-jacket-wearing 
kid informs him that the blotchy red spot actually marks Walker as the chosen 
savior of the kingdom of Nebula, Walker initially thinks it’s another prank. When he 
plays along and agrees to join the kid, Eddie, on his return to Nebula, he’s stunned 
to discover that the luminous Nebula is indeed quite real. In fact, it is in desper-
ate need of its destined protector, as the Warriors of the Black Shroud threaten to 
plunge the kingdom into eternal darkness. The plot is nearly glutted with time-worn 
fantasy tropes, including Walker’s role as the marked “Chosen One”, the eminently 
evil, two-dimensional villain, and the ultimate triumph of a group of heroic kids 
over not only the aforementioned evil but also the apathy of adults. As a former 
cowardly prince looking for redemption, Eddie offers a fresh component, but this 
is mostly a predictable tale of good versus evil. More experienced fantasy fans will 
find Suzanne Collins’ underworld in Gregor the Overlander (BCCB 1/04) far more 
to their liking, but newbies to the genre will find the straightforward storytelling 
here appealingly accessible. KQG
iBBotson, evA One Dog and His Boy. Scholastic, 2012 282p
ISBN 978-0-545-35196-6 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-6
All Hal has ever wanted is a dog. His busy parents, hoping that he’ll tire of the idea, 
rent a dog from Easy Pets, run by the heartless Mr. and Mrs. Carker. Hal and Fleck, 
the dog he chooses, bond immediately, and they are both heartbroken when Hal’s 
mother, realizing that Hal’s interest isn’t waning, sneaks the dog back to Easy Pets. 
Hal decides to get Fleck back and run away to his grandparents, and he is joined 
in his quest by ten-year-old Pippa, the little sister of the kennel maid at Easy Pets, 
and by four other dogs whom feisty Pippa frees as well. Ibbotson thoughtfully 
picks apart the pet-rental business, characterizing dogs fittingly by breed (waiting 
around is agony for a working collie, for instance). While some of the adults are 
a bit exaggerated, the young characters are honest and real, and Hal’s longing will 
resonate with many kids: “Often and often when you wanted something and then 
got it, it was a disappointment. . . . But having a dog was completely different. He’d 
404 • The BulleTin
wanted it and wanted it and when it happened it was even better than he’d thought 
it would be.” Ibbotson’s evocation of the emotional bond between humans and dogs 
and her descriptions of the dogs’ personalities are especially strong. Animal lovers 
will lap this up, of course, but they also might walk away with a fresh perspective 
on pet ownership. JH
jAmes, BriAn Life Is But a Dream. Feiwel, 2012 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-312-61004-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Institutionalized for schizophrenia, Sabrina is finally starting to make some progress, 
but she worries that the medications she’s on will eventually take away not just the 
scary stuff but also the beauty, the dreams, the things that make her who she is. 
Enter Alec, a fellow patient who sees drugs as mind control and argues that they 
are a conspiracy by a crazy world to corrupt the only sane people in it. Alec’s also 
the only peer Sabrina’s ever known who truly appreciates her imagination. Caught 
up in his worldview, she stops taking her pills; when the two escape the institution 
together, it predictably ends poorly, with Alec expelled and Sabrina alone and newly 
paranoid. This is a sympathetic portrayal of severe mental illness that recognizes 
its complexities—Sabrina’s imagination has been a source of comfort for most of 
her life, and some of what her family has labeled illness is merely unpopular belief. 
It’s particularly refreshing that Alec isn’t a villain, just a kid in over his head who 
tries to do the right thing when he realizes just how different Sabrina’s situation is 
from his own. Sabrina’s narration, threaded with flashbacks that explain how she 
ended up in the institution, can be disorienting in its projection of Sabrina’s real-
ity, but it’s a effective way of conveying a troubled consciousness. The depiction of 
going through life with a brain whose perceptions you can’t trust is evocative and 
immediate, and the sharply observed character interactions will invest readers in 
Sabrina’s plight. CG 
jinks, CAtherine The Paradise Trap. Egmont, 2012 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-273-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-283-6 $16.99 
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Marcus’ mom is intent on reliving the magic of her childhood vacations at the 
ocean, which is why Marcus has been dragged away from his beloved video games 
to accompany her in a beat-up old trailer to Diamond Beach. The beach turns out 
to be anything but summery fun—in fact, it is more cement than sand—but when 
Marcus and his new friend Edison stumble upon an old door in the trailer that 
inexplicably leads to a cellar, Marcus goes from being bored to being spooked. The 
cellar leads to a giant amusement park that enchants Edison but tries to kill Marcus 
(first by suffocation by teddy bear and then by a killer ferris wheel); although Marcus 
manages to escape, Edison is not so lucky. As Marcus repeatedly tries to return with 
reinforcements to rescue Edison, the scene behind the door changes each time to 
represent someone’s ideal vacation while containing their doom: Edison’s mother 
sees a luxurious spa, for instance, but its purring cats are murderous. There’s a bit 
of Twilight Zone-like trickery going on here: just when Marcus and his mom think 
they are safe, the rug is pulled out again and they find themselves in yet another 
paradise gone awry. The settings are often both hilariously absurd (the spa cats are 
April 2012 • 405
both giant and pink) and frightening (they also have very, very sharp claws). The 
motivation of the villain, a siren who must now lure tourists with ideal vacations 
after losing her voice, is a bit of stretch, but the snappy pace more than makes up 
for the somewhat lackluster antagonist as Marcus and his makeshift family battle 
maniacal clowns, epic tidal waves, and camping vampires. In a refreshing change 
from the horror genre’s typical early dismissal of parental units, Marcus’ mom is 
in on the adventure the whole time to offer support and guidance, making this a 
spirited and family-friendly tale. KQG
john, Antony Thou Shalt Not Road Trip. Dial, 2012 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3434-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
It started as a simple project writing parables for the Sunday school kids, but now 
Luke is the new teenage guru of Christian publishing, and he’s on a book tour 
with his older brother Matt as chaperone and chauffeur. Unfortunately, Matt is 
determined to make the tour double as a road trip to save his relationship with 
girlfriend Alex, who has brought her younger sister Fran. Fran and Luke used to 
be best friends, a relationship that ended when she dyed her hair purple, pierced 
her upper ears, and started getting tattoos to prove to her controlling parents that 
appearance didn’t matter—only to find that to Luke, at least, it did. As an emotional 
premise, this heartbreaking bit of misunderstanding and betrayal will ring true to 
any teen who has ever felt judged on appearance. Luke is a likable but realistically 
fallible protagonist who has to come to terms with the fact that he has been a pretty 
awful friend and, on top of that, is completely out of his depth as an author, unable 
to live up to the polished, airbrushed version of himself fans seem to expect. His 
inevitable failures alternate between hilarious gaffes in the professional arena and 
wrenching missteps in the personal one, making the book a highly readable balance 
of humor, heart, self-discovery, and shenanigans. John (Five Flavors of Dumb, BCCB 
1/11) leaves the details of Luke’s faith pretty open—he worries about sin and can 
recite Bible verses but never engages the big divisive social issues—and thus allows 
readers from a variety of backgrounds and beliefs to relate to him as he strives to 
simply be a good person. Like most road-trip novels, this makes the point that it’s 
the journey, not the destination, that counts. CG
johnson, peter The Amazing Adventures of John Smith, Jr., AKA Houdini. Harp-
er/HarperCollins, 2012 168p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-198890-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-209912-9 $8.99  
R Gr. 5-7
After thirteen-year-old John Smith, Jr., also known as Houdini, meets the author 
of a children’s book, he decides to try his own hand at writing a novel, since he 
knows more about being a kid than that grownup does. Johnson offers this title 
as Houdini’s own work, wherein he shares stories about his friends Lucky and 
Jorge; his rough and tumble neighborhood in Providence, Rhode Island; his older 
brother who is fighting in Iraq; Angel Dimitri, the local bully; and Jackson, the 
neighborhood crazy/Vietnam vet who is said to sic his pit bull, Da Nang, on 
passersby. Eventually, writing makes Houdini see connections among what used 
to be “a big blur of unconnected events” and helps him look at the people around 
him a little more closely. The book has invitingly short chapters and an affable, 
406 • The BulleTin
rambling style, and while a lot of characters and plot points surface, they combine 
effectively. There is considerable boy appeal here, with stories of practical jokes 
gone wrong intermingled with dares and misadventures; these humorous elements 
are craftily balanced by the more serious topics that Houdini examines, from his 
father’s unemployment to his best friend’s father’s alcoholism to the fear that grips 
his family when his brother is reported missing. Reluctant and committed readers 
alike will warm to this story of friendship and community told from the point of 
view of an all-around likable guy. HM 
kinArd, kAmi The Boy Project (Notes and Observations of Kara McAllister). Scho-
lastic, 2012 [272p] illus.
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-34515-6 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-39225-9 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-7
Kara McAllister wants a boyfriend. She also wants to get an A in eighth-grade sci-
ence—well, she wants the unlimited texting that said A would buy her. With those 
goals in mind, she devises a scientific experiment that aims to address the hows 
and whys of attracting the opposite sex. Recording her observations on notecards 
and presenting her data in various charts and graphs (included in the book), Kara 
negotiates the tricky terrain of middle-school dating, at first floundering awkwardly 
while talking to boys (especially after her BFF gets a BF, leaving Kara alone in her 
inexperience) but eventually learning to just be herself and, in doing so, getting the 
guy. From the opening entry in which Kara describes her Spin the Bottle encounter 
with Chip, “a total dweeb,” the story is entirely predictable, and the unyielding 
focus on boys—not just by Kara but by every other teen female in the story—offers 
a rather depressing portrait of life as a adolescent girl. There are, however, plenty of 
girls out there who are often driven by the need to be noticed by “the guys,” and 
for them Kara may serve as an interesting role model as she consistently puts the 
needs of her friends first and even manages to maintain a sense of individuality as 
she begins dating. Ignatow’s The Popularity Papers (BCCB 5/10) offers a similarly 
science-based approach to middle-school politics with a bit more nuance, but for 
the girl bent on hooking a particular fish, Kara’s advice might do the trick. KQG
lAfevers, roBin Grave Mercy. Houghton, 2012 [528p] (His Fair Assassin)
ISBN 978-0-547-62834-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
A jagged scar running the length of Ismae’s back marks her as a daughter of Death 
and causes the lascivious farmer to whom she is betrothed to beat her senseless 
on the night of their wedding. Rescued by a kindly priest, Ismae is spirited across 
fifteenth-century Brittany to the convent of St. Mortain, the pagan god of death, 
where she spends the next three years preparing for her career as a spy and assassin 
for the sisterhood. Her second assignment throws her headlong into the backstab-
bing world of court politics as she poses as mistress to Gavriel Duval, a Breton noble 
and suspected ally to the French in their attempt to gain dominion over Brittany. 
Her investigations, however, soon indicate that other court members, and perhaps 
even the higher-ups at the convent itself, are the ones guilty of treason, and she 
must call upon the power of Death herself to ferret out the traitors and save both 
the duchy and her love. Masterfully crafted, this tale of shifting alliances, deadly 
betrayals, and breathless romance is court intrigue at its best. LaFevers mines the 
April 2012 • 407
rich history of Brittany’s long and ultimately futile struggles against French rule to 
create a decadent, lush backdrop to the political maneuvering, all the while seam-
lessly integrating essential historical knowledge without overwhelming the reader. 
In both seduction and genuine emotion, the romance between Ismae and Duval 
far outranks the typical push-and-pull relationship often encountered in YA, and 
Ismae manages to maintain her identity while coming to own her sexuality. Her 
narrative voice moves from strong to vulnerable as the situation warrants it, and 
readers will immediately warm to Ismae’s determination to think for herself despite 
the powerful influences of multiple others. Several supporting characters look to 
feature in upcoming installments, so fans should prepare for further dalliances 
with Death. KQG
lAwrenCe, CAroline 
The Case of the Deadly Desperados. 
Putnam, 
2012 [288p] (Western Mysteries)
ISBN 978-0-399-25633-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Mystery writer Lawrence shifts her sleuthing from the Roman Empire to much 
closer to home—Virginia City, Montana in the 1860s. The opening novel in her 
Western Mysteries series is off to a promising start with a truly hiss-worthy villain 
and an eccentric young private-eye-in-the-making who is—dare we venture so bold 
a statement?—unique in the world of fictional adolescent investigators. Whittlin’ 
Walt, the titular desperado, who dabbles in dismemberment before dispatching 
his victims, has just scalped and slain the foster parents of twelve-year-old P. K. 
(Pinky) Pinkerton, a half-white, half-Lakota boy who holds a coveted deed to an 
entire region of silver mines. Pinky hightails it to Virginia City, where he attempts 
to hide out long enough to register his claim, cash in the money, and make his way 
to Chicago, where he wants to join the detective whom he believes to be his father. 
But hiding out isn’t easy when an opium-addicted “soiled dove” (the genteelism 
of the time for a prostitute) swindles you, the son of a Chinese laundryman will 
only help for the money, reporter Sam Clemens blows your cover, and Whittlin’ 
Walt has his henchmen staked out around the registry office. And Pinky, a savant 
who cannot “read” the emotions of others or express his own, is generally his own 
worst enemy, trusting the literal utterances of everyone he meets until Poker Face 
Jace takes him under his wing and teaches Pinky how to ignore words and interpret 
body language. Wild chases, wilder disguises, goofy humor, wordplay, a delightfully 
gruesome end for Whittlin’ Walt, and a strong hint of episodes to come all provide 
a passel of good readin’. EB
levine, gAil CArson Forgive Me, I Meant to Do It: False Apology Poems; illus. by 
Matthew Cordell. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [80p]
ISBN 978-0-06-178725-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-8
There are poetry collections on a broad variety of subjects, but this is almost certainly 
a historic first: a collection of insincere poetic apologies. Levine follows closely in 
the footsteps of William Carlos Williams, modeling her verses tightly on “This Is 
Just to Say,” his famous confession of unfair plum consumption, and using that title 
for all of her nearly fifty entries. While subjects vary, most poems draw on folklore, 
nursery rhyme, or familiar songs: the pushing of Humpty Dumpty off the wall hap-
pened because “all the king’s horses/ and all the king’s men/ were bored,” explains 
408 • The BulleTin
one poem apologetically, while Beauty’s Beast sorrowfully confesses, “I breakfasted/ 
on your daughter” (“please send/ her sisters/ by the next coach”). While not all 
poems are equally successful (and some of the apologies seem genuine enough, if 
comic in context), the collection overall possesses appealing irreverence and vitality. 
The open and breezy format adds accessibility, with each spread offering one or 
two of the terse verses offset by Cordell’s humorous art, monochromatic, wittily 
scrawled images often containing their own exclamations or sound effects. The 
introduction includes a spirited set of instructions for the writing of fauxpology 
poems, and there would be entertainment value in individual recitations as well 
as in just browsing. DS
losure, mAry The Fairy Ring, or Elsie and Frances Fool the World. Candlewick, 
2012 [192p] illus. with photographs 
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5670-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5965-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
Towards the end of World War I, two girls in Yorkshire took photographs that 
purported to capture the fairies they regularly saw, and these pictures eventually 
became a national sensation when none other than Sir Arthur Conan Doyle publi-
cized them and championed them as authentic. Losure explores this historical event 
in a narrative that reads like a novel, keeping the focus tightly on the experience 
of young cousins Elsie and, especially, Frances as they move from an in-family bit 
of mischief to justify outdoor play to a claim that they must increasingly invest in 
as the stakes become higher and higher. While that approach limits reflection and 
analysis, the book deftly conveys the widening of the ripples from the event and the 
complexity of the impulses behind the creation of the photographs (while eventu-
ally confessing to the girls’ fakery of the photographs, Frances remained convinced 
that she had seen fairies and that one picture was real). It also makes clear points 
about views of the fairy world that made some people ripe for belief (the girls even 
carefully curled their hair into ringlets for a photograph, the better to fit a romantic 
image) and how the girls negotiated both credulity and skepticism. While the book 
ultimately seems to find this incident rather charming, it would be interesting to 
use the title along with explorations of the spiritualist Fox sisters or the Salem witch 
frenzy for a discussion of the way a few kids can start something that takes on a 
life of its own. Inclusion of several of the actual images allows contemporary kids 
to see just what the girls produced; end matter includes detailed source notes and 
a bibliography, and the bound book will include an index. DS
ludwig, elisA Pretty Crooked. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2012 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-206606-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-206608-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Upon finding out that the rich, popular girls at her new school are cyber-bullying 
the scholarship kids, Willa decides to exact some justice by stealing from the bul-
lies and buying designer clothes for the victims. She loves the adrenaline rush of 
actually lifting the merchandise as well as enacting her version of social justice, and 
though she eventually gets caught when her classmates put two and two together, 
she remains the Robin Hood benefactress of the poor girls—and she hooks a hottie 
April 2012 • 409
in community service. The caperesque details of Willa’s crimes are appealing, and 
the rough fairness of her actions, delivered in a currency particularly significant to 
high-school girls, will definitely earn her some supporters. There’s a genre confu-
sion problem here, though: the book starts out as a standard moral tale of cliques 
and outsiders, which would require some comeuppance and remorse and some 
acknowledgment of Willa’s own moral failings, none of which ever comes; the ending 
reveals that there are complicated crimes involving Willa’s mother and a mystery 
man that mean Willa’s infractions provide her with some necessary skill sets, such 
as lock-picking and pickpocketing, for the promised sequels. Unfortunately, the 
genre distinction does not become apparent until the very final scene of the novel, 
and by then, readers will have made up their minds about Willa’s moral vacuity 
in what is possibly the wrong context. The genre confusion also makes readers’ 
advisory more difficult; on its own, this first book will appeal to fans of high-school 
clique books, but depending on where the series is headed, it may swing more to 
mystery fans and gamers. KC 
mACk, jeff Frog and Fly: Six Slurpy Stories; written and illus. by Jeff 
Mack. Philomel, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25617-2 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 1-2
Frog loves to eat flies, and eat them he does in this collection of six brief easy-reader 
stories in a picture-book format. In one story, Fly greets Frog with “Nice to meet 
you” but Frog conveniently mishears “meet” as “eat” and zaps up Fly. In another, 
Frog throws Fly off guard by kissing him. When Frog professes that the kiss came 
out of love, Fly responds, “How sweet! Do you really love flies?” to which Frog 
replies, “I do. I really love flies . . . SLURP! With lots of ketchup!” In the last story 
Frog, in the dark, attempts to catch a fly but actually catches something quite dif-
ferent: “Wow. You are a big fly! You are a hairy fly! Wait a minute. You are not a 
fly. You are a . . . A. . .” “A frog-slurping bear?” replies the creature, and that is the 
end of Frog, while a cheerful fly bids everyone goodnight on the last page. Short 
sentences (many only a few words long), easy vocabulary, and repeated words or 
sound patterns (e.g., “miss” and “kiss”) make this perfect for beginning readers, and 
the slightly twisted tone and bright, comic-strip-like mixed-media illustrations will 
appeal to kids who find other easy readers insipid. Although the first stories feature 
green Frog posed against a different solid-colored background (and end with a poor 
startled-looking fly being slurped up by Frog’s hot pink tongue), the last cleverly 
depicts everything in silhouette against a deep lavender night sky, allowing kids to 
figure out the bear’s identity before Frog does. Adults might want to get more than 
one copy of this, as it’s sure to fly right off the shelves. JH
mAiA, love DJ Rising. Little, 2012 284p
ISBN 978-0-316-12187-3 $17.99  
R Gr. 9-12
“Why put a needle in my arm when I can put a needle on a record?” That’s a guid-
ing mantra for Marley, who’s a scholarship student at an elite prep school and who 
dreams of someday being a professional DJ. Meanwhile, though, he’s trying to 
make it in a school where class and race (Marley’s half black and half Puerto Rican) 
separate him from the most of the student body; at the same time, he’s supporting 
his single mother, who’s succumbed to addiction and relinquished all parenting 
410 • The BulleTin
responsibilities. Marley gets a substitute DJ gig for one night and makes the most 
of it; local buzz, a surly mentor, and entry into a prestigious local competition all 
follow, even as Marley’s home life slides downhill. The author gets into the complex 
mechanics of DJ-ing, including the software needed and the considerations that go 
into transitions, without losing the reader in extraneous detail: Marley’s pure joy 
in the music transcends technical knowledge, and his growing success in achieving 
his dream offsets some of the bleakness of his home life. Marley’s present-tense 
narration has an immediacy and ease that will appeal to reluctant readers, and the 
understated but affectionate portrayal of teen male friendship—in which loyalty 
and support are punctuated by a wealth of scatological humor—makes this a cred-
ible read-alike to books like Voorhees’ The Brothers Torres (BCCB 5/08) and de la 
Peña’s Mexican WhiteBoy (BCCB 10/08). Detailed, engaging, and uplifting, this 
debut novel is transparently in love with the art of DJ-ing and the joy of achieving 
a dream, and readers will revel in Marley’s exciting ride. CG
mAlAspinA, Ann Touch the Sky: Alice Coachman, Olympic High Jumper; illus. by 
Eric Velasquez. Whitman, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-8035-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
Daddy wanted Alice to “sit on the porch and be a lady,” instead of being different 
from all the other girls in 1920s Albany, Georgia, by wanting to practice the high 
jump. Undeterred, Alice Coachman knotted rags, tied them across sticks driven into 
the dirt, and took running leaps that prepared her to compete with the Tuskegee 
Golden Tigerettes. Sucking on a sour lemon that made her feel “lightning-fast, 
feather-light, and moon-jumping strong,” she took her first national medal, but 
it would take some convincing for her father to allow her to leave the farm and 
actually enroll in the Tuskegee Institute. As she worked her way through school and 
trained with the Tigerettes, World War II delayed her Olympic ambitions. Finally, 
in 1948, she set an Olympic women’s high-jump record of 5 feet, 6 1/8 inches, 
becoming the first African-American woman to win Olympic gold. Malaspina 
recounts Alice’s triumph in a staccato, ragged-right-edged text (“Flags waving./ 
Flame burning./ Pigeons flying into the blue./ The Olympics had begun—/ and 
Alice’s dream/ was almost . . . / almost/ here”). Velasquez delivers a gallery of track 
scenes that alternate realistically between moments of leg stretching and intense 
concentration, and moments of Alice in full flight. A list of Malaspina’s sources 
is included, but children will be far more interested in the double-page spread of 
black-and-white team photos from Tuskegee and the Olympic games and the note 
on Alice’s welcome-home festivities and her later career. Librarians who incorporate 
Kathleen Krull’s vibrant Wilma Unlimited (BCCB 4/96) in their storytimes will 
want to add Alice Coachman’s barrier-crashing performance into the program. EB
mAndel, peter Zoo Ah-choooo; illus. by Elwood Smith. Holiday House, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2317-0 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
It’s a slow day at the City Zoo: “The Hippos were slow. Low and slow. The Sloth 
was asleep. Deeply asleep. Even the Seals swam slowly. It was a slow zoo show.” 
Things liven up swiftly, though, when a snow leopard’s sneeze sets off a chain 
April 2012 • 411
reaction of achoo-ing across the zoo. The Elephant’s sneeze knocks down a fence 
and uproots a tree, while the Hippo’s sneeze creates “a MUD volcano,” giving ev-
erything in range a solid coating (“Is that a chocolate giraffe?” asks a visitor). After 
the Seals all simultaneously sneeze, causing the water in their exhibit to gush like 
a geyser (“Is that Old Faithful?” asks another visitor), the Zookeeper finally calls 
the Large-Animal Vet, who administers “a FIZZY sneeze solution,” which quiets 
everything back down—until the Snow Leopard starts the chain reaction again 
with a yawn. Mandel’s euphonious text is a pleasure to read aloud (“Chunks of 
chocolaty gunk rained down everywhere. People put up umbrellas”), and it would 
be easy to encourage audiences to participate by echoing each animal’s unique 
sneeze. The amusing asides of the visitors, the crazy-sounding sneezes (“Kah-bah-
RUMppphhhHHHH!!!” sneezes the Hippo), and the frequent situational humor 
(“The Zookeeper tried wiping Zebras with spray cleaner”) will all get kids giggling 
as well. Smith’s goofy cartoonish art (which utilizes pen and India ink, watercolor, 
and Photoshop) in muted tones is a perfect complement to the comical text. The 
Elephant’s sneeze, for example, sends a startled-looking, pop-eyed bird flying up-
side down in the wake of the uprooted tree, while a mouse clings for dear life to 
a remnant of fence. Pair this with Redmond’s Felicity Floo Visits the Zoo (BCCB 
12/09) for a sneezy storytime; just be prepared to pass the tissues. JH
mArrin, AlBert 
Black Gold: The Story of Oil in Our Lives. 
Knopf, 
2012 181p illus. with photos
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96673-6 $22.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86673-9 $19.99  
R Gr. 7-12
Adolescents who view the gas pump with dismay, wondering how they will ever 
afford to drive, are a prime audience for Marrin’s cogent overview of the meteoric 
rise of fossil fuel as a catalyst for economic growth and geopolitical turmoil. Open-
ing chapters discuss the geological aspects of oil formation and its early historical 
uses for just about everything except fuel. The focus then shifts to the recent past 
with the discovery of major oil fields and the advancing technology for capturing 
the crude, and onto the fraught political relationships that have formed between 
Western nations and the Middle East over oil concessions and control. While not 
stridently alarmist, Marrin nonetheless takes a firm stand for the urgent need to 
diversify our energy sources under a real threat of depleted fossil fuel reserves. 
Although student researchers will appreciate the short, easily navigable chapters, 
sources notes, and index, the clear organization and smooth, confident narration 
will make this equally satisfying to teens who simply want to get up to speed on 
current events. Libraries that shelve YA nonfiction among adult titles can expect 
to see the over-eighteen set glom onto this succinct selection as well. EB
mCkAy, hilAry Caddy’s World. McElderry, 2012 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4105-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4107-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Fans of the Casson family, rejoice; McKay is returning to the headlong, madcap, 
and fiercely poignant crew to chronicle the earlier days of the clan. Oldest daughter 
Caddy is twelve here, superglued to her three longtime school friends Alison, Ruby, 
and Beth, and tender-heartedly invested in the foundling baby birds she brings home 
412 • The BulleTin
to unsuccessfully nurse. When her mother gives birth to a delicate premature baby, 
Caddy’s history with doomed fragile infants fills her with terrified certainty about 
her new sibling’s fate, and she’s further destabilized by the turmoil the situation 
puts her family into and the changes beginning to affect her quartet of friends. 
No one can match McKay for chronicling an ensemble; she manages to give all 
her characters spark and individuality as her focalization amiably roves among cast 
members, and she documents the way each individual sensibility contributes to 
the group dynamic even as she gives her star performer plenty of room on center 
stage. Readers already familiar with the Cassons will recognize the strands that will 
develop later and will know that the baby will survive to become the superb and 
irresistible Permanent Rose, but her story acquires a new dimension from seeing 
just how close the Casson family came to losing her. A final chapter set six years 
later helps link these events to the previously published cycle, but aside from that 
note, the novel will be open and inviting to new readers as well, and the strong 
focus on Caddy’s set of friends, who aren’t featured in the other books, puts all 
readers on an equal footing and provides a school-and-friend story with appeal to 
followers of Frances O’Roark Dowell and the like. DS
mCkissACk, pAtriCiA C. Best Shot in the West: The Adventures of Nat Love; 
written by Patricia C. McKissack and Fredrick L. McKissack, Jr.; illus. by Randy 
DuBurke. Chronicle, 2012 132p
ISBN 978-0-8118-5749-9 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-9
Nat Love’s cattle-driving days are long over and America is a much tamer place when 
the black cowboy, now a Pullman porter, runs into “Bugler,” a man he knew back 
in the day. Bugler’s son is a publisher in search of authentic stories from the Wild 
West, and Love is persuaded to contribute his memoirs. From this framing story, 
the McKissacks segue into Love’s adventures, based on his autobiography. Raised 
in a slave family unaware of their freedom until years after the Civil War ended, 
Love left the farm to try his hand at horse-breaking to support his impoverished 
relatives. Soon he was hired on with cattle drivers and became a deft hand at guiding 
herds across the plains through storms, buffalo stampedes, and Indian attacks. As 
Love tells it, nobody could outride him or outshoot him: “Horses were shot from 
under me, men were killed around me, but I managed to live through even the 
worst wounds.” In the end though, it was Progress that defeated him: “There was a 
new order to things, and we were not a part of it.” The graphic novel is an unusual 
format for the McKissacks, but their boxed narration flows gracefully alongside 
DuBurke’s vibrant and varied compositions. DuBurke (illustrator of Neri’s Yummy, 
BCCB 9/10) is particularly adept at manipulating and conveying the passage of 
time, slowing it across panels—as Love makes his laborious way to Dodge City, 
as the Lord’s Prayer paces out a funeral, as the seasons change and Love rides into 
his future—and then racing headlong through action scenes of horse-breaking and 
gunfights. Full-color artwork will appear in the finished copy. EB
meAdows, jodi Incarnate. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2012 374p
ISBN 978-0-06-206075-4 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 9-12
The Range is home to one million human souls that have continually reincarnated 
for hundreds of lifetimes. Everyone knows one another, and everyone has thousands 
of years of life experience—everyone except Ana, who is new. Her appearance 
April 2012 • 413
marks the mysterious absence of one of the million, and it may also hold clues to 
the origins of her whole society and the purpose and identity of its deity. Sent out 
into the world on her eighteenth birthday by her resentful, neglectful mother, Ana 
is attacked by shadowy fire creatures known as sylph and rescued by Sam, the first 
person she’s ever met who believes she’s actually human. Meadows sets Ana—a 
character whose single-lifetime frame of reference aligns her with the reader—loose 
in an insular society in which relationships mutate over many lifetimes and age, 
gender, and family ties shift from incarnation to incarnation. The degree to which 
Ana is alienated and infantile in this context is what makes the world so fascinating; 
unfortunately, it also results in a huge experiential and lived-age gap that makes 
her romance with Sam somewhat creepy and her growing rapport with his friends 
unrealistic. There’s also a jarring disconnect between the fantasy plotline, which 
features thought-provoking cultural dynamics and existential questions, and the 
book’s clichéd emotional arc, in which Ana learns self-esteem by way of romance 
with someone who tells her she’s estimable. There’s nonetheless plenty of innovation 
in the social dynamics of the Range and the particular perils of the landscape, and 
dystopia fans will probably consider it a world worth visiting. CG
mellom, roBin Ditched: A Love Story. Hyperion, 2012 275p
ISBN 978-1-4231-4338-3 $16.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Reformed serial-kisser Justina has preserved her pucker for eight months for a shot 
at Ian, the prom date of her dreams. The trouble is, she’s not sure whether he sees 
her as more than just a friend; they know all of each other’s foibles (or they would, 
if he had any), but he’s never made any romantic overtures that she registers as 
such. Prom begins with an iridescent thrift-store dress worn semi-ironically and 
ends with Justina bedraggled and alone in a roadside ditch, trying to piece together 
what became of the night that started off with so much promise. She stumbles to 
a convenience store where she finds a couple of older women with sympathetic 
ears and pours out her tale of woe, working her way through the trail of stains and 
other wardrobe malfunctions that function as a map of the night’s mixed signals 
and missed encounters, each more zany than the last. Far-fetched and over the top? 
Oh, yeah. Predictable ending? Like an ’80s teen movie, complete with a character 
there to bear wistful witness to the triumph of young love. Irresistible? Fortunately, 
that too. A night on the couch with this one might just prove the cure for the bad-
school-dance blues. KC 
miChAelis, AntoniA The Storyteller; tr. from the German by Miriam Deb-
bage. Amulet/Abrams, 2012 402p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0047-7 $18.95  
R Gr. 10-12
In this German import, straitlaced, naïve Anna is drawn to Abel, a new boy whose 
past and present are enshrouded in rumors, the only confirmed one being that he 
is a drug dealer. She discovers that he is caring for his six-year-old sister, Micha, on 
his own now that his mother has disappeared, and she shamelessly eavesdrops on 
their conversation, finding herself enchanted by a story he is telling his sister about 
a young orphan queen who is being pursued by hunters who want her diamond 
heart. As Anna persists in her attention, Abel reluctantly lets her into their lives, 
even into their story, but when the people the characters are based on, including 
Micha’s abusive father and a nosy social worker, turn up dead, Anna is worried 
414 • The BulleTin
that the gentle Abel she knows may have a darker side. Indeed, when she pushes 
him into a physical relationship, her fears are realized when he begs her to stop 
and then violently rapes her, but by then she is deeply in love, and while she can’t 
forgive him, she can’t resist trying to help him. Michaelis draws out the mystery of 
the murders in fascinating ways, offering plausible suspects among the characters, 
including a classmate who is stalking Anna, and a teacher whose intentions are 
unclear. The story that Abel weaves presents an unsettling analogue to the actual 
events, bringing into sharp relief how much real life can resemble dark and dangerous 
fantasies, especially when abuse and drugs are involved. Shades of The Little Prince 
are self-consciously evoked, but both the fairy tale and the real story that unfolds 
around it are original and engrossing, and readers will find themselves, like Anna, 
irresistibly taken in by the enigmatic, shape-shifting storyteller. KC
mitChell, mArgAree king When Grandmama Sings; illus. by James E. Ran-
some. Amistad/HarperCollins 40p
ISBN 978-0-688-17563-4 $16.99  
R 5-8 yrs
Narrator Belle has always been proud of the way her grandmother, Ivory Belle Coles, 
could belt out a song in church—or in the kitchen, or in the garden. Grandmama’s 
unexpected invitation to tour as vocalist for a band offers Belle the opportunity to 
catch a glimpse of the world beyond Pecan Flats, Mississippi, as she can help “read 
signs and menus and such” for her illiterate grandmother. What the eight-year-old 
discovers on the tour is eye-opening indeed—the soaring voice of Grandmama as she 
rocks a nearly empty auditorium; the segregated hotels that deny accommodation 
even to such greats as Ella Fitzgerald; the feisty assertiveness of Grandmama as she 
demands service in a “Whites Only” diner; the triumph of Grandmama’s climactic 
performance to a rapt, racially mixed audience. No exact date is included for this 
fictional setting, but clothing styles, automobiles, and Jim Crow practices suggest 
the early 1950s. Ransome’s watercolor pictures exude the warmth and dignity of 
the performers as they navigate social obstacles throughout the segregated South 
and launch Grandmama into a late-in-life career up North “where things were a 
little easier for black people.” EB
moore, CArley e. The Stalker Chronicles. Farrar, 2012 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-374-37180-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Imagine Harriet the Spy older, girlier, more into boys, and even more insatiable for 
information. That’s Cammie, a high-school sophomore, whose history has involved 
such intense interest in guys (to the point of obtaining a yearbook photographer 
post just to take endless pictures of her crush and nobody else) that she’s now 
known around school as a stalker. When cute new guy Toby turns up in her small 
town, Cammie’s determined that she’ll change her ways, relate to him normally, 
and finally get the relationship she’s been longing for. The book steers clear of the 
light-hearted rom-com approach that forgives pathology in the name of true love; 
without becoming heavy-handed, Moore instead explores what’s driven Cammie to 
this behavior and how it’s seriously damaged her relationship with her classmates. 
Cammie’s an appealing and sympathetic narrator, and her pressing need to know 
is palpable, even as both she and the reader grasp that she’s going way too far (she 
even ends up pawing through Toby’s garbage in her search for knowledge). The 
April 2012 • 415
dissolution of Cammie’s parents’ marriage plausibly brings her dysfunctional pat-
terns into sharp relief, as her father practices similar behavior to Cammie’s (parked 
in a car on the street at night, he silently watches the house) and as both her stress 
and her awareness grow. Like other strong recent titles about girls who can’t control 
their invasive impulses (Hoffman’s It’s Not You, It’s Me, BCCB 9/09, and Graham’s 
Stalker Girl, BCCB 9/10), this is firm about the inappropriateness of its heroine’s 
action but reassuring about her ability to pull herself together, so those who share 
Cammie’s urges can read with hope and others can grasp that there but for the 
grace of God and impulse control go they. DS 
morpurgo, miChAel Kaspar the Titanic Cat; illus. by Michael Foreman. Harp-
er/HarperCollins, 2012 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-06-200618-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Fourteen-year-old orphan Johnny Trott, a bellhop at London’s Savoy Hotel, is 
befriended by the imperious but kindly Russian diva Countess Kandinsky, and he 
becomes the only person to whom she will entrust her equally imperious cat, Kaspar. 
When the Countess dies in an accident, Johnny clandestinely keeps an eye on the 
cat, even though he is not allowed to keep an animal in his room. A rambunctious 
little hotel guest, Lizziebeth Stanton, has an affinity for Kaspar, and when Johnny 
heroically saves Lizziebeth from falling off the hotel roof, the cat, the bellhop, and 
the guest form a bond so tight that, when the Stantons leave, Johnny stows away 
on the Titanic to follow them to the States. The rest, as they say, is history—or in 
this case a heavily fictionalized spin on it that has all the protagonists survive and 
Johnny gain a new family. Inspired by “a sculpture of a huge black cat” near the 
American Bar at the Savoy rather than by the titular shipwreck, Morpurgo nonethe-
less leverages the disaster’s centennial in order to flesh out his alternate backstory of 
the carved cat who, as a closing note explains, was seated as the fourteenth diner for 
Savoy parties comprising the unlucky number thirteen. Writing at another time, 
perhaps the author would have run with that intriguing, and more historically 
accurate, premise, but young readers stricken with Titanic fever will be more than 
happy to have yet another timely (if wildly ahistorical) take on the sinking instead. 
Noted illustrator Foreman provides monochromatic illustrations, in soft pencil and 
watercolor, that range from spot art to dramatic double-page spreads. EB
oCkler, sArAh Bittersweet. Simon Pulse, 2012 378p
ISBN 978-1-4424-3035-8 $16.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Hudson Avery is well on her way to fame and glory as a figure skater when her 
parents’ marriage falls messily apart. She then leaves skating to bury herself in a 
new avocation, making cupcakes, while her mother struggles to keep her diner 
afloat. As the economy tanks and revenues dwindle, Hudson’s mother asks her 
to start waiting tables in addition to providing the cupcakes for which the diner 
has achieved some fame. Resisting tying her own future to her mother’s dream 
of making the diner her legacy, Hudson secretly returns to skating, training for a 
scholarship competition that could be her ticket out of Watonka, New York. To get 
ice time, she also trains her high-school hockey team, which puts her in a romantic 
dither between the two equally hot co-captains. Hudson’s conflicting emotions are 
richly realized here; a lot of narrative time is spent on explaining the complicated 
416 • The BulleTin
nature of her various quandaries, but it needs to be, because neither her goals nor 
her motivations are simple or clear-cut. Instead, every move she makes has ripples 
of consequences that drive her to seek a clarity that eludes her; it’s hard for her to 
figure out which activities constitute avoidance and escapism, and which are keep-
ing her involved and grounded in her own life. Although her eventual choices are 
fully explained and elaborated, not all readers will agree with them, making this 
an engaging and sometimes emotionally challenging read as Hudson tries to sort 
out what really matters. KC
oliver, lAuren Pandemonium. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-197806-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-21099-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
In Delirium (BCCB 2/11), eighteen-year-old Lena escaped the “Cure” (a gov-
ernment-mandated procedure to rid her of the emotion of love) by fleeing to the 
unregulated Wilds, only to see the love of her life shot down by enforcers. Now 
Lena, near to death from exposure, has been taken in by ragtag group of Invalids 
(uncured rebels) and nursed back to health until she is capable of joining the re-
sistance herself. Her first assignment sends her back into regulated territory, where 
she is to infiltrate a pro-Cure group by getting close to Julian Fineman, the son 
of the group’s leading spokesperson; unfortunately, things go awry when she and 
Julian are kidnapped by violent extremists and must work together to escape with 
their lives. Chapters alternate between “now,” detailing the current debacle with 
Julian, and “then,” recounting her recovery in the Wilds, her mourning of Alex, 
and her rebirth as a resister. Although the artful prose of the introspective “then” 
chapters teeters towards melodrama, it is Lena’s hard-won transformation from 
bereft, clueless girl to a vengeful, cold assassin that makes up the emotional core 
here. Both her grief and her subsequent fury are keenly felt so that when she sud-
denly rediscovers her compassion upon meeting Julian—an utterly unremarkable 
love interest—their ensuing romantic relationship feels more like a plot convenience 
than an organic development. Fortunately, gaining freedom requires more kicking 
butt than canoodling from Lena, and she proves herself equal to any of the genre’s 
current top female fighters (read: Katniss). The political plot behind the kidnapping 
makes it clear that both Lena and the reader are still in for some surprises, and the 
gasp-worthy final page sets the stage for a promising conclusion to this trilogy. KQG
petruChA, stefAn Ripper. Philomel, 2012 [432p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25524-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When Ellis Orphanage in 1895 New York moves to a more modern building, 
fourteen-year-old Carver Young is among the older children who are placed out in 
families or work. Carver lands the placement of his dreams, apprentice to eccentric 
Albert Hawking, who lives at the asylum on Blackwell’s Island (the better to study 
the criminal mind) and helps run the New Pinkertons, an offshoot of the original 
detective agency that now operates from an underground complex. Hawking and 
his partner Septimus Tudd have done their homework, and they realize before 
Carver does that the boy’s father is likely Jack the Ripper, who has moved across 
the ocean to shadow the son he recently discovered. As the truth of his parentage 
April 2012 • 417
becomes ever more obvious to Carver, he adds his own detection skills to those of 
the New York Police under commissioner Theodore Roosevelt, the New Pinker-
tons, and New York Times reporters as they attempt to close in on the killer, who is 
once again plying his murderous trade, this time among New York society ladies. 
The crime drama central to this novel is enhanced by the gadget-rich labors of 
the New Pinkertons, the overlapping and often oppositional efforts of parties hot 
on the Ripper’s trail, and Carver’s own self-doubts as he considers what it might 
mean to be the son of a notorious murderer. The Ripper’s butchery is largely more 
implied than pointedly described, and there’s far more action and strategy than 
gore to be had. Still, the air is thick with an atmosphere of evil, and readers who 
are just making the acquaintance of the mass murderer will doubtless be lured on 
to speculation about Ripper’s identity in the true-crime shelves. EB
pinkwAter, dAniel Mrs. Noodlekugel; illus. by Adam Stower. Candlewick, 
2012 [80p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5053-7 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5971-4 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 1-3
Young Nick and his sister Maxine are intrigued by the tiny house behind their high-
rise apartment building, a house where a nice old lady named Mrs. Noodlekugel 
lives. Visiting their new neighbor, Nick and Maxine are amazed: Mrs. N has a cat 
who can talk and bake (“Mr. Fuzzface is also an expert dancer, and he is teaching 
himself to play the piano”) and a group of “prizewinning” far-sighted mice. Better 
yet, Mrs. Noodlekugel will be their babysitter, and things get even more exciting 
when the kids help her make gingerbread mice (they trace around the real mice 
on the dough) and the baked gingermice come to life and scamper out the door 
(“It is just something that happens,” Mrs. Noodlekugel explains to the children). 
The gentle whimsy and humorous tone of this title will have many young readers 
hoping that this is the beginning of a series. Simple vocabulary (with the occasional 
big word thrown in), crisp sentence structure, and a large typeface make this very 
accessible for kids ready to step up from easy readers into short chapter books. This 
would also make an amusing short readaloud selection, however, with Pinkwater’s 
funny dialogue sure to generate plenty of chuckles. Final art not seen. JH
potter, AliCiA Mrs. Harkness and the Panda; illus. by Melissa Sweet. Knopf, 
2012 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94448-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84448-5 $16.99  
R 6-9 yrs
What with the common affection for pandas these days, it’s easy to forget there 
was a time when people outside of China had no idea of what one was. One of 
the first people to change that was Ruth Harkness, New York socialite and widow 
of an explorer, who in 1936 left her comfortable home to travel to the wilds of 
China in hopes of bringing the first panda ever to America. Though dismissed by 
those in the know, Mrs. Harkness found a sympathetic guide, journeyed through 
the mountains where pandas dwelled, and finally found a baby panda, which 
she named Su Lin; after taking him back to America, she gave him to Chicago’s 
Brookfield Zoo. While audiences will need to resort to the end matter to get some 
of their questions answered (especially “What happened to Su Lin?”), it’s an in-
418 • The BulleTin
triguing picture of one woman’s unexpected daring and an event that changed the 
popular face of world zoology. Sweet backs her trim line-and-watercolor figures 
with collections of memorabilia, rich textures, and swatches of Chinese manuscript, 
leavening intricate, carefully framed historical compositions with open and coolly 
beautiful landscapes; the result effectively conveys both the freshness of Harkness’ 
experience and the storied past of the country that was so startlingly new to her. 
Pair this with Joanne Ryder’s Panda Kindergarten (BCCB 9/09) for a deeper look 
at these appealing critters, or with one of Don Brown’s explorer picture books to 
give Ruth Harkness some classic context. End matter includes a timeline, a note 
with more information about the impact of Harkness’ acquisition of Su Lin, and 
a selected bibliography. DS
priCe, lissA Starters. Delacorte, 2012 [342p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99060-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74237-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97523-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
When a deadly virus wipes out the entire population of the U.S. save the elderly and 
the young, who were both vaccinated against it, the result is a dysfunctional society 
polarized between young “Starters” and the increasingly long-lived “Enders.” Chil-
dren who are unclaimed by surviving relatives are institutionalized, and many—like 
Callie and her little brother, Tyler—learn to fend for themselves in virtual hiding 
from the law to escape that fate. With Tyler sick, Callie takes the drastic step of 
signing a contract with a company called Prime Destinations: in exchange for a 
ridiculous amount of money, she will essentially rent out her body three times to 
Enders, allowing them to transfer their consciousness to her mind and enjoy being 
young again (with limits, of course) for the agreed-upon allotment of time. Her third 
client, though, is pursuing a vendetta against the company, which she believes either 
killed or permanently sold her granddaughter; a connection malfunction means that 
Callie and her renter, Helena, must work together to expose Prime Destinations’ 
crimes. The world-building is engaging but the character development here is flat, 
with neither Callie’s love interests, nor Helena’s friendships, nor Callie’s ability to 
impersonate an Ender at all convincing. Still, the body-swap premise allows for 
plenty of twists to spice up the plot, and this latest take on dystopian resistance 
offers enough new ideas to the mix to make it worth a read for genre devotees. CG
QuiCk, mAtthew Boy21. Little, 2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-316-12797-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Finley McManus knows he’s never going to be a basketball superstar, but he’s look-
ing forward to a successful senior year as co-captain and point guard, feeding the 
ball to his more talented teammate Terrell. Coach throws a wrench in the plan by 
asking Finley for an unusual favor—to take under his wing Russell Washington, 
the disturbed son of a family friend. Boy21, as Russell now calls himself, was a 
phenom back in California until his parents were killed and he withdrew into an 
outer-space obsession and refused to play ball. Finley’s task is to coax Russell back 
into the game, even if it means losing precious time with his girlfriend, Erin, and 
possibly even his slot as point guard. If it isn’t difficult enough for Finley, who’s 
April 2012 • 419
white, to shepherd around an insanely tall black kid in a homemade superhero 
costume, they’re allowed social acceptance in their small town only through the 
sufferance of the Irish mob boss (Erin’s brother) and a black drug dealer (Terrell’s 
brother), who have graciously agreed to let the weird kid have his space. Just as 
Boy21 begins to get his life back together, Finley’s goes into a tailspin when Erin 
is run down by an enemy of her brother and Finley is forced to confront violent 
childhood memories he’s chosen to repress. There’s a boatload of melodrama here 
that nearly capsizes amid the plot points, but Quick assembles a cast that seems so 
credible in both vulnerability and resilience that their travails are almost plausible. 
Basketball and the witness protection program don’t generally share the same novel, 
but the sheer oddity of the mix should draw some fans. EB
rApp, AdAm The Children and the Wolves. Candlewick, 2012 [160p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5337-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5625-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 10 up
Three eighth-graders kidnap a little girl and hide her in a basement. Why? That’s 
the question that is slowly explored over the course of this latest exploration of 
adolescent capacity for monstrosity from Adam Rapp (33 Snowfish, BCCB 5/03, 
etc.). Bounce, a rich, genius-smart, charismatic girl bored with the “cardboard joke” 
of the world, is a budding sociopath who concocts the kidnapping as part of her 
convoluted plan to attack a poet who visits her class and undermines her worldview. 
Wiggins and Orange—both desperately poor, both severely psychologically scarred, 
both hooked on the “Oxycotton” and sexual favors Bounce doles out to them—are 
her willing pawns. As the plan falls apart and Bounce expands her target base, 
with horrific consequences, Wiggins starts to break away from her influence. The 
savage, dreamlike narration rotates among the three kidnappers and their charge, 
three-and-a-half-year-old Frog, who is increasingly unable to distinguish between 
reality and the graphic video game she’s been given to play during her incarcera-
tion, in which children battle wolves in the forest and the winning group gets to 
eat the other. Rapp paints a bleak and deeply disturbing portrait of the soulless-
ness of contemporary adolescence, from the casual racism that pervades the book’s 
language to its obsessive attention to the grotesque and visceral. Give this one to 
readers mature enough to catch the commentary embedded in all the brutality. CG
renner, ellen Castle of Shadows; illus. by Wilson Swain. Houghton, 
2012 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-547-74446-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Eleven-year-old Charlie may be the Royal Princess of Quale, but her life has been 
no fairy tale. After her mother mysteriously disappeared five years ago, her king 
father went mad, leaving Charlie in the care of a sadistic housekeeper and allowing 
the charming but potentially duplicitous prime minister to act as regent over the 
struggling country. When Charlie discovers an old letter written by her mother, she 
becomes certain that locating the missing queen will put a stop to the whispers of 
revolution, reinstate the power of the monarchy, and save the kingdom. Unfortu-
nately, she has no idea whom to trust with such a task: former friend of her parents 
and eminent smooth-talker Prime Minister Windlass; her kindly and knowledge-
420 • The BulleTin
able but mostly cowardly tutor, Mr. Moleglass; or Tobias, the bossy and annoying 
gardener’s boy who seems to know more abut the castle than Charlie does herself? 
Here is court intrigue designed for the younger set, and Renner deftly manages an 
abundance of secrets and subterfuge to create an accessible, compelling tale that 
reads almost like a Victorian spy thriller, complete with double identities, threats 
to national security, and life-threatening rooftop jaunts. The imaginary kingdom 
of Quale has the distinct feel of nineteenth-century Britain; the shadowy passage-
ways of a castle in ruin and an urban populace steeped in poverty and rebellion 
make for an ideal backdrop to the plot’s many twists and turns. Flawed by both 
her stubbornness and gullibility, Charlie is more authentic than the average plucky 
protagonist, and her transformation from political pawn to royal powerhouse will 
give readers something to cheer for as they sort out the identity of the real bad guy. 
An ending that has the king become a hero and the queen safely returned sets the 
stage for a sequel to this atmospheric British import. KQG
rossi, veroniCA Under the Never Sky. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 374p
ISBN 978-0-06-207203-0 $17.99  
R Gr. 9-12
Aria lives in a protected domed city where the monotony of existence is buried 
under layers of virtual reality and constant technological input. Perry lives in the 
harsh world outside, where Aether storms scorch the earth and imbue a select few 
(including Perry) with enhanced senses essential to humanity’s continuing survival. 
Their paths collide when he, breaking into the food stores of the dome, rescues her 
from a psychotic but politically powerful peer. Aria’s cast out for what she knows 
of the attack, Perry’s exiled when his nephew is kidnapped in retaliation for his 
break-in, and the two reluctantly team up, needing to share knowledge when it 
turns out that Perry’s nephew’s kidnapping and Aria’s mother’s disappearance are 
related. Having spent her whole life in such a sterile environment, Aria is disgusted 
by the messy reality of life on the outside even as she is fascinated by its tactile details 
and vivid sensory impact. The differences between her and Perry are thoughtfully 
explored: with each raised on scary bedtime stories about the other, she finds him 
primitive, he finds her barely human, and their relationship (come on, you knew it 
was inevitable) develops with refreshing slowness. In the meantime, it’s exhilarating 
to watch Aria develop into a strong, purposeful heroine, discovering and reveling 
in her own skills as she’s honed by the hardships of the real world, fully alive for 
the first time. Aria and Perry’s complementary skill sets are a neat metaphor for 
the state of their societies, each dysfunctional and disintegrating without the other, 
and Rossi unravels this world’s secrets, perils, and wonders with a sure hand. CG
rothenBerg, jess The Catastrophic History of You and Me. Dial, 2012 375p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3720-4 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
More than a few teenagers (and adults) have felt that their lives were over when they 
got dumped, but for fifteen-year-old Brie it’s actually true: when her boyfriend Jacob 
tells her that he no longer loves her, Brie’s heart spontaneously tears in two and she 
dies. The afterlife looks oddly like her California hometown of Half Moon Bay, and 
she finds herself in the heavenly version of her favorite pizza joint, where she meets 
Patrick, resident Lost Soul and guide to all things post-mortem. He informs her 
that she will have to work her way through the five stages of grief with a series of 
visits to her old life; unfortunately, her need to meddle in the lives of those she left 
April 2012 • 421
behind (sometimes via snarky text message) threatens her chance at eternal peace. 
This is a lighter take on a dead-girl narrator than other recent treatments (Warman’s 
Between, BCCB 7/11, Hudson’s Hereafter, BCCB 9/11), and Rothenberg keeps the 
tone light and the pace snappy as Brie negotiates the afterlife with a bubbly wit 
and a keen sense of irony. Peppered with slang and pop culture references, Brie’s 
voice is utterly adolescent, and her lively, flirtatious banter with Patrick, though 
bordering on precious, rivals that of any blockbuster rom-com. Readers are asked 
to suspend disbelief the minute Brie’s heart stops, but their credulity will be sorely 
tested by the many inconsistencies in the author’s version of life after death and 
the inexplicable climax that seems to refute several of the rules established in the 
book’s beginning. Readers are likely to forgive these discrepancies, however, as they 
lay the groundwork for an ending that grants happiness to all involved, both in 
this life and the next. KQG 
sAlAs, lAurA purdie A Leaf Can Be…; illus. by Violeta Dabija. Millbrook, 
2012 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-6203-6 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-8847-0 $13.95  
R 5-8 yrs
Playful rhyming text explores the many roles a leaf can play, from providing shelter 
for animals in the rain (“Rain stopper”) to housing cocoons (“Soft cradle”), to 
purifying the air (“Air cleaner”), to providing autumnal entertainment for children 
(“Pile grower”). The terms are poetically focused, yet they compactly sum up some 
complicated processes, so the book offers abundant opportunity for discussion of 
scientific concepts from photosynthesis (“Sun taker/ Food maker”) to camouflage 
(“Moth matcher” and “Snake concealer”). An accessible and useful explanatory note 
at the end of the book breaks down the meaning of each verse in detailed paragraphs, 
providing the lesson for each reference (e.g.,“Hill glow-er: In fall, the weather cools 
off and days grow shorter. Leaves stop making chlorophyll, the substance that turns 
them green”). Dabija’s light-infused digital compositions balance crisp-edged ele-
ments against soft, misty effects, the style counterpointing the stylized, toylike figures 
with carefully designed compositions and sophisticated use of controlled palettes. 
Each spread is bursting with natural wonder, and while the animals are cute rather 
than realistic, the art creatively and effectively supports the text’s evocation of the 
leafy world. This is an ideal curricular introduction to a unit on leaves, but it will 
also find plenty of readers drawn to its rich language and portrayal of the natural 
world. A glossary and list of further reading are included. HM
sAldin, erin The Girls of No Return. Levine/Scholastic, 2012 345p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-31026-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-39253-2 $17.99  
R* Gr. 9-12
Every girl at Alice Marshall, a residential school for troubled girls in the wilds of 
Idaho, has a painful history, and those histories are shrouded in rumor, mystery, 
and sometimes even bravado, despite the efforts of the faculty to get the girls to 
open up and deal honestly with their pasts. Lida is determined to keep her story 
a secret, and she’s doing okay maintaining her distance from her cabinmates, in-
cluding the dangerous and sinister Boone (whose backstory contains confirmed 
accounts of arson and rumors of murder), until a beautiful, charismatic girl named 
Gia arrives. Gia threatens Boone’s place at the top of the school hierarchy, and Lida 
422 • The BulleTin
finds herself caught between the two girls, as Boone begins to open up to Lida, and 
Gia too seems to single her out for the much-coveted position of confidante. Even 
as it becomes clear that Gia is playing Lida, Lida’s attracted to her, and she has to 
choose between honest friendship with Boone and the possibility of something 
more with Gia. Motivation is subtly but masterfully conveyed here, with hints 
that it’s Lida’s unresolved grief over being abandoned by her mother that makes 
her vulnerable to Gia’s manipulation. Unexpected kindness comes her way through 
Jules, an oddly perky classmate; Margaret, a teacher who encourages her gifts as a 
naturalist; and Lida’s stepmother, who has borne much of Lida’s displaced anger. 
In a landscape as fraught with sinister attraction, suppressed rage, and unresolved 
grief as it is with natural beauty, Lida works her way slowly toward redemption 
with the help of Boone, whose damage has ultimately left her with a hard-edged 
capacity for forgiveness that outstrips Lida’s considerable inclinations for mean-
ness and betrayal. This is an unflinching portrayal of the sometimes brutal but not 
necessarily irrevocable fall-out of misdirected pain. KC 
sAuer, tAmmi Me Want Pet!; illus. by Bob Shea. Wiseman/Simon, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-0810-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
Cave boy has plenty of useful possessions (“Rocks. Sticks. A club”) but what he 
really wants is a pet. When he asks, hopefully, to keep a woolly mammoth he has 
found, Mama protests: “He too big. Where he sleep?” Cave Boy searches again, this 
time bringing home a saber-tooth tiger, but his dad turns out to be allergic: “Make 
me sneeze! No can stay.” Even an orphaned baby dodo bird can’t make the family 
relent (Gran declaims, “No can keep! He no potty-trained”), until the mammoth 
and tiger save Cave Boy and the dodo from being trampled by a herd of stampeding 
animals (“Phew-ga!” cheers the family in relief), and Cave Boy is allowed to keep 
all three of his prehistoric pets. Sauer’s terse text is an absolute hoot, and while any 
adult who touches this is going to immediately want to read it aloud, the simply 
worded short sentences make this amusing and accessible fare for young solo 
readers as well. Shea’s blocky digital illustrations add plenty of punch to the text 
with saturated tones of red, orange, gold, acid green, and turquoise offering lots of 
contrast against the more muted blues, greens, browns, and grays of some of the 
backgrounds. Thick, charcoal-like black outlines give a primitive cave-art feel to 
the simplified human and animal figures, but humorously so: Gran, for example, 
may wear a leopard-spotted tunic, but she also sports oversized spectacles and a 
remarkably tidy bun, even whilst bashing stuff with a club. Besides being enjoyed 
on its own, this would also make a novel selection for a pet-themed storytime, or 
a great springboard for a silly short class play. JH
sChABAs, mArthA Various Positions. Foster/Farrar, 2012 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-374-38086-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
When Georgia is accepted to the best ballet school in Toronto, she’s thrilled. Her 
joy isn’t simply because she’s a dedicated acolyte of dance, but also because ballet 
school gets the fourteen-year-old out of public school, where the growing sexual 
interest of her classmates fills her with panic; additionally, she’s keen to get away 
from the strife in her family, which, in Georgia’s eyes, is the fault of her weak, de-
April 2012 • 423
manding, and overdramatic mother. While ballet school isn’t the complete departure 
from adolescent sexuality she had hoped, she’s elated by her growing recognition 
there; she also believes that her attention from Roderick Allen, the famous dancer 
who’s for decades been the school’s artistic director, indicates an interest beyond 
the professional—which leads to her taking disastrous actions to encourage him. 
While Schabas’ narrative voice for Georgia is often oversophisticated for both the 
character and the age, the exploration itself is nuanced and disturbing. Georgia’s 
already skewed read on relationships (she has absorbed her father’s view that 
husband-pleasing is the main marital goal) plausibly unbalances further amid the 
ballet school’s all-encompassing focus on the director’s approval. It’s frighteningly, 
heartbreakingly believable that she’s convinced that her winning that approval has 
sexual implications, which in turn gives her a significance in a man’s eyes that she 
yearns for, and that her parents’ emotional neglect of her combines with her own 
naïveté to clear the way for some appalling missteps. This will resonate with many 
girls negotiating the meaning of their own bodies and the implications of male 
attention. DS
seeger, lAurA vACCAro Green; written and illus. by Laura Vaccaro Seeger. Por-
ter/RoaringBrook, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-397-7 $16.99  
R 4-6 yrs
In this concept book from the author/illustrator of First the Egg (BCCB 12/07), 
every spread evokes a different kind of green. The spare text (only two words, one 
of them “green,” per spread) starts out literally, with depictions of forest green (a 
forest) and lime green (limes), then moves towards more abstract representations, 
such as a caterpillar for “slow green,” a stop sign for “never green,” and a wintry 
white scene for “no green.” Each spread includes a small die-cut hole (or holes) on 
the recto that reveals the next page, allowing a coordinating part of the upcoming 
spread to peek through; conversely, when the page is turned, the aperture now on 
the verso coordinates with the previous spread. While not all of the interpretations 
are equally successful, this is overall an enticing project in color exploration and 
language, and the use of the die-cuts to knit each spread to others is a cunning 
device. The acrylic paints in the full-bleed spreads are heavily applied to textured 
canvases, and there is subsequently a great deal of texture in each painting, and the 
large scale would share well with a crowd. There may not be enough heft here to 
stand alone as a group readaloud, but listeners will likely want a closer examination 
of the rich paintings and the intricate workings of the die-cuts when storytime is 
through. HM 
snyder, lAurel Good Night, Laila Tov; illus. by Jui Ishida. Random House, 
2012 28p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96868-6 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86868-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89939-3 $10.99  
M 5-8 yrs
In this rhyming story, a family camping trip provides the impetus for a brother 
and sister exploring the natural world. The family first stops at the ocean, where 
kids play in the waves and camp on the sandy beach, then continues to a grassy 
hillside, where the kids gather berries by day and get caught in the rain by night. 
Exhausted from all their adventuring, the children periodically collapse and sleep 
424 • The BulleTin
to the repeated refrain, in mixed English and Hebrew, of “Good night, laila tov.” 
Unfortunately, only the jacket flap makes clear that the activity is part of the tra-
dition of tikkun olam (repairing the world), and there’s no explanation that “laila 
tov” means “good night.” The rhyming verse is bland and jingly (“We stopped for 
dinner, stopped to see . . . /Stopped again so I could pee”), and the family’s apparent 
habit of planting seedlings near their campsites is actually more ecological threat 
than reparation. Ishida’s scenes are chock full of activity, but the colors tip into the 
lurid, and the draftsmanship is stiff and uninviting. Tikkun olam is a compelling 
tradition, but this simply doesn’t effectively introduce it to young people or offer 
a compensatory story; turn instead to Schwartz’s folkloric Gathering Sparks for an 
accessible examination of the concept. HM
spires, Ashley Larf; written and illus. by Ashley Spires. Kids Can, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-1-55453-701-3 $16.95  
R 5-8 yrs
Larf the sasquatch “lives a quiet life in the woods with his bunny, Eric,” and he 
likes it that way. He has thus far managed to elude mankind, but when he reads 
in the newspaper that a sasquatch will be appearing in a nearby city, he realizes the 
benefits of a same-species friendship (“Teeter-tottering would no longer be impos-
sible. He could share hair grooming tips. And his witty commentary on cheesy 
movies would no longer go to waste”). After traveling to town to meet the featured 
’squatch, Larf is disappointed to find instead a man wearing a costume (“It was all a 
BIG FAKE”), on his way home, however, he encounters another duped would-be 
sasquatch visitor—a nice female sasquatch named Shurl. Spires’ wry, matter-of-fact 
relaying of the eccentric yet appealingly ordinary details of Larf’s life makes this 
a humorously absurd story that will appeal to the sort of kids who love Willems’ 
Naked Mole Rat Gets Dressed (BCCB 2/09). Slyly comic touches in both text and 
illustrations (which are “rendered in vegetable-based watercolor, biodegradable 
ink, recycled paper collage and a dollop of Organic Sasquatch Detangler and 
Conditioning Shampoo”) make this a beginning-to-end delight. More than one 
human, for example, mistakes Larf for “Aunt Mildred,” while, in the city scenes, 
the hulking, beret-clad Larf is depicted wearing the bug-eyed, buck-toothed Eric in 
a baby-sling that appears to render the poor bunny completely immobile. Careful 
viewers will also pick up subtle visual clues about Shurl’s existence several pages 
before Larf notices her. Sasquatches may not be real, but Larf will make readers 
wish they were. JH
stAmpler, Ann redisCh Where It Began. Simon Pulse, 2012 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2321-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2323-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
It begins with an extreme makeover that turns Gabby from an ordinary girl into a 
beauty that her mother can finally be proud of. Extensions, highlights, makeup, and 
new clothes catch the attention of Billy Nash, and Gabby begins to think that her 
mother may have been right about the value of transforming herself. Her relation-
ship with Billy is a bit of a minefield, but Gabby walks carefully, weighing every 
comment, text message, and sultry look to achieve just the right level of flirtatious 
April 2012 • 425
interest without seeming needy. Then one night she awakens to find herself alone 
on the ground beside Billy’s totaled BMW, smelling of beer and vodka, unable 
to remember anything about how she got there. When she, home and recuperat-
ing, finally hears from Billy, he’s relieved that she doesn’t remember anything and 
encourages her to keep her mouth shut; he even gets his mother to arrange for a 
lawyer for her so that her punishment for drunkenly wrecking the car won’t be that 
bad. Readers will obviously smell a huge rat in Billy’s eager steering of the blame to 
Gabby, but she sees what she wants to see, and since she really doesn’t remember 
what happened, she accepts that she stole her boyfriend’s car and destroyed it. Her 
intense need for his love is as relatable as it is pathetic; even while covering their 
faces with their hands, readers will see themselves in Gabby as as they suffer vicari-
ously through her willful ignorance of what a manipulative jerk Billy is. The weird 
reactions of her classmates to what they misunderstand as her extreme girlfriend 
loyalty are a severe indictment of the whole high school class/gender system, and 
the narcissistic parents get a lashing as well, but it’s all done in a context that avoids 
preaching in favor of involving and emotionally rich storytelling. KC 
stone, phoeBe The Boy on Cinnamon Street. Levine/Scholastic, 2012 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-21512-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-39316-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-7
Once Louise lived with her parents on Cinnamon Street and loved doing gymnastics 
more than anything. Now the seventh-grader lives with her grandparents in their 
condo and she’s quit even cartwheeling for fun, instead spending her time with 
friends Reni and her brother Henderson Elliot, whose warm and embracing family 
she adores. When a cute ninth-grader turns up on her doorstep delivering pizza, and 
she then finds a note under the mat confessing interest in Louise, she’s transported 
into her first serious crush. There are the bones of a familiar plot here—it’s not the 
pizza boy but Louise’s dear friend Henderson who likes her—but Stone fleshes it 
out with a vivid, tender tale of loss, grief, and very first romance that’s subtly woven 
but still easily accessible. It’s clear from the beginning that Louise is trying to repress 
her grief from a recent tragedy, and Stone gradually unpeels the truth about Louise’s 
mother’s suicide following her father’s leaving. The book is particularly original in 
the deft way the crush story partners with the plot of Louise’s processing of her loss, 
but it’s also a wonderful human tale in general with superlative characterization 
(Louise’s adoring, vibrant grandparents step out of stereotype and into heroism) 
and observations of human dynamics (her beloved Elliots are actually as flawed as 
anybody else). Most winning of all, however, is the romance itself, which bursts out 
in a joyful, honey-sweet dénouement that’s destined to be one of the great romantic 
moments in preteen fiction. Younger kids not ready for or interested in the steamy 
teen fantasy romances currently abounding will be thrilled to find a moving and 
delightful treatment of love among the lockers. DS
426 • The BulleTin
strAtton, AllAn The Grave Robber’s Apprentice. Harper/HarperCollins, 
2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-06-197608-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Hans has been helping his foster father pilfer graves since he washed up on the shores 
of the Archduchy of Waldland as a baby, but as he approaches his thirteenth birthday, 
he will be reluctantly going on his first solo grave-robbing adventure. Fortunately 
for Countess Angela Gabriel von Schwanenberg, Hans has been instructed to raid 
her family’s tomb—which is where she happens to be trapped after faking her own 
death to avoid a marriage to the evil archduke. After springing the twelve-year-old 
countess from her coffin, Hans decides to forgo graverobbing indefinitely and help 
the girl rescue her imprisoned parents. Pursued by the archduke, a necromancer, 
and the necromancer’s demonic minions, Hans and the young countess venture 
through a fairy-tale forest, complete with wolf kings, a traveling minstrel family, 
and a hermit guarding a very important secret regarding Hans’ true identity. Read-
ers will guess early on who Hans truly is, but if anything, that makes the journey 
even more delightful as Stratton all but promises his audiences a happy ending—a 
promise that makes the chilling scenes with the necromancer and the truly lecher-
ous archduke slightly more palatable. The pace and tone here are straight out of 
Storybook 101: the book starts off with a slow build and finishes with not one 
but three triumphant moments, all the while giving sly nods to the reader as each 
villain gets his comeuppance. Readers who like their fairy tales packed with action 
and happy endings will want to add this to their collection. KQG
tAvAres, mAtt There Goes Ted Williams: The Greatest Hitter Who Ever Lived; 
written and illus. by Matt Tavares. Candlewick, 2012 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-2789-8 $16.99  
R Gr. 2-4
With Phil Bildner’s The Unforgettable Season and Fred Bowen’s No Easy Way (BCCB 
7/11; BCCB 4/10) already gracing the picture-book collection, why bother with 
another Ted Williams story? Because Tavares puts Williams’ stellar 1941 season into 
the context of his total career, with attention to his childhood and high school years, 
his military service in both World War II and the Korean War, and his return to 
professional baseball at the ripe old age of thirty-five. Readers eager for an account of 
Williams’ explosive home runs will be equally riveted by his explosive crash landing 
of a fighter jet in Korea: “His plane hits the landing strip engulfed in flames, going 
225 miles per hour, and skids for nine thousand feet. Pieces of the plane break off. 
Everything but the cockpit is on fire.” Watercolor and pencil illustrations convey 
a larger-than-life, often heroic image of Williams as slugger and warrior, but the 
visual portrayal is tempered by endnotes that bring the subject back down to Earth: 
“He had a terrible temper. He swore too much. He threw tantrums. . . . He hated 
sportswriters, and most of them hated him.” Along with a bibliography of adult 
resources, Tavares offers a chart of Williams’ Red Sox career stats. Mr. Personality? 
Maybe not. But Greatest Hitter? Numbers tell their own tale. EB
April 2012 • 427
tooke, wes King of the Mound: My Summer with Satchel Paige. Simon, 
2012 [160p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3346-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3348-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Nick has just been released from the hospital where he’s been recovering from po-
lio, and his father, a catcher for the Bismarck Churchills semi-pro baseball team, 
makes it clear he now regards his son as a pitiful cripple. The team owner, Mr. 
Churchill, finds plenty of odd jobs for Nick to do, and as Nick stows away his leg 
brace (against doctor’s orders) and forces himself to carry out normal activities, he 
begins to see some hope that he’ll eventually regain his old spot as pitcher on the 
local kids’ team. Help comes from an unexpected corner: Mr. Churchill has put 
together an integrated barnstorming team for the 1935 season, with Satchel Paige 
as pitcher, and Paige nudges Nick along with liniment, coaching, and tough-hearted 
encouragement. Although the Nick/Paige plot is fictional, the Bismarck Churchills 
and their big win at the inaugural National Baseball Congress semi-pro champion-
ship in Wichita is based on fact. Moreover, Tooke keeps his portrayal of Paige as 
accurate as possible, ably balancing the player’s on-field antics with cocky faith in 
his own phenomenal abilities and ever-simmering resentment of the injustices he 
faces within the segregated baseball system. Readers looking for a more realistic 
alternative to Dan Gutman’s time-travel baseball adventures (Honus and Me et al.) 
have come to the right place. EB
vAn leeuwen, jeAn Five Funny Bunnies: Three Bouncing Tales; illus. by Anne 
Wilsdorf. Cavendish, 2012 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6114-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6115-9 $17.99  
R 4-6 yrs
Mrs. Rabbit’s five little bunnies are a lively lapine crew, and in these three short 
stories, they (like most siblings) alternately fuss and play nicely with each other. In 
the first story, “Pie,” the bunnies help their mother bake a berry pie for Grandma, 
but on the way there the pie is jostled out of the buggy (“Well, we might as well 
finish it off,” says Mrs. Rabbit). In “Tricks,” the siblings show off the various skills 
they have mastered (including scooter-riding, jumping rope, and pogo-sticking), 
while Baby Sadie takes her first hop. “Nap Time” sees Flossie, the eldest, taking 
charge, telling her sibs a tale about a princess and a dragon that successfully puts 
four out of the five to sleep; only Baby Sadie is left awake to finish the story (and 
the book) with a “The end.” This isn’t quite as stellar as Van Leeuwen’s delightful 
Oliver and Amanda series, but the bunnies are a cheery lot and the text is brisk and 
energetic. The rabbits’ dialogue and the ear-pleasing language play (“They hippity-
HOPPED till they flippety-FLOPPED in the grass”) will make this an enjoyable 
early text for readers and listeners alike. Wilsdorf’s bright, spirited watercolor and 
china-ink illustrations are crisply executed and capably depict the bouncing bun-
nies in all their boundless energy; their long-nosed, pop-eyed faces are particularly 
expressive. Pair this with Martin’s Five Little Piggies (BCCB 5/98) or one of Wells’ 
Max and Ruby titles for an animal-centered storytime about siblings. JH
428 • The BulleTin
voAke, steve Hooey Higgins and the Shark; illus. by Emma Dodson. Candle-
wick, 2012 [112p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5782-6 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Hooey Higgins needs money—£65, to be exact. That’s the cost of the enormous 
chocolate egg in the candy shop that Hooey and his best pal, Twig, are determined 
to buy. After learning that a shark has been spotted off the coast of their seaside 
British town, Hooey, Twig, and Will decide to catch it and charge people a pound 
a piece to view it. While their shark-catching plan fails, Hooey does discover an 
enormous sea urchin, and the trio decides to charge people to come look at it, a 
plan that goes awry when Hooey’s grandpa and his friend discover that what Hooey 
has found is actually a World War II mine, a revelation that, in a roundabout way, 
eventually leads to Hooey’s not only seeing a shark but also acquiring the chocolate 
egg for which he’s yearned. Already an established series figure in Britain, Hooey 
appears here in his American debut, and readers who speed through this fast and 
funny read will hope that more installments quickly become available. Voake’s text 
is both lively and wry (“Twig flattened himself against the wall in an effort not to 
be seen, but the fact that he was painted bright green, wearing a sandwich board, 
and had bendy straws sticking out of his head made it rather difficult”), and his 
characters are fresh and believable. Dodson’s numerous monochromatic ink and 
gouache illustrations are equally original: the stylized human figures have the hip, 
scribbly flavor of cutting edge cartooning, and illustrations and hand-lettered text 
interweave amiably with the prose. Although this has broad appeal, it might be 
a particularly good choice for the boys goofing off in the back of the room. JH
wAlton, k. m. Cracked. Simon Pulse, 2012 312p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2916-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2918-5 $9.99  
Ad Gr. 6-9
Bull has been regularly beaten by his alcoholic grandfather and mother, who blame 
him for screwing up his mother’s life and driving his grandmother to an early grave. 
Victor is abused in a different way: his parents withhold love from him, insisting that 
he conform to an impossible standard of perfection. Punished for not achieving a 
perfect score on the SATs, he swallows his mother’s prescription sleeping-pill stash. 
Bull’s had enough as well, but when his attempt to shoot his grandfather goes awry, 
he ends up sharing a hospital room with Victor, whose grandmother found him 
in time. Victor is devastated to find himself alive and in the same room with Bull, 
who has tortured him since elementary school, but he accepts the friendly overtures 
of the other kids in the ward, all of whom have attempted suicide. Indeed, both 
boys find not only friends but girlfriends as a result of their ordeal, as well as one 
caring adult each who is willing to protect them from further abuse once they are 
released. The result is a pat story with under-realized emotional potential, but it 
will nonetheless will speak to young readers. Bull and Victor take turns narrating, 
and they establish their impossible situations with can’t-miss clarity. Their experi-
ences in the hospital are just as clearly drawn in their positivity; the group-therapy 
sessions are full of feel-good revelations from the other patients, while Bull and 
Victor keep their mouths shut but learn vicariously that they are not alone in their 
pain. Victor even manages to get in that one good punch that makes up for all of 
April 2012 • 429
the torture Bull inflicted and establishes a détente between the two. The lack of 
ambiguity in their full recoveries may have less honesty than recent treatments of 
attempted suicide such as Hubbard’s Try Not to Breathe (BCCB 3/12), but their 
stories offer a strong message of hope to the bullied and abused. KC
wArren, sArAh Dolores Huerta: A Hero to Migrant Workers; illus. by Robert 
Casilla. Cavendish, 2012 28p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6107-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6108-1 $17.99  
Ad 6-8 yrs
This picture-book biography chronicles the campaigns of the Latina activist who 
advocated for the rights of agricultural laborers in 1960s and ’70s California. While 
workers’ rights may not seem at first to be a topic that lends itself to the story-hour 
set, Warren does an excellent job of streamlining the issues and casting them in 
language that will reach a young audience. Each double-page spread begins with 
“Dolores is a . . . ” and adds a noun that embodies an aspect of her advocacy. “Do-
lores is a detective,” who, as a teacher attuned to her students’ classroom problems, 
investigates their family life for clues to their academic troubles. “Dolores is a 
warrior,” who confronts suited and tied farm bosses concerning the overwork and 
underpayment of their laborers. The main text comes full circle, culminating with 
“Dolores is a teacher,” only now her students are not in the classroom, but in the 
fields, learning “how to work as a team.” An appended timeline offers expanded de-
tails of Huerta’s personal life and her collaboration with César and Richard Chavez, 
bringing her efforts up to the 2003 establishment of the Dolores Huerta Foundation 
to train activists. Casilla’s watercolor and pastel illustrations, unfortunately, do not 
rise to the level of Warren’s narration, featuring stiffly posed, diorama-like groups 
of families, workers, and bosses listening to Huerta, and no visual representations 
of exhausting physical labor that Huerta sought to regulate. Nonetheless, this skill-
fully organized story of the 1960s grape boycott will pair well with picture book 
titles such as George Ella Lyon’s Which Side Are You On? (BCCB 1/11) or Jonah 
Winter’s Steel Town (BCCB 7/08) for Labor Day programming and beyond. EB
wells, rosemAry Yoko Learns to Read; written and illus. by Rosemary 
Wells. Disney Hyperion, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-3823-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 4-6 yrs
When Yoko’s teacher begins giving out “book leaves” to students who have finished 
a book, young Yoko initially earns only three, for the three Japanese books that she 
owns and knows by heart. Yoko’s mother (who cannot read English) takes her to the 
public library, where Yoko checks out a book; Yoko and her mama “read” the story 
by following the pictures, and Yoko earns another book leaf. With encouragement 
from her teacher (“‘Words are like faces,’ said Mrs. Jenkins. ‘Easy to remember’”) 
and her mother (“‘I am so proud of my little snow flower’”), and despite discourage-
ment from some of her peers (“‘I bet you can’t read my book!’ said Sylvia”), Yoko 
soon begins to learn to read signs and other short books, and she can’t wait to teach 
her mother how to read English, too. While many young listeners will find Yoko’s 
success encouraging, some, especially those for whom reading is difficult, may be 
put off by the ease with which Yoko learns to read and by the teacher’s viewpoint 
that words can simply be remembered visually. It’s also not clear if Yoko is actually 
430 • The BulleTin
reading in Japanese already, and if so, why no one is pointing her toward books in 
that language. Wells’ oil pastel and collage illustrations feature her trademark bright, 
cuddly animal characters and are here accented with what looks like patterned ori-
gami paper. The resulting art is friendly and cheerful, but the patterns sometimes 
make the compositions overly busy. Despite these flaws, Yoko’s plucky perseverance 
is admirable and her mother’s unconditional love and support is heartwarming, 
and Yoko fans may well enjoy her journey towards literacy. JH
willems, mo Listen to My Trumpet!; written and illus. by Mo Willems. Hy-
perion, 2012 57p (Elephant & Piggie)
ISBN 978-1-4231-5404-4 $8.99  
R* Gr. K-1
Fans of the obstreperous Piggie will know that she certainly doesn’t need an instru-
ment to trumpet her affections for the less demonstrative Gerald, but grab one 
she does, commanding the elephant to sit on a comically diminutive three-legged 
stool while she attempts to coax notes out of her shiny new trumpet. The bleats 
become an obnoxious but subtly ingenious phonics lesson, as her instrument emits 
variations of consonant blends that combine with easily pronounceable endings to 
form nonsense words that lack meaning but nonetheless show how words work. 
Gerald’s attempts to be supportive without hurting his friend’s feelings teach an 
important emotional lesson as well, as he flounders to be encouraging and honest 
at the same time; he lauds Piggie’s efforts as enthusiastic but has to acknowledge 
that they are not musically pleasing. The punchline strikes a beautiful note even if 
Piggie doesn’t, as Willems manages yet again to pull off the perfect dual audience 
move: Gerald’s adult-like misunderstanding of Piggie’s intentions and the revelation 
of Piggie’s actual motive will ring true to youngsters and will elicit surprised and 
delighted eeps from older reading partners at the unaffected sweetness of childlike 
empathy and friendship. The consistency of the color-coded sound bubbles and 
the clear depiction of emotional states, conveyed through comic exaggeration of 
the deceptively simple figure drawings, will help even the newest readers track the 
narrative line as they practice their emergent literacy skills. KC 
winter, jeAnette Kali’s Song; written and illus. by Jeanette Winter. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2012 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97022-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87022-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
When young Kali, who lives “thousands and thousands and thousands of years ago,” 
is given a bow to practice hunting, he discovers that if he puts it to his mouth and 
plucks the string he can make music. From that moment on, instead of practic-
ing shooting with his bow, he secretly practices playing, and when the big hunt 
occurs, Kali stuns everyone by playing his bow so musically that even the herd of 
mammoths is entranced. The people decide that Kali is a shaman rather than a 
hunter, and he lives out his days healing and guiding his community. Although 
Kali’s people’s immediate approval of his talent may seem a bit far-fetched to a 
modern audience, their acceptance of his unique gift (and of his lack of desire to 
follow a more expected path) is heartwarming. This aspect of the book might make 
it a useful tool in talking with kids about the variety in people’s gifts, talents, and 
inclinations, especially when those talents and inclinations aren’t what’s expected 
April 2012 • 431
for gender or other reasons. Winter’s text and art are both cleanly and simply 
crafted. The spare prose has the sound of an old oral story, told so many times that 
anything extraneous has been polished away, while the illustrations (rendered in 
acrylic paint, pen and ink, and handmade paper, sometimes cut and collaged) echo 
that primitive, almost mythological feel with muted colors, natural textures, and 
gray human figures. The ancient setting and the invocation of Kali’s shamanistic 
gift will likely intrigue youngsters and spark further interest in ancient cultures, 
instruments, and art; a clever reader-aloud with a mouth harp will be able to bring 
even more life to this stone-age story. JH
wood, Audrey Blue Sky; written and illus. by Audrey Wood. Blue Sky/Scho-
lastic, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-31610-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
This simple concept book explores the various and ever-changing types of sky, with 
each spread offering a different characterization (“Blue sky”; “Rain sky”; “Sunset 
sky”; etc.) and bringing it vividly to life in the oil pastel illustrations. The sequence 
follows the course of a day, beginning with the titular blue sky and ending with 
dawn of the following day (“New sky”). The book emphasizes the changeability of 
the sky, with one spread depicting a midday “sun sky” ablaze in bright yellow, the 
following (“Sunset sky”) bathed in deep orange, and the next (“Dark sky”) awash 
in deep purple. The illustrations provide young listeners (and even burgeoning 
readers) with lots of visual impetus to guess what word is used for each sky shot. 
Additionally, the book offers a tacit encouragement for kids to pay attention to the 
world around them, a practice exemplified by the recurring figure of a boy with a 
toy monkey, who quietly observes the sky in each spread. This provides plenty of 
opportunity to initiate discussion about types of sky and perhaps to call on young 
people to add other types to the list, either with words or compositions of their 
own, and even to branch out into their own descriptive projects. HM
zink, miChelle A Temptation of Angels. Dial, 2012 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3726-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
When mysterious men invade her home, setting it ablaze and killing her parents, 
sixteen-year-old Helen Cartwright escapes into the streets of Victorian London 
guided only by her dying mother’s instruction to find the Channing brothers. 
Griffin and Darius Channing take her in when she shows up on their doorstep and 
confirm her suspicions that her beloved parents were hiding some rather significant 
secrets. Helen is a Keeper, an angelic guardian of the Akashic Records (mystical 
texts containing the history of the cosmos and the secret of all knowledge), and her 
parents were murdered in their efforts to protect her from the demon-controlled 
Syndicate. Complicating matters further is Raum, Helen’s childhood friend and 
fellow Keeper, who has gone rogue and may in fact be responsible for the deaths of 
Helen’s parents and dozens of other Keepers. Despite the set up for an epic battle 
of good vs. evil, this is largely a character-driven plot with the focus so centered 
on Helen’s relationships with Griffin and Raum that the details of the backstory 
are often vague and undeveloped; even the setting of an alternative Victorian Eng-
432 • The BulleTin
land remains an undeveloped and generic historical venue. The romance element 
is slightly more successful, especially as the chemistry between Griffin and Helen 
heats up, but her additional affection for Raum feels mostly unearned and even 
more convenient as an easily resolved obstacle. Still, the barely concealed sensual-
ity in Helen’s stolen touches and breathless kisses with her two suitors may be be 
enough to charm fans of supernatural romances. KQG
April 2012 • 433
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Jack Gantos for Dead End in Norvelt (Far-
rar). Two Newbery Honor Books also were named: Inside Out & Back Again, by 
Thanhha Lai (HarperCollins); and Breaking Stalin’s Nose, written and illustrated 
by Eugene Yelchin (Holt).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to Chris Raschka for A Ball for Daisy, writ-
ten and illustrated by Chris Raschka (Schwartz & Wade). Three Caldecott Honor 
Books were also named: Blackout, written and illustrated by John Rocco (Disney/
Hyperion); Grandpa Green, written and illustrated by Lane Smith (Roaring Brook); 
and Me … Jane, written and illustrated by Patrick McDonnell (Little, Brown).
The Coretta Scott King Book Award for writing goes to Kadir Nelson for Heart 
and Soul: The Story of America and African Americans, written and illustrated by 
Kadir Nelson (Balzer + Bray). Two King Author Honor Books were selected: The 
Great Migration: Journey to the North, written by Eloise Greenfield, illustrated by 
Jan Spivey Gilchrist (Amistad/HarperCollins); and Never Forgotten, written by 
Patricia C. McKissack, illustrated by Leo and Diane Dillon (Schwartz & Wade). 
The Coretta Scott King Book Award for illustration goes to Shane W. Evans for 
Underground: Finding the Light to Freedom, written and illustrated by Shane W. 
Evans (Porter/Roaring Brook). One King Illustrator Honor Book was selected: 
Heart and Soul: The Story of America and African Americans, written and illustrated 
by Kadir Nelson (Balzer + Bray). Ashley Bryan is the winner of the Coretta Scott 
King—Virginia Hamilton Practitioner Award for Lifetime Achievement. 
The Pura Belpré Award for writing goes to Guadalupe Garcia McCall for Under 
the Mesquite (Lee & Low). Two Belpré Author Honor Books were named: Hur-
ricane Dancers: The First Caribbean Pirate Shipwreck, written by Margarita Engle 
(Holt); and Maximilian and the Mystery of the Guardian Angel: A Bilingual Lucha 
Libre Thriller, written by Xavier Garza (Cinco Puntos). The Pura Belpré Award for 
illustration goes to Duncan Tonatiuh for Diego Rivera: His World and Ours, written 
and illustrated by Duncan Tonatiuh (Abrams). Two Belpré Illustrator Honor Books 
were selected: The Cazuela That the Farm Maiden Stirred, illustrated by Rafael López, 
written by Samantha R. Vamos (Charlesbridge); and Marisol McDonald Doesn’t 
Match/Marisol McDonald no combina, illustrated by Sara Palacios and written by 
Monica Brown (Lee & Low).
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most 
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is 
Eerdmans Books for Young Readers for Bibi Dumon Tak’s Soldier Bear, translated 
from the Dutch by Laura Watkinson. One Batchelder Honor Book was also selected: 
The Lily Pond, written by Annika Thor, translated by Linda Schenck (Delacorte).
The Michael L. Printz Award for excellence in literature written for young adults 
goes to John Corey Whaley for Where Things Come Back (Atheneum). Four Printz 
ChILdren’s Book AwArds 2011
434 • The BulleTin
Honor Books also were named: Why We Broke Up, written by Daniel Handler, il-
lustrated by Maira Kalman (Little, Brown); The Returning, by Christine Hinwood 
(Dial); Jasper Jones, by Craig Silvey (Knopf); and The Scorpio Races, by Maggie 
Stiefvater (Scholastic).
The Robert F. Sibert Medal for most distinguished informational book for children 
goes to Balloons Over Broadway: The True Story of the Puppeteer of Macy’s Parade, 
written and illustrated by Melissa Sweet (Houghton). Four Sibert Honor Books were 
named: Black & White: The Confrontation between Reverend Fred L. Shuttlesworth 
and Eugene “Bull” Connor, by Larry Dane Brimner (Boyds Mills); Drawing From 
Memory, written and illustrated by Allen Say (Scholastic); The Elephant Scientist, 
written by Caitlin O’Connell and Donna M. Jackson and illustrated with pho-
tographs by Caitlin O’Connell and Timothy Rodwell (Houghton); and Witches!: 
The Absolutely True Tale of Disaster in Salem, written and illustrated by Rosalyn 
Schanzer (National Geographic).
The Theodor Seuss Geisel Award for most distinguished beginning reader book goes 
to Tales for Very Picky Eaters, written and illustrated by Josh Schneider (Clarion). 
Three Geisel Honor Books were named: I Broke My Trunk, written and illustrated 
by Mo Willems (Hyperion); I Want My Hat Back, written and illustrated by Jon 
Klassen (Candlewick); and See Me Run, written and illustrated by Paul Meisel 
(Holiday House).
The Schneider Family Book Award for books that embody an artistic expression of 
the disability experience goes to The Running Dream, by Wendelin Van Draanen 
(Knopf), in the teen category. Two books were selected for the middle school 
category: Close to Famous, by Joan Bauer (Viking); and Wonderstruck: A Novel in 
Words and Pictures, by Brian Selznick (Scholastic).
The Stonewall Children’s and Young Adult Literature Award, for children’s and 
young adult books of exceptional merit relating to the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and 
transgendered experience, was given to Putting Makeup on the Fat Boy by Bil Wright 
(Simon). Four honor books were selected: a + e 4ever, written and illustrated by 
Ilike Merey (Lethe); Money Boy, by Paul Yee (Groundwood); Pink, by Lili Wilkinson 
(HarperTeen); and With or Without You, by Brian Farrey (Simon Pulse).
The Andrew Carnegie Medal for excellence in children’s video goes to Paul R. Gagne 
and Melissa Reilly Ellard of Weston Woods, producers of Children Make Terrible Pets. 
The Odyssey Award for excellence in audiobook production goes to Listening 
Library for the audiobook Rotters. The book was written by Daniel Kraus and 
narrated by Kirby Heyborne. Four Odyssey Honor Recordings were also selected: 
Ghetto Cowboy, produced by Brilliance Audio, written by G. Neri, and narrated 
by JD Jackson; Okay for Now, produced by Listening Library, written by Gary D. 
Schmidt, and narrated by Lincoln Hoppe; The Scorpio Races, produced by Scholastic 
Audiobooks, written by Maggie Stiefvater, and narrated by Steve West and Fiona 
Hardingham; and Young Fredle, produced by Listening Library, written by Cynthia 
Voight, and narrated by Wendy Carter.
April 2012 • 435
The 2013 May Hill Arbuthnot Honor Lecture will be delivered by author Michael 
Morpurgo.
The Margaret A. Edwards Award for lifetime achievement in writing for young 
adults goes to Susan Cooper. 
The William C. Morris Award for a book written by a first-time author for young 
adults goes to Where Things Come Back, by John Corey Whaley (Atheneum). Four 
additional books were shortlisted: Girl of Fire and Thorns, by Rae Carson (Green-
willow); Paper Covers Rock, by Jenny Hubbard (Delacorte); Under the Mesquite, 
by Guadalupe Garcia McCall (Lee & Low); and Between Shades of Gray, by Ruta 
Sepetys (Philomel).
The YALSA Excellence in Nonfiction Award goes to The Notorious Benedict Arnold: 
A True Story of Adventure, Heroism & Treachery, by Steve Sheinkin (Flash Point/
Roaring Brook). Four other books were shortlisted for the award: Sugar Changed 
the World: A Story of Magic, Spice, Slavery, Freedom and Science, by Marc Aronson 
and Marina Budhos (Clarion); Bootleg: Murder, Moonshine, and the Lawless Years of 
Prohibition, by Karen Blumenthal (Flash Point/Roaring Brook); Wheels of Change: 
How Women Rode the Bicycle to Freedom (With a Few Flat Tires Along the Way), by 
Sue Macy (National Geographic); and Music Was It: Young Leonard Bernstein, by 
Susan Goldman Rubin (Charlesbridge).
The Scott O’Dell Award for Historical Fiction goes to Jack Gantos for Dead End 
in Norvelt (Farrar). 
The Canadian Library Association’s 2011 Book of the Year for Children is Half 
Brother by Kenneth Oppel (HarperCollins). Two Honor Books are Dear George 
Clooney: Please Marry My Mom (Tundra), by Susin Nielsen, and The Secret Fiend 
(Tundra), by Shane Peacock. The Amelia Frances Howard-Gibbon Illustrator’s 
Award goes to Marie-Louise Gay for Roslyn Rutabaga and the Biggest Hole on Earth! 
(Groundwood), written and illustrated by Marie-Louise Gay. Honorable mentions 
go to Luc Melanson for Book of Big Brothers (Tundra), written by Cary Fagan, il-
lustrated by Luc Melanson; and Julie Flett for Owls See Clearly at Night: A Michif 
Alphabet (Simply Read Books), written and illustrated by Julie Flett. The Young 
Adult Canadian Book Award goes to Kenneth Oppel for Half Brother (HarperCol-
lins). Two Honor Books are Dust City, by Robert Paul Weston (Puffin), and Room 
(HarperCollins), by Emma Donoghue.
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Patrick Ness for Monsters of Men (Walker). 
The Kate Greenaway Medal was awarded to Grahame Baker-Smith for FArTHER 
(Templar), written and illustrated by Grahame Baker-Smith.
The 2012 NCTE Orbis Pictus Award for outstanding nonfiction for children goes 
to Balloons Over Broadway: The True Story of the Puppeteer of Macy’s Parade, written 
and illustrated by Melissa Sweet (Houghton). Honor books are: Amelia Lost: The 
Life and Disappearance of Amelia Earhart, by Candace Fleming (Schwartz & Wade); 
Father Abraham: Lincoln and His Sons, by Harold Holzer (Calkins Creek); Pablo 
436 • The BulleTin
Neruda: Poet of the People, written by Monica Brown, illustrated by Julie Paschkis 
(Holt); Terezin: Voices from the Holocaust, by Ruth Thomson (Candlewick); and 
The Mangrove Tree: Planting Trees to Feed Families, by Susan L. Roth and Cindy 
Trumbore (Lee & Low). 
The Center for Children’s Books’ 2012 Gryphon Award goes to Like Pickle Juice on a 
Cookie, written by Julie Sternberg, illustrated by Matthew Cordell (Amulet/Abrams). 
Four honor books were named: The No. 1 Car Spotter, written and illustrated by 
Atinuke (Kane Miller); Waiting for the Magic, written by Patricia MacLachlan and 
illustrated by Amy June Bates (Simon); and Dear Hot Dog, written and illustrated 
by Mordicai Gerstein (Abrams). 
April 2012 • 437
Accidents–fiction: Stampler
Adventure: Blade; Chad; else; 
Gibbs; Hautman; Howe; Jinks; 
LaFevers; Oliver; renner; Stratton
Africa–fiction: de Graaf
African Americans: Fradin; Mala-
spina; McKissack
African Americans–fiction: Hatha-
way; Maia
African Americans–stories: Mitchell
Afterlife–fiction: rothenberg
ALpHABet BOOKS: Bingham
Animals: davies; potter
Animals–fiction: Mack; Willems
Animals–stories: Bingham; Buzzeo; 
Mandel
Art: Anthony
Babies–stories: Feiffer
Baseball: tavares
Baseball–fiction: tooke
Basketball–fiction: Quick
Beaches–fiction: voake
BedtiMe StOrieS: Feiffer
BiOGrApHieS: Backderf; Fradin; 
Malaspina; McKissack; potter; 
tavares; Warren
Biology: davies
Birds: davies
Books and reading–stories: Wells
Breakups–fiction: rothenberg
Brothers–fiction: Alexander
Brothers and sisters–fiction: de Graaf
Brothers and sisters–stories: van 
Leeuwen
Careers–fiction: Maia
Cats–fiction: Morpurgo
Cliques–fiction: Ludwig
Clothing–stories: Catchpool
Colors: Seeger
Communities–stories: Graham
COnCept BOOKS: Seeger
Cowboys: McKissack
Creative writing: Levine
Crime and criminals: Backderf
Crime and criminals–fiction: ellison; 
Ludwig; Michaelis; petrucha; 
rapp; Saldin
dancers and dancing–fiction: Mel-
lom; Schabas
death–fiction: Geithner; LaFevers; 
rothenberg
disabilities–fiction: tooke
disasters: Hopkinson
disasters–fiction: Morpurgo
dogs–fiction: ibbotson
dystopias–fiction: Crockett; Mead-
ows; price; rossi
Economics: Marrin
epiStOLAry nOveLS: Hatha-
way; House
Ethics and values: Catchpool; 
Franklin; John; Saldin; Schabas; 
Stampler
explorers and exploring: potter
Fairies: Losure
Fame–fiction: John
Families–fiction: Hautman; Henkes; 
ibbotson; Johnson; McKay; 
Moore; Ockler; Schabas
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CApS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
438 • The BulleTin
Families–stories: Snyder; van Leeu-
wen
FAntASy: Alexander; Blade; else; 
Foxley; Hautman; Howe; Jinks; 
Meadows; renner; Stratton; Zink
Fathers–fiction: petrucha
FOLK-LiKe tALeS: Gilmore
Food and eating–fiction: else; Mack; 
Ockler
Friends–fiction: Franklin; Gaughen; 
House; James; John; Kinard; 
McKay; Quick; Saldin; Stone; 
Willems; Zink
Friends–stories: Bingham; Spires
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Franklin
Geology: Chad
Ghosts–fiction: Hicks
Giants–fiction: Foxley
Giraffes–stories: Buzzeo
GrApHiC nOveLS: Backderf; 
Chad; Hicks; McKissack
Greed–stories: Catchpool
Grief–fiction: Geithner; Stone
HiStOriCAL FiCtiOn: Hatha-
way; Hemphill; LaFevers; Law-
rence; Mitchell; petrucha; tooke
History, U.S.: Fradin
History, world: Hopkinson; Marrin
Hoaxes: Losure
HOrrOr: Jinks
Hospitals–fiction: James; Walton
HuMOr: Bingham; duddle; 
Foxley; Johnson; Levine; Mack; 
Mandel; McKay; pinkwater; 
Sauer; Spires; voake
illness–stories: Mandel
india–stories: Gilmore
industry: Marrin
Jews–stories: Snyder
Kidnapping–fiction: rapp
Labor movement: Warren
Latinos: Warren
LeGendS: Gaughen
Letter-writing–fiction: House
Magic–fiction: else; pinkwater
Mental illness–fiction: James
Mice–fiction: Henkes
Money–fiction: voake
Moon–stories: Griffith
Mothers–fiction: Geithner; Hicks; 
Maia; Saldin
Mothers–stories: Buzzeo; Wells
Music and musicians–fiction: An-
thony; Henkes; Maia; Willems
Music and musicians–stories: Mitch-
ell; Winter
MySterieS: Anthony; ellison; 
Lawrence; Michaelis
Nature study: davies; Salas; Wood
neighbors–fiction: pinkwater
neighbors–stories: duddle; Graham
Obsessive-compulsive disorder– 
fiction: ellison
Orphans–fiction: Alexander
pets–stories: Sauer
photography: Losure
Physical education: Malaspina
pirates–stories: duddle
pOetry: Levine
prehistoric life–stories: Sauer; Winter
prejudice–stories: Mitchell
prom–fiction: Franklin; Mellom
rabbits–stories: Griffith; van Leeu-
wen
Reading aloud: Levine; pinkwater; 
tavares
Reading, beginning: Mack; Willems
Reading, easy: Henkes; pinkwater; 
voake
Reading, reluctant: Johnson
reincarnation–fiction: Meadows
relationships–fiction Anthony; 
Gaughen; Kinard; Mellom; Mi-
chaelis; Moore; Ockler; Schabas; 
Stampler; Stone; Walton
reputations–fiction: Moore
rHyMinG StOrieS: duddle; 
Salas; Snyder
romance–fiction: Hemphill; LaFe-
vers; Meadows; Oliver; rossi; 
rothenberg; Zink
royalty–fiction: else; renner
School–fiction: Geithner; Gibbs; 
Hicks; Kinard; Ludwig; Saldin; 
Stone
School–stories: Wells
April 2012 • 439
Science: Chad
SCienCe FiCtiOn: Chad; Oliver; 
price; rossi
Secrets–fiction: renner
Ships and sailing: Hopkinson
Size–fiction: Foxley
Skating–fiction: Ockler
Slavery: Fradin
Spies and espionage–fiction: Gibbs; 
renner
Sports: Malaspina
Sports–fiction: Quick; tavares; tooke
Storytelling–fiction: Michaelis
Storytime: Griffith; Sauer; van 
Leeuwen
Suicide–fiction: Walton
SurvivAL StOrieS: Crockett
SuSpenSe: petrucha
time travel–fiction: Hautman
vacations–fiction: Jinks
verSe nOveLS: Hemphill
voyages and travel: Hopkinson
voyages and travel–fiction: else; 
Howe; ibbotson; John; Morpurgo
voyages and travel–stories: Mitchell; 
Snyder
War–fiction: Blade; de Graaf
Weather: Wood
Winter–fiction: Crockett
Witches–fiction: Alexander
Work–fiction: Ockler
Writers and writing–fiction: John; 
Johnson
Zoos–stories: Mandel
2715 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD 21218 • 1.800.548.1784 • 410.516.6987 • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
The Bulletin of the  
Center for Children’s Books
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
issn: 0008-9036 / e-issn: 1558-6766
Children’s literature*
R. H. W. Dillard, Editor-in-Chief 
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, Editors
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
issn: 0092-8208 / e-issn: 1543-3374
Children’s literature 
assoCiation Quarterly*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, Editor
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
issn: 0885-0429 / e-issn: 1553-1201
The lion and the uniCorn
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman,  
and Naomi J. Wood, Editors
An international theme- and genre-centered  
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion  
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
issn: 0147-2593 / e-issn: 1080-6563
*Please direct inquiries and orders to the ChLA:  
www.childlitassn.org.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
ChiLDreN’S LiterAture
