I LLI NOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
ry and Information Science
University of Illi nois Press
'1
n 
• 
m
"Cabbage Rose is a fresh heroine
and a plucky survivor."*
Cab&W,7
By M.C. Helldorfer
Illustrated in full color by Julie Downing
-. jif 
^ 
-. "7^ 
... 
* '
DANIEL'S
Illustrated in fu
Julie Dow
$13.95 R
0-02-7435
Aladdin pape
$4.95/0-689-
ng's lush watercolors,
age's blossoming life
The clear-cut message here-the importance of valuing
orth-is especially timely in today's image-conscious
Starred, Publishers Weekly
watercolors are rich and sunny, with fascinating depic-
eenth-century costume."-*Booklist
r of several original tales creates another strong female
..interesting and visually attractive."--Kirkus Reviews
$14.95 RSBMA-02-743513-X/Ages 4-8
Also byM.C. Helldorfer-
GIFT 
THE DARLING BOYS 
THE MAPMAKER'S
llcolor by 
Illustrated in full color by 
DAUGHTER
ning 
Megan Halsey 
Illustrated in full color b
SBE 
$14.95 R8BE 
Jonathan Hunt
11-3 
0-02-743516-4 
S14.95 
RSBE
7rback:
71440-8
0-02-743515-6
y
RSBE indctes a side-awn reinforced hardcover edition.
BRADBURY PRESS
An Affiliate of Macmillan, Inc., 866 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
May 1993
Vol. 46 No. 9
A LOOK INSIDE
273 THE BIG PICTURE
Think ofan Eelwritten by Karen Wallace and illustrated
by Mike Bostock
274 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
278 
* The Woman Who Fell From the Sky by John Bierhorst; illus. by Robert
Andrew Parker
281 
* The Wind Blows Backward by Mary Downing Hahn
296 * Coyote Steals the Blanket by Janet Stevens
297 * Matthew and the Sea Singer by Jill Paton Walsh; illus. by Alan Marks
300 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
301 SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 54 East Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Carol Fox, Youth Services Consultant, Illinois State Library
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $3.00. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois, and additional mailing offices
© 1993 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Mike Bostock, from Think ofan Eel © 1993 by Karen Wallace and used by
permission of Candlewick Press.
MAY 1993 
* 273
THE BIG PICTURE
Think of an Eel
written by Karen Wallace; illustrated by Mike Bostock
"Think of an eel. He swims like a fish. He slides like a snake." The title/first line
of Karen Wallace and Mike Bostock's book is aptly chosen. Until a book of non-
fiction comes along and makes you think, you don't realize how many don't. Of
facts, we have plenty. The series titles that have tumbled off the presses over the
last decade demonstrate, by default, an important point: information is power
only when it's presented in a powerful way. Here's a series that has what so much
nonfiction lacks-voice. Other elements (clarity, accuracy, organization, scope,
currency, objectivity, honesty, authority, illustration, documentation, holistic treat-
ment, and readability) are all important, but without voice, nonfiction too often
goes unheard. An informational book may even be recommended blandly in re-
view journals as "useful." Read between the lines: the reviewer is faced with de-
scribing a book that seems to have nothing really wrong with it but is nevertheless
unaccountably boring. The difference between a useful R and an enthusiastic R is
voice.
In Think ofAn Ee4 the voice is a distinctive blend of verbal and artistic styles
that shapes the subject, from the selection of facts to the progression with which
they're presented. The endpapers depict developmental stages of eel growth in
eye-catching watercolors and suggest a mysterious dynamic about to unfold. Young
listeners who don't even know they want to know about eels are quickly enlisted to
learn, and they haven't even reached the title page. Next, their eyes will slide
across pages filled with long slender shapes in plenty of white space. Both compo-
sitions and text are varied, the former with different page frames, the latter with
free verse in regular type and with special facts in italics. The life cycle that orga-
nizes the information is reflected in rhythmic graphic patterns of blue and green.
Despite the designerly pages, the material is not romanticized: 
"The gulls are
waiting. Beaks snap like scissors through wriggling water"; and later, "There's eel-
tomb and eel-cradle in the weedy Sargasso. After eighty days swimming, not eat-
ing, not sleeping, eel's long, winding body is worn-out and wasted. He spills the
new life carried deep in his belly, then sinks through the sea like a used silver
wrapper." And the book ends as it began, with the fertilized eggs hatching.
Each of the titles in this series has a distinctive voice that evinces itself in a
different way. Some of the books are written in prose, some in poetry. The latter
is difficult to pull off but is all the more impressive when it's well done (remember
Ruth Heller's successful metered rhyming in Chickens Aren't the Only Ones and in
her other nonfiction series on science and grammar). Think of a Beaver, by the
same author/artist team that created Think of an Eel uses appropriately crisper
274 
* THE BULLETIN
words and pictorial line work. All Pigs Are Beautiful written by Dick King-Smith
and illustrated by Anita Jeram, is a personalized, whimsical (just short of anthro-
pomorphic) introduction to the porcine personality. Hindley and Chamberlain's
A Piece of String Is a Wonderful Thing succeeds, despite a few forced rhymes and
cartoonish effects, in inviting preschoolers to imagine the invention-and to con-
sider the uses-of an indispensable object.
Yes, this is a series, and some titles are more successful than others, but the fact
that each volume has not been forced into a standardized mold says something
important: every subject must dictate a different treatment. Moreover, text and
graphics carry equal weight, unlike much picture-book science that relies on bril-
liant photography to distract children from a sketchy, descriptive text that amounts
to little more than captions. When you read a Read and Wonder book, you know
it was written not by a committee or packager, but by someone with a distinctive
personality and interest in the subject.
Although this happens to be a nonfiction series at the picture-book level, the
same vocal effects should demarcate nonfiction series for older children (there are
a number of nonfiction series titles, varied in quality and age range, reviewed in
this issue). When Russell Freedman won the Newbery Medal in 1988 for his
Lincoln biography (BCCB 1/88), we seemed to be on the verge of a renaissance of
informational books for children from preschool age through young adulthood.
What we have seen too often since then is an array of textbookish series limited by
TV dinner formats-edible, but often unvaried and even more often uninterest-
ing. There are exceptions, of course, and that's where librarians can exert their
influence. It's important to apply all the standard criteria in evaluating nonfiction;
but just as important, listen for voice in the books you read or find reviewed. When
you hear it, buy it.
Betsy Hearne, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALEXANDER, BRYAN 
Inuit; written and illus. with photographs by Bryan and Cherry
Alexander. 
Raintree/Steck-Vaughn, 1993 
48p 
(Threatened Cultures)
ISBN 0-8114-2301-8 
$14.94 
M 
Gr. 4-8
Crisp and well-captioned color photos convey a great deal of information about
Inuit society and the Arctic environment, but the text suffers from a malady found
in many heavily illustrated nonfiction series books: it's all over the place, seeming
to serve primarily as visual relief from the pictures, rather than having an educa-
tional function of its own. The subject of hunting, for example, is brought up in
at least three different places, and each time is introduced as a new topic. Photos
and boxed paragraphs are often placed with little regard to the text around them,
with a photo and box about Inuit art popping up amid a discussion of "land food"
and "store food." While the text consistently draws a simplistic dichotomy be-
tween Inuit/environmentally-correct/old-ways and Anglo-Christian/polluting-and-
MAY 1993 
* 
275
rapacious-scoundrels, it does give a varied introduction of Inuit (primarily Cana-
dian) life; and while the format is not efficient, it's browsable. A glossary, reading
list and directory, and index are appended. RS
ALIKI 
Communication; written and illus. by Aliki. 
Greenwillow, 1993 
36p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11248-X 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10529-7 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-3
Aliki's tidy pencil-and-watercolor sketches, vignettes, and cartoons illustrate a con-
cept book that is a bit too ambitious for its format. The book begins with the
basics of communication: talking, listening, laughing and crying, symbols, baby
and animal noises, etc. but turns into a self-helpy manual about the importance of
self-expression and reflective listening. The premise of the pep talk seems to be
that unexpressed anger or problems will always be alleviated by telling someone;
there's a couple of instances, such as a son and mother who communicate via the
use of hand puppets about the kid's bad day or a baby who goes in for a little lap-
sitting bibliotherapy ("Sometimes a book can communicate your feelings to you"),
that seem both psychologically half-baked and not terribly cognizant of the pri-
mary-grades audience the format implies. All of the cartoon sequences of kids
gathering their courage to speak up work out for the best ("whew! That was easy");
young readers will know better. The book is very loosely organized, but some of
the sequences may resonate for particular readers, opening up some important
one-on-one communication. RS
ALLEN, JONATHAN 
Who's at the Door?; written and illus. by Jonathan
Allen. 
Tambourine, 1993 
[25p]
ISBN 0-688-12257-4 
$11.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
"The big bad wolf... desperately wanted to eat the little pigs for dinner. But to do
this, he had to get inside their house. It was a tough problem." This postmodern
version of "a knock at the door" has the pigs unfooled ("What a hairy policeman!
. .. Go and arrest yourself, Wolfie!") as the predator variously disguises himself,
only to be out-disguised when he finally gains entry in a pig mask, hears a knock at
the door, and confronts the three pigs camouflaged as an even bigger bad wolf
("Well, you look like a piggy," say the three pigs in their wolf suit. "Prepare to be
eaten"). Kids will be fooled by none of this, which will do wonders for their ego
and their deconstruction skills. They'll also have fun with the "split-page surprise"
format, in which half pages disguised as doors open to reveal an extremely silly-
looking wolf in his four costumes. Allen cleverly keeps the colors, shapes, and
compositions simple, so the cartoons never become cluttered despite the balloon
dialogue and complicated book design. The perfect counter for listeners who
quake at scary tales, this will also get a thumbs-up from those who take it all in
stride but aren't quite ready for Scieszka's The True Story of the Three Little Pigs by
A. Wolf (BCCB 9/89). BH
ALLEN, JUDY 
Whale; illus. by Tudor Humphries.. Candlewick, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56402-160-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
4-7 yrs
Like the author and illustrator's Tiger (BCCB 11/92), this is an ecological fable
framed as fiction. It's a stormy night, and Anya and her parents are motorboating
276 
* THE BULLETIN
home to the shore after a visit to her grandparents on an island. Just as the radio
brings reports of a shipwreck and subsequent oil slick, Anya spots a whale. The
whale has a baby with it, and Anya's mother (intuitively, one supposes) realizes
that the slick occurred in the whales' breeding grounds, and the whale is desper-
ately trying to outswim the slick and protect its newborn. In an unfortunate lapse
into fantasy, ghost-whales of all species, each displaying the scars or implements
(harpoons) of death, suddenly show up and help the exhausted pair to safety. "This
is magic," says Anya; no argument there. Such a sentimental conclusion is not
only too easy, it also subverts the ecological theme: why save the whales if they can
save themselves? Humphries' sea-washed watercolors of the moonlit whales have a
romantic grandeur as appropriate to the mystical text as they would have been to a
more sensible story. RS
ANCONA, GEORGE 
Powwow; written and illus. with photographs by George
Ancona. 
Harcourt, 1993 
4 8p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-263268-9 
$16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-263269-7 
$8.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
While his book may document events at a traditional Native American celebra-
tion, Ancona is careful to show us more than ancient beads and feathers. This
particular powwow is the Crow Fair, where Indians of many tribes come together
to compete in the four primary kinds of contemporary Indian dancing: Tradi-
tional, Fancy, Grass, and Jingle-dress. Each dance has its own conventions and
costumes, and the sharp color photos show the incredible detailing of the elaborate
clothing and headdresses that the dancers construct. (Each dancer also wears a
large paper number that presumably is meant for the judges, though Ancona does
not explain this.) The dancing is just part of the get-together, so there are also
plenty of shots of friends chatting and eating, and family members watching ap-
preciatively while a son or daughter dances. Modern touches are everywhere, from
cups of Diet Pepsi and Foot Long Hot Dog stands to telephone wires and pre-fab
tepees. The effect of such accents is neither ironic nor jarring; rather, it gives the
old ways-in new forms-the breath of continuing relevance. RS
ANDRYSZEWSKI, TIucIA 
The Dust Bowl: Disaster on the Plains. Millbrook,
1993 
6 4 p 
illus. with photographs 
(Spotlight on American History)
ISBN 1-56294-272-7 
$14.40 
R Gr. 4-8
With excerpts from a young girl's diary and many period photographs of the end-
less dust, Andryszewski's account of the Dust Bowl times has an excellent balance
of ecological and economic discussion, along with personalizing anecdotal mate-
rial. She describes how farming practices of the 1920s and '30s combined with the
cyclical appearance of drought in the Midwest region to make disaster inevitable,
and how the Great Depression and the resulting slide in farm prices made it im-
possible for many farmers to survive. The New Deal gets a slightly mixed review
from the author, who applauds the changes in agriculture it brought (contour plow-
ing, for example), but who also points out that crop reduction money only went
to landowners, not renters, who were then kicked off their farms. The writing is
clear and the layout is spacious; a closing chapter, "Can It Happen Again?", gives a
contemporary context, citing problems of over-grazing and groundwater depletion
that could bring disaster to the Plains once again. A source note, reading list and
index are appended. RS
MAY 1993 
* 
277
BARTONE, ELISA 
Peppe the Lamplighter; illus. by Ted Lewin. 
Lothrop,
1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10269-7 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10268-9 
$14.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Peppe is a young boy living "a long time ago when there was no electricity and the
streetlamps in Little Italy had to be lit by hand." Due to his father's illness Peppe
must work to help support his motherless family, and he eventually finds a job
lighting those streetlamps. Peppe is dismayed when his father denigrates the job as
menial street work, but eventually his youngest sister causes him and his father to
regain pride in his work. The story avoids sentimentality in favor of simplicity and
a touch of lyricism (when Peppe lights the lamps he imagines each one to be a
"small flame of promise for the future"); Peppe's quiet quest for familial respect
and pleasure in his work is touching and rhythmically written. The early-Ameri-
can city scenes are dark but have a nice period luminescence in the myriad street
and table lamps, and the earth-toned watercolors lend the bustling streets and
interiors of Little Italy an air both somber and lively. This is a pleasing kid-cen-
tered slice of history that possesses a warmth and dignity to which contemporary
youngsters will relate. DS
BENDICK, JEANNE 
Tombs of the Ancient Americans; illus. by Jeanne Bendick and
with photographs. 
Watts, 1993 
64p 
(First Books)
ISBN 0-531-20148-1 
$12.40 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Tombs and mummies are a magnetic subject for most of us, including kids, and
there's not nearly so much published on burial sites in the Americas as there is on
those of ancient Egypt. Bendick's approach to the subject is a little circuitous,
starting with a list of silly questions ("Do you think you would be good at solving
ancient mysteries?") that frustrate the reader's curiosity rather than arousing it.
Next there's an explanation of archaeology and a generalized introduction to the
first settlement of the Americas. Finally, we get to the fascinating facts themselves:
the tombs of the Peruvian Moche, Chimu, and Incas; the Mayan tomb of Pacal;
the Great Temple of the Aztecs; the burial caves of the Mogollon; and the various
mounds of the Mississippi cultures. The color photographs are more effective
than the crayon drawings, which are attractive but potentially confusing in several
cases (Is the king who's watching an Inca ballgame really a mummy, as the caption
indicates? Why do the Aztec and Mayan tombs appear to be situated in North
America? Why isn't there any indication of scale in the drawing of a one-person
tomb that looms so large on the map of South America?). On the other hand, who
can resist the breathless suspense in Albert Ruz' discovery of Lord Jaguar Pacal's
elaborate sarcophagus? Or the satisfyingly simple Mayan mathematical system in
which any number could be written with only three symbols? Readers who get
past the discombobulated beginning will find plenty to interest them here. Glos-
sary and index appended. BH
BIAL, RAYMOND 
Amish Home; written and illus. with photographs by Raymond
Bial. 
Houghton, 1993 
40p
ISBN 0-395-59504-5 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
While the author/photographer states that there are no pictures of people in his
book because the Amish do not allow themselves to be photographed, he probably
should have amended his statement to read someAmish; Richard Ammon's Grow-
278 
* THE BULLETIN
ing Up Amish (BCCB 7/89) is just one photodocumentary on the Amish people
that includes portraits. Nevertheless, Bial is a more interesting photographer than
Ammon, and his pictures of horses, houses, and various utensils for living and
working often have the effect of still-life paintings that say as much about what is
not in the picture as they do about what's included. While the Amish may be the
"plain people," disdaining personal and household adornment, Bial shows the eye
for beauty revealed in the rich colors of clothes drying on the line and in the rose-
colored walls of a bedroom. The text is admiring but not sentimental, mention-
ing, for example, the teen rebellion of Amish boys ("They may soup up their buggies
with plastic reflectors, stereos, carpeting, dashboards, and speedometers"), and the
book as a whole gives a spare and balanced picture, mirroring Amish beliefs. A
reading list is appended. RS
BIERHORST, JOHN, ad. 
The Woman Who Fell from the Sky: The Iroquois Story of
Creation; illus. by Robert Andrew Parker. 
Morrow, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10681-1 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10680-3 
$15.00 
R* 
5-9 yrs.
"Before the world was new, sky people lived on a floating island high in the air.
The sun had not yet been created, but light shone from the flowers of a tall tree."
When a sky woman hears "voices under her heart," she knows she will have chil-
dren and tells her husband, who becomes jealous, uproots the tree, and pushes the
sky woman through the hole toward the water below. Her every movement gen-
erates new creations, from the ducks who catch her to the muskrats who spread
mud on the turtle's back where she lands. The earth, the stars, and the sun are her
work, while her twin sons, gentle Sapling and hard-edged Flint, fill the earth with
complementary forms of life. Bierhorst's text has a dignified simplicity well matched
by Parker's impressionistic watercolors, which are sometimes lit with a fiery orange
glow or plunged into deep-blue darkness. Neither words nor pictures overreach
for literal, elaborate interpretation; both leave room for metaphoric imagination.
Because of this, the concluding prayer of thanks offered up with campfire smoke is
a natural outcome of the story, without the solemn pretension that has character-
ized some recent Native American lore in picture book format. Bierhorst's source
note, too, is exemplary, with exact citations of all the published and unpublished
sources on which he drew to adapt the tale. This will span a broad age range and
varied spectrum of interests, especially as an accompaniment to children's cross-
cultural exploration of myth and spiritual traditions. BH
CAVANAGH, HELEN 
Panther Glade. Simon, 1993 
14 7p
ISBN 0-671-75617-6 
$15.00 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Bill resents his parents' European summer trip without him, and he's at first un-
sure about spending that time visiting his great-aunt Cait, an archaeologist in the
Florida Everglades. She's involved in the excavation of a Calusa burial mound,
and her deep affection for her work and surroundings gradually finds a sympa-
thetic spirit in Bill, who feels a bond with the Calusa cat-god and hopes to catch a
glimpse of the rare Florida panther. Although the book has an exotic-locale ap-
peal, it's cliched and sentimental ("If you take the last letter and put it first, earth
spells heart. Isn't that something?"), and between the main plot as described above,
Bill's friendship with a local girl, her grandmother's gradual warming, Bill's inter-
est in crafts, his concern about being small for his age, and so forth, there are too
MAY 1993 
* 279
many threads to the story. The plot moves from the formulaic to the ridiculous
when Bill unintentionally embarks on a vision quest by getting lost in the Ever-
glades overnight. There he meets the spirit of King Calos, who helpfully recants
the aspect of Calusan culture-child sacrifice-that had put Bill off and then takes
Bill into his sacred circle. This final act not only swamps the pedestrian plot but
also undermines the message of respect for other civilizations, since that respect
seems conditional on a culture's ability to rewrite their history to suit contempo-
rary tastes. For a good vision quest book, try Susan Sharpe's Spirit Quest (BCCB
9/91); for a book on the real Florida panthers, try Clark's book reviewed below.
DS
CLARK, MARGARET GOFF 
The Endangered Florida Panther. Cobblehill,
1993 
54p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-65114-4 
$14.99 
R Gr. 5-7
Clark has done her homework here, and her account of attempts to preserve the
surviving Florida panthers-fewer than fifty are left-has individualized dimen-
sions as a result. Interviewing several experts has yielded stories of personal en-
counter, from standard health checks on tranquilized animals to confrontation
between a conservationist and a tense female panther defending her kittens. The
radio banding program has contributed to an increased store of information on
the secretive animals, which in turn has enabled officials to take steps such as the
building of 1-75 underpasses allowing panthers to cross highways safely within
their home territory. Clark has a good sense of story, and the information here
emerges narratively to good advantage. Color photographs lend you-are-there
impact; and a map, list of wilderness parks, dateline of "Florida Panther Mile-
stones," and index will help students out. BH
THE COUSTEAU SOCIETY 
Albatross; ISBN 0-671-86565-X. 
Manatees; ISBN 0-
671-86566-8. 
Otters; ISBN 0-671-86567-6. 
Whales; ISBN 0-671-
86564-1. 
Each 
book: 
Little 
Simon, 
1993 
18 p 
illus. 
with
photographs 
$3.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Nature photography magnificently reproduced in full color is the real centerpiece
of this series; the text amounts to captions of one or two lines per page that follow
the animals in their respective activities of egg-laying, nursing babies, munching
crabs, or diving. Although sketchy, the information is clear. However, it is the
pictures that inject personality into the presentation; the startling closeup of an
albatross grooming its lifetime mate after a year of separation makes up a bit for
the maddening absence of any explanation as to how they find each other "among
thousands of other birds." It's coffee-table science, and none of the books have
much sense of beginning, middle, and end, but they'll give young listeners and
even beginning readers a first glimpse of realms beyond the inland world, urban or
rural. BH
CWIKLIK, ROBERT 
Stokely Carmichael and Black Power. Millbrook,
1993 
32p 
illus. with photographs 
(Gateway Civil Rights)
ISBN 1-56294-276-X 
$11.90 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Starting with a speech in which he suggested "black power" as a slogan for de-
manding African-American rights, this brief biography touches on Carmichael's
childhood in Trinidad and Harlem before concentrating on his role as a SNCC
280 
* THE BULLETIN
representative, one of the youngest-and angriest-leaders of the Civil Rights
Movement. Now a resident of Guinea, with his name changed to Kwame Ture,
the subject gets sympathetic if superficial treatment here, with competent writing,
black-and-white news photos, lists of dates and of books for further reading (three
out of six titles are Millbrook Press publications about other black leaders), and an
index. Despite the limitations of scope and documentation, the inherent drama of
Carmichael's activities guarantees a readership for this; it's short enough to snag
reluctant readers and involving enough to induce better readers to look for further
information. BH
DEPAOLA, TOMIE 
Tom; written and illus. by Tomie dePaola. 
Putnam,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22417-3 
$14.95 
R 
4 -7 yrs
Another in the series of the author/artist's childhood reminiscences, this one is
about Tommy's grandfather Tom, who provides a host of delights when Tommy
comes to visit on Sundays ("We're named after each other, Tommy"). Tom and
Tommy read the comics together, clean the furnace, visit the puppies next door or
"just sit outside the cellar door and talk." The tone is tender, but there's no story
and occasional explanatory parenthetical remarks restate the obvious. The plot
picks up when Tom, a butcher, gives Tommy a pair of chicken feet that the boy
uses to make trouble at school; this episode has a liveliness that would have been
welcome throughout. dePaola's watercolor illustrations have facility and a great
appeal for children, who may forgive the pottering around for the sake of the
funny ending and the evident warmth of Tom and Tommy's friendship. RS
GILMORE, KATE Jason and the Bard. Houghton, 1993 
[240p]
ISBN 0-395-62472-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Jason's encounter with the Bard takes place during a summer Shakespeare festival
at a small midwestern college, where he and several other teens are apprenticed for
the purpose of learning the theatrical trade, performing small parts, and supplying
technical labor and grunt work as needed. It's an exciting but exhausting pro-
gram, and Jason, a model apprentice, finds himself assisting a demanding props
mistress, learning his parts, understudying an uncertain lead actor, and playing
detective to find out who's responsible for the unnerving practical jokes being
played on the cast and crew. Gilmore doesn't manage to make Jason's crowded
life clearer to the readers than it is to him; the book is overstuffed with plot (the
practical joker mystery and its obvious culprit are unnecessary, as is Jason's bud-
ding romance with a fellow apprentice) and dramatis personae (with character
development for only a few, not including the saintly Jason; it's also a problem to
have a Peggy and a Penny and a Tony and a Tory). The dialogue throughout is
too baroque even for stage-struck teens, with Briticisms abounding for no appar-
ent reason other than general affectation. Through it all, however, the mechanics
of rehearsal and preparation are absorbing and the teen apprentices' parent-free
immersion in the adult field of their choice is enviable. The cast and crew's love of
and devotion to drama is apparent, the theatrical lore is interesting, and the touches
ofAllAbout Eve-ish melodrama enhance the allure. There's a lot to wade through,
but junior thespians are likely to find it worthwhile. DS
MAY 1993 
* 
281
GREENE, CAROL 
Reading about the River Otter; ISBN 0-89490-425-6; Reading
about the Peregrine Falcon; ISBN 0-89490-422-1. 
Each book: Enslow,
1993 
$12.95 
32p 
illus. with photographs 
(Friends in Danger)
R Gr. 1-3
Standardized in format, each of these series titles features full-page color photo-
graphs accompanying an easy-to-read nature narrative. Two animals from an en-
dangered species are introduced by name (Rocky and Zip are the falcons, Slip and
Slider the otters) and described in their habitat. Concluding sections explain the
population decline (DDT for falcons, fur trapping for otters, diminished territo-
ries for both), list suggestions for concerned young readers to follow up on, and
include more facts, along with a map. It's too bad the covers are cluttered with
multi-colored titles, because the design within is mostly simple and clear, the pic-
tures action-packed. Each volume has a glossary and index. The information is
straightforward, with no condescension of tone, and the photographs are well re-
produced. The facts are specific if sometimes canned: one book begins "Winter is
almost over"; another, "Winter is here." Still, this bland style may prove an asset
to beginning readers, who will most certainly be interested in real animals as a
variation on the "talking animals" so often presented in easy-to-read format. The
series will include books on the gray wolf, humpback whale, grizzly bear, and
manatee, as well as the peregrine falcon and otter. BH
GROVER, WAYNE 
Ali and the Golden Eagle. Greenwillow, 1993 
150p
ISBN 0-688-11385-0 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Wonderfully farfetched if entirely possible, this is a fictionalized account of the
author's stay in the remote high desert region of western Saudi Arabia. When
Wayne, an American engineer, befriends thirteen-year-old Ali, he's introduced to
the ancient art of falconry, a hunting technique that Ali's village depends upon for
food. Together, Wayne and Ali capture a baby wild eagle from its nest, and Ali
and his father train it to a superb degree, with Ali and Samson (as he names the
bird) soon outreaching the feats of the most skilled hunters in the village and even,
as is demonstrated in a nationwide competition, the crown princes of the royal
family. The falconry lore and technique are detailed and intriguing; just as fasci-
nating is the running account of life in Ali's village tucked far down a steep can-
yon. Mysticism (Ali telepathically communicates with Samson) combines with
high adventure (Wayne takes Ali up in a glider to fly with Samson) for strong
appeal. Even though we're not supposed to talk about "boys' books" anymore,
this is a great one. (See Hahn, below, for other sexist remarks.) RS
HAHN, MARY DOWNING 
The Wind Blows Backward. Clarion, 1993 
[2 72 p]
ISBN 0-395-62975-6 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
Lauren and Spencer, drawn together by their love of fantasy novels, were close in
junior high (and she had harbored a secret crush on him), but come ninth grade,
Spencer joined the in-crowd and never spoke to Lauren again. Now they're se-
niors, and Spencer, handsome, poetic and troubled, is back in Lauren's life: "He'd
apologized for hurting me, he'd held my hand, he'd asked me to be his friend-
he'd kissed me. I touched my mouth cautiously so as not to disturb any evidence
that might still linger on my lips." This is a lavishly romantic novel, with all the
moody intensity anyone could want. Lauren is quiet and bookish and looking for
282 
* THE BULLETIN
someone with whom to share her deeply felt responses to poetry and life; Spencer
has tried to escape the pain of his father's suicide by burying himself in popularity,
but his despair only increases and he looks to Lauren for salvation. While Lauren's
narration captures all the high emotions of first love, Hahn's writing is clean and
unsentimental, her love scenes discreet but sexy, and her smooth fusion of serious
themes of suicide and depression with a passionate love story has both dignity and
wide appeal. With a romantic watercolor cover of a pretty Lauren and an even
prettier Spencer in a car at night, this is going to be, hands down, the Girl Book of
the Year. RS
HELMER, DIANA STAR 
Belles ofthe Ballpark. Millbrook, 1993 
96 p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 1-56294-230-1 
$14.90 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The popular movie A League of Their Own may spur interest in Philip K. Wrigley's
wartime-inspired All-American Girls Professional Ball League. While Helmer's
book doesn't have the personality of Macy's A Whole New Ballgame, reviewed
below, it is an informative overview of the league's beginnings and recruitment of
players, growth during the war years, and eventual decline. Chapters also cover
changes in rules, life on the road, minor league activity, and the renaissance of
interest during the 1980s in the league's history. Helmer peppers enough anec-
dotes and photographs throughout to avoid a summary tone; index, chronology
and bibliography are appended. RS
HESLEWOOD, JULIET Introducing Picasso. Little, 1993 
[32p] 
illus. with pho-
tographs
ISBN 0-316-35917-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Visually, this is a terrific introduction to Picasso: it's chock-full of vivid reproduc-
tions of his paintings, his sculptures, other artists' works that influenced him; it's
also sprinkled with brooding and quizzical photos of the artist himself. The text is
simple and fairly clear, although occasionally not as explanatory as one might wish
(the section on Picasso's Blue and Rose periods, for instance, never defines "rose"
and is illustrated with a painting containing blues, roses, blacks, and browns). The
chapters proceed by theme, which occasionally makes things chronologically con-
fusing but is appropriate for a book more concerned with the artist's work than his
life (even the biographical information is artistic rather than personal). It's an eye-
catching and accessible overview which, by concentrating on visuals, conveys the
excitement and iconoclasm of Picasso's work in a way children can understand. A
timeline and index are included. DS
HEWETT, JOAN 
Tiger, Tiger, Growing Up; illus. with photographs by Richard
Hewett. 
Clarion, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-395-61583-6 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Tara, although definitely a tiger, looks less like the Blakean vision at which the title
hints than a window display at FAO Schwartz: she is a fuzzy and adorable piece of
kittenish felinity. She's a resident of Marine World Africa USA, and the book
documents her rearing by Marine World employees Mary and Lynn, until the
MAY 1993 
* 
283
kitten is of an age and size to join the adult tigers on "Tiger Island." The text is
straightforward and clear, although there are a few omissions: it's not explained
why Tara was taken from her tiger mother at five days, and she's treated so much
like a house pet that there really ought to be a caveat about wild animals still being
wild. No matter, really: what's important are the photos of Tara as she cuddles
with her understandably besotted caretakers and grows into those huge paws. You
don't even have to booktalk this-just flash one of the multitude of irresistible
pictures and your audience will come running; as a readaloud, this could also keep
younger kids purring. DS
HINDLEY, JUDY 
A Piece of String Is a Wonderful Thing; illus. by Margaret
Chamberlain. 
Candlewick, 1993 
32p 
(Read and Wonder)
ISBN 1-56402-147-5 
$14.95 
Ad 4-7 yrs
See the Big Picture, p. 273, for review.
HULL, ROBERT, comp. ed. 
A Prose Anthology ofthe Second World War. Millbrook,
1993 
64p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-56294-223-9 
$12.90 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
"Thirty million people died in the Second World War.... Sometimes we need to
go back to experiences in the singular to make sense of these huge numbers." A
brief but intelligent introduction paves the way for a primary-source anthology
that is awkwardly designed but nevertheless telling in its broad range of voices,
including Jews, Nazis, troops, and civilians of many nationalities and both gen-
ders. The bold-face explanations between the selections, as well as the italicized
definitions at the bottom of the page of text, both appear to be captions when they
are placed next to photographs; sometimes they are and sometimes they aren't. A
European Jewish boy's description of life in a boys' school in England is illustrated
by a picture of a girl with two dolls; the explanation of the Victoria Cross seems to
label a picture of refugees lined up on a dock; yet Churchill shows up above his
own words. However confusing its appearance, the material itself will prove a
valuable supplement to textbook accounts that distance readers from the events.
Important dates, a glossary, a six-title list of books for further reading, source notes,
and an index conclude the book. BH
JAUCK, ANDREA 
Assateague: Island of the Wild Ponies; written by Andrea Jauck
and Larry Points. 
Macmillan, 1993 
32p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-02-774695-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Starting with spring, this book gives a season by season overview of how the wild
relatives of Misty of Chincoteague survive and flourish in their island preserve.
The authors mention and show life other than the ponies, too, with deer, sea birds,
and marine life appearing throughout, plus some descriptions of vegetation and
overall ecology. The text, although clear, lacks a narrative thread, seemingly writ-
ten around the photographs, which makes it all the more confusing when the
words and pictures don't jibe (a paragraph discussing how ponies usually give birth
at night is accompanied by a photo of a mare foaling in broad daylight; text de-
scribing the mother piping plover sitting on her eggs and chicks partners a picture
of eggs and chicks but no mom). Kids will also have questions (how do the cars get
to the island? If it's over a bridge, why don't the ponies leave that way?) that the
284 
* THE BULLETIN
text doesn't answer. The pictures are terrific, however (even the composite on the
cover), and the reader gets a strong sense of bucolic pony life on the island. This is
a good elementary look at one natural habitat as well as an appealing read for
friends of Misty and ponies generally. There is one map, and an address for fur-
ther information is included. DS
JOHNSON, ANGELA Julius; illus. by Dav Pilkey. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08615-1 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05465-9 
$14.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
This gleeful celebration of silliness starts out with just the right hint of what's
coming: "Maya's granddaddy lived in Alabama, but wintered in Alaska." So when
he brings her "something for my special you" and it turns out to be even better
than a horse or an older brother ("She'd always wanted one or the other"), Maya is
thrilled to meet Julius, an Alaskan pig ("a big pig"). Julius climbs out of the box
doing a polar bear imitation, wreaks havoc in the house, keeps Maya company in
multiple endeavors (e.g., "peanut butter from the jar, without getting any on the
ceiling"), and in turn learns some things from Maya (how not "to act like he lived
in a barn"). Maya's parents are less than thrilled, but of course that's the main
attraction of the situation, which steadily veers out of control in all the ways chil-
dren love-noise, mess, late TV, sneaking into stores to try on clothes ("Julius
liked anything blue and stretchy"), and generally transforming order into chaos.
The fact that these characters are black-except for Julius, of course, who is pink
when not rolling in flour-makes this an exceptionally refreshing break from the
folklore and nostalgic childhood memories that have dominated African-Ameri-
can picture books lately. Pilkey's paintings are a major factor in the hilarity. He
translates a keen sense of the ridiculous into vivacious hues and wildly varied pat-
terns without ever getting cluttered. The picture of the family at breakfast, for
instance, features flowered wallpaper framed in patchwork-a very pretty sight
except for the coffee dribbling down the page from one of Julius' many spills.
These are not idealized parents either; their expressions range from critical disap-
proval to desperate disapproval. It's the kids who have all the fun, and they do it
with an abandon reminiscent of Sendak's free spirits. Despite the vast artistic
differences, readers will recognize a tone common to both: wheeeee! BH
JONES, TERRY 
Fantastic Stories; illus. by Michael Foreman. 
Viking, 1993 
128p
ISBN 0-670-84899-9 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Jones, film director, former member of Monty Python, and author of Terry Jones'
Fairy Tales, etc., has here collected twenty-one of his original folklike tales. Stories
include "The Improving Mirror," about the disastrous consequences of a mirror
that makes people's reflections look better than they do; "How the Badger Got Its
Stripes," a pourquoi tale; "The Slow Ogre," about the eponymous monster and
the small child who triumphs over him. Jones has a good ear for storytelling
rhythm ("There once was a mermaid who pitied the sailors who drowned in the
windy sea") and repetition (the Gatekeeper's Daughter's refrain of "Daddy, don't
let him in!" punctuates "The Slow Ogre") which lifts these stories above the level
of most would-be-fantastical short stories. Foreman's line-and-watercolor illustra-
tions keep things generally light-hearted and properly fantastical. Unfortunately
the ends of the stories are often abrupt or disappointing, not only baldly moralistic
but disconcertingly topical ("The Flying King" turns out to be a parable about the
MAY 1993 
* 285
hazards of automobiles), and both the humor and narratorial asides can be inane.
Still, for kids who like drollery in fairy tales (milder than Scieszka's satirical The
Stinky Cheese Man) this might be an appealing readaloud or private exploration.
DS
JuKES, MAVIS 
I'll See You in My Dreams; illus. by Stacey Schuett. 
Knopf,
1993 
32p
Library'ed. ISBN 0-679-92690-9 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-82690-4 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
"If she were a skywriter, she would wait for the sky to turn pink and blue-the
colors of dusk or dawn." Thus begins an eloquently written, undeniably moving,
and ultimately adult litany of farewell to a loved one. The first half details a girl's
fantasy of flying her uncle's plane and skywriting "Good-bye ... I love you ... I'll
see you in my dreams" across the clouds where her uncle can see it through his
hospital window. Then comes a puzzling switch in the pivotal word "would,"
which has been used to mean "if I could" in the first half of the book. In the
second, after two brief sentences in the simple past tense ("She was not a skywriter.
She was a little kid"), which effectively refocus the listener on reality, the text
suddenly returns to "would" in a completely different sense, referring to events
that may have happened or may be about to happen on a real plane trip to see her
dying uncle. This third change is at best unnecessary and at worst confusing.
"Her mother would try to prepare her"-did she or didn't she? What's going on
here? We do know, in a mystical way, that the child is going through a series of
head trips and probably one plane trip. The sunset to nighttime colors that cast a
dramatic glow over the first half of the book reflect again off the last two pages,
tying together fantasy and reality. However, Schuett's paintings are at their best in
the subtler tones that depict a panel of instruments, a darkening landscape of fields,
or a brown leather aviator's jacket. Altogether, this is a heartfelt creation which, if
it succeeds in reaching beyond the personal experience it's depicting to communi-
cate with young listeners, will touch them deeply; if not, it will leave them puzzled
indeed. BH
KAYE, MARILYN 
Real Heroes. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1993 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-15-200563-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Kevin adores his tough-cop father Charley, and he's relieved that Charley seems to
be bouncing back after the departure of Kevin's mother. Kevin also finds reassur-
ance from his understanding gym teacher, Mr. Logan, so it's a blow to him to
discover that Mr. Logan is HIV-positive. Kevin's father, currently a media celeb-
rity for performing an heroic rescue (correctly seen by his superiors as an act of
foolish risk), is chosen to spearhead the drive to get Mr. Logan out of the school,
which forces Kevin to examine his own loyalties. The characters of faithful but
confused Kevin and his proud, hurt, and frightened father are well-depicted, as is
the changing relationship between the two. Unfortunately much of the novel falls
into formula: other characters are stereotypes of villainy (Kevin's homophobic
friend and his father) or virtue (Mr. Logan, about whom Kevin's friend Emily says
"in wonderment": "He can still smile at us with all this going on.... What a brave
man"); the plot is coincidence-driven, with televisions turned on at just the right
moment and private information accidentally conveyed through computers or
286 
* THE BULLETIN
unguarded files, and often preachy AIDS information is lodged uneasily in people's
dialogue. The story remains readable, however, and, to Kaye's credit, it eschews a
neat wrap-up: Mr. Logan resigns, and Kevin, who has refused to respond to his
estranged mother's overtures, doesn't see her at the end either, although the possi-
bility of rapprochement has increased. The father-son story is what's really impor-
tant here, and readers will find that part of the book most involving. DS
KING-SMITH, DICK 
All Pigs Are Beautiful; illus. by Anita Jeram. 
Candlewick,
1993 
32p 
(Read and Wonder)
ISBN 1-56402-148-3 
$14.95 
R. 4-7 yrs
See the Big Picture, p. 273, for review
KLEIN, ROBIN 
Dresses ofRed and Gold. Viking, 1993 
177p
ISBN 0-670-84733-X 
$12.50 
R* Gr. 5-9
The Melling sisters and their obnoxious cousin Isobel, first introduced in All in the
Blue Unclouded Weather (BCCB 4/92), are back in another sequence of slice-of-
life short stories. Grace, the oldest girl, has left home for a dressmaking course, but
the rest go on with their squabbles, scrapes and unlikely alliances. The tone is
basically humorous, with one or the other of the girls getting herself-or just as
often, being snared-into trouble, as when Cathy brags to friends about her big
fancy birthday party, only to have to produce it when the friends show up with
presents. (Dad saves the day with an impromptu treasure hunt: "steal a nail off
the roof of the police station lock-up.") The slapstick is balanced by some touch-
ing moments, none more poignant than when Vivien, in the hospital to have her
tonsils out, discovers that Miss Bradtke, the old woman who is her roommate, has
died: "She simply wasn't there at all, but appeared to have slipped very quietly and
gently out of the room." Miss Bradtke had been introduced in an earlier story in
the sequence; similar links provide narrative continuity and some small ironies. A
couple of the stories have too-neat endings, but the voice is always fresh and engag-
ing. The postwar rural Australian setting is easy to get settled into, and the girls
each have their distinctly bratty idiosyncrasies that make them an entertaining
group to get to know. RS
KUDLINSKI, KATHLEEN 
Earthquake!: A Story of Old San Francisco; illus. by Ronald
Himler. 
Viking, 1993 
[6 4 p] 
(Once Upon America)
ISBN 0-670-84874-3 
$12.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Philip is twelve, proud of his ability to help with his father's San Francisco livery
stable, when disaster strikes the city in 1906. Kudlinski depicts the famous earth-
quake and fire as Philip sees it: first the quake, which injures the horses (one so
severely that Philip's father shoots her) that make up the family's livelihood; then
the eerie silence and confusion, punctuated by the sound of gas explosions, as
Philip's father leaves him with the horses and tries to get the family to a safe place;
then finally the fires crossing and re-crossing the city, leading to Philip's evacua-
tion with the horses as the army begins to dynamite his street in an effort to make
a firebreak. The book is more effective for Kudlinski's decision to stick to Philip's
point of view rather than trying to shoehorn a multitude of historical details into
the plot; the complete destruction of Philip's life as he knows it is story enough,
even though it doesn't address the massive death and tragedy that the event caused.
(There's even some subtle emphasis on how the earthquake marked, in many ways,
a shift to automobiles and modern times in San Francisco, with Philip's father
MAY 1993 
* 287
planning to turn to auto repair rather than the livery business.) A slight subplot
about Philip's ability with the horses is unnecessary but too small to distract from
the focus on the main story. A historical note about the earthquake is appended.
DS
LAWSON, JULIE 
The Dragon's Pearl; illus. by Paul Morin. 
Clarion, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-395-63623-X 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Presumably an original tale with some folkloric motifs, this is set in China, where
a boy named Xiao Sheng parlays his poverty for a fortune by cheerfully pursuing-
even during a drought-his search for grass to sell as fuel or fodder. What he
eventually finds, under a lush field, is a magic pearl that multiplies whatever it
touches, including rice and gold. Xiao Sheng and his mother become rich, attract-
ing a pair of greedy villains. In the ensuing struggle, the boy swallows his pearl,
turns into a dragon, and breathes rain-bearing clouds upon the village. Morin's
three-dimensional textures and chiaroscuro effects may be familiar to viewers from
his art work for Mollel's The Orphan Boy (BCCB 4/91); here, the tone is darker
but the composition less stark, with some pictures strongly resembling tapestry.
Story and illustration are an elaborate fit, resulting in a book that will introduce
children who have enjoyed European folktales featuring objects that multiply to
their owners' advantage ("The Wonderful Pot," "The Lad Who Went to the North
Wind," etc.) to a more sophisticated literature. BH
McDANIEL, LURLENE 
Baby Alicia Is Dying. Bantam, 1993 
[17 6 p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-29605-1 
$3.50
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
The title clues you in-this is a tearjerker in the classic tradition. Desi, a science
brain, is unmoved by the social opportunities of her freshman year in high school,
and she instead begins to work at a foster care facility that houses babies born
HIV-positive. Soon ChildCare, and particularly baby Alicia, becomes the main-
stay of Desi's days, and she finds satisfaction in providing for Alicia the kind of
maternal care that she feels neither of them have received from their own mothers.
Desi endures negative reactions from friends, family, and strangers (on Desi's school
locker, "spray-painted red letters left a hateful message: 'Get Out, Nigger Queer
Lover'"), but she's finally devastated by the decline and eventual death of the baby
whom she thinks of as her own. There are no particular plot surprises here (Desi
does eventually overcome her pain and return to work at ChildCare, and she and
her mother have a rapprochement after Alicia's death), and the information on
AIDS and HIV, although extremely up-to-date, is occasionally intrusive. McDaniel
makes Desi's passion believable and understandable, however, and she paints other
characters, such as Desi's lab partner Brian and Alicia's teenage mother, with gentle-
ness and skill. The story is gripping and emotional, and those who come to scoff
may stay to weep. DS
MACHOTKA, HANA 
Outstanding Outsides; written and illus. with photographs by
Hana Machotka. 
Morrow, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11753-8 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11752-X 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Machotka continues her piquantly specific series on biology via anatomy (Breath-
taking Noses, BCCB 7/92, etc.) with a look at skins, shells, scales, feathers, and-
288 
* THE BULLETIN
well, just plain outsides. The book follows her previously employed form: a closeup
photo of the outside of the critter in question ("This dome shaped shell belongs to
a . . . . "), then a double spread describing and picturing the subject more fully
("The shell of this box turtle is made up of hard, bony plates that are joined to-
gether. .... "). The unique quality of a particular outside covering doesn't always
come through photographically (kids may not be able to tell, for instance, that the
fuzzy-looking tarantula has "a hard skeleton on the outside"), but the pictures and
text are engaging and reasonably explanatory. Like the others in the series, this is
an accessible and easy introduction to biology from a pragmatic viewpoint, and it's
all the more salutary for its underlying implication that we humans are hardly the
biological norm we imagine ourselves. DS
MCMAHON, PATRICIA 
Chi-Hoon: A Korean Girl; illus. with photographs by
Michael F. O'Brien. 
Caroline House/Boyds Mills, 1993 
[6 4 p]
ISBN 1-56397-026-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Eight-year-old Chi-Hoon is the focus for this photodocumentary, which takes the
girl through a typical week in Seoul as she goes to school, visits relatives, goes
sightseeing, and spends time at home with her family. The color photographs are
excellent, uncaptioned but generally well-placed in the unfortunately crowded
double-column text. Less touristy than many similar books, this has lots of detail
and personality, and Chi-Hoon's rebellious streak makes her more interesting than
the good girl she longs to be (in order to win a prize at school). Sometimes the text
is too complicated, as in a long discussion of Korean names, and sometimes it is
oversimplified, as in a passage that implies that the country is still ruled by royalty.
Aside from some tense moments between Chi-Hoon's parents and grandparents
about the proper role of girls and women, the book is apolitical, but its authentic
perspective on one girl's (relatively privileged) life make it a good family story as
well as valuable material for social studies classes. RS
MACY, SUE A Whole New Ballgame: The Story of the All-American Girls Profes-
sional Baseball League. 
Holt, 1993 
140p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-1942-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Probably the biggest difference between Helmer's Belles of the Ballpark, reviewed
above, and this title is that Macy's book has a whole lot more baseball. She does
play-by-plays of a couple of tense games, includes statistics for the all-star players,
and highlights various no-hitters, home-runs and gaffes that give a sense not just of
what the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League meant, but of what it
was. Not that social issues are slighted in either book: while Helmer includes
more material on the genesis of the League, Macy takes more of a feminist perspec-
tive, examining the encouragement and prejudice the women players faced, and
what kinds of lives they went on to after the league folded. Macy's writing is lively,
and she gives a good sense of the various players, such as Peoria Redwings player
Faye Dancer, who was pals with a Mob kingpin: "Once he even asked me if I
wanted anyone killed. I told him maybe the umpire, but I made sure he knew I
was kidding." Lots of often campy photographs, including a "dream team" gallery
MAY 1993 
* 
289
of baseball cards, enliven the text; a source note, reading list, and an index are also
appended. RS
MARGOLIES, BARBARA A. 
Warriors, Wigmen, and the Crocodile People: Journeys in
Papua New Guinea; written and illus. with photographs by Barbara A.
Margolies. 
Four Winds, 1993 
4 0p
ISBN 0-02-762283-5 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
In this exceptionally exotic photoessay, Margolies visits two Papua New Guinean
tribes: the Huli people of the interior highlands, whose men decorate themselves
with elaborate wigs and body paint; and the more Westernized people of the Sepik
River, who use the river as a "highway" connecting villages only fairly recently at
peace with one another. In both places, Margolies uses a young person as a lense
for her travelogue, but the effect is never stagey as it was in her previous book,
Kanu ofKathmandu (BCCB 11/92). The text is brief, sketching the daily lives of
the two very different groups, and it's to Margolies' credit that while she knows
what American kids will find fascinating, she never turns her subjects into curiosi-
ties. Color photos are intense and revealing, especially in her beautiful portraits of
the "Wigmen" in full adornment. While a book like this one does not have the
full outline of "facts" featured in most geography series books (see the Alexanders'
Inuit, above), it does a far more effective job of drawing readers into a different
way of life. RS
MATAS, CAROL 
Daniel's Story. 
Scholastic, 1993 
[128p]
ISBN 0-590-46920-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Published in conjunction with the U. S. Holocaust Memorial Museum, this is
based on scenes from an exhibit about a boy who serves as a "carefully researched
composite of the many children who lived through the Holocaust." Unlike Matas'
involving portrayals in Lisa's War (BCCB 9/89) and Code Name Kris (1/91), the
novel never seems to take on a fictional life of its own but remains almost a de-
scriptive explanation of Jewish suffering at the hands of the Nazis. The distance is
partially due to the device of Daniel's rumination over photographs, stressing long
passages of narrative over action ("But how different to be running from one warm
house to another than to be trapped day and night in an unheated school when the
temperature is twenty-five degrees and people are suffering from frostbite and
malnutrition"). Daniel's relationship with a first love is interrupted by expository
comments ("By the time the ghetto was sealed off from the rest of the world, in
April 1940, there were 160,500 people there. By 1943 there were around 80,000
of us left, the rest having died or been sent away in one of the many transports").
Even dramatic moments are vague; when Daniel steps off the train at Auschwitz,
we learn that "many in the car are dead" but not how or why. Dialogue often
seems contrived: "'It was all that nettle soup they fed us,' I answer. 'Little did they
realize that it was just chock-full of vitamins and minerals and everything.'" The
book is unarguably well-informed and well-intentioned, and reading it will cer-
tainly add to the impact of attending the museum exhibit; but it's paradoxically
true that particular individuals' stories such as Leitner's The Big Lie (BCCB 1/93)
convey a more universally effective sense of experience than generalized situations
such as this one. BH
290 
* THE BULLETIN
MAYO, GRETCHEN WILL, ad. 
Meet Tricky Coyote!; Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8199-
3; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8198-5. 
That Tricky Coyote!; Library ed. ISBN 0-
8027-8201-9; Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8200-0. 
Each book: ad. and illus. by
Gretchen Will Mayo. 
Walker, 1993 
Library ed. $13.85, Trade ed.
$12.95 
[3 2 p]
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Although Mayo's companion volumes repeat the same afterwords (explaining
Coyote's place in Native American tradition) and acknowledgments, the five easy-
to-read stories featured in each volume differ distinctively. All ten tales are short
and funny, with helpful notes at the end of each giving a bit of background on the
selection and tribe of origin; exact sources are cited in a bibliography, which also
lists additional titles for further study. A few of the tales show European influ-
ence-"Burrrrrrrrrrp!," collected in 1916 from the Canadian Salishan people, is a
variant of "The Wolf and the Fox" (Grimm #73)-and there's a version of "Tor-
toise and the Hare" called "I Win," which features Coyote and Turtle. Most of the
stories will be unfamiliar to young readers, however, and the title tale, "Tricky
Coyote," will hook practicing readers as Coyote tricks a cowboy out of his hat,
shirt, pants, and horse and rides off laughing, leaving Fancy Man wearing only
boots and long underwear. The illustrations depict a playful tan coyote outlined
in thick yellow and cavorting against a background of innocent pastels. It's not
the sly artistry of Janet Stevens' Coyote Steals the Blanket (reviewed above), but it's
a friendly staple that livens the format and will wear well with use; these beat
textbook readers by a mile. BH
MOCHIZUKI, KEN 
Baseball Saved Us; illus. by Dom Lee. 
Lee & Low,
1993 
[3 2p]
ISBN 1-880000-01-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-9 yrs
"One day, my dad looked out at the endless desert and decided then and there to
build a baseball field." The resemblance to Field of Dreams should not be dis-
counted in this story set in an unnamed internment camp for Japanese citizens
during World War II. When the narrator's brother, Teddy, arrogantly talks back
to their father, Dad decides that there's not enough to do around the camp and
organizes a baseball field/barn-raising to have the field cleared and watered, and
bleachers built and uniforms sewn from mattress covers. Baseball becomes the
thing to do, and the narrator, who usually strikes out and occasionally gets a single,
is in a crucial game, batting at the bottom of the ninth inning, two outs, one man
on base and they're trailing by one run. But not for long-goaded by the presence
of the anonymous, ever-watching, sunglassed tower guard, the boy hits a home
run and wins the game: "I looked up at the tower and the man, with a grin on his
face, gave me the thumbs-up sign." The desert camp setting is bleak, somberly
captured in Lee's ochre-toned paintings, but the story is as familiar as Horatio
Alger. Later, after the family has returned home, the boy responds to racial taunts
at school by hitting another winner and gaining the enthusiastic approval of his
Caucasian teammates. As is often true of books from alternative presses, the politi-
cal consciousness here is very contemporary, but the children's-book vehicle it
rides in is dated and sentimental. The writing is better than the plot, and the
pictures, while occasionally stiff and monochromatic, convey an appropriate deso-
lation that doesn't always jibe with the upbeat story. RS
MAY 1993 
* 291
MoRI, KYOKO Shizuko's Daughter. Holt, 1993 
227p
ISBN 0-8050-2557-X 
$15.95 
R* Gr. 8 up
A first novel that truly bridges the interests of young adults and adults, this is
written in a spare, intricately balanced style interweaving several viewpoints with-
out losing sharp focus. The book opens with the calm, carefully deliberated sui-
cide of eleven-year-old Yuki's beautiful but unhappy mother, Shizuko, who turns
on the gas while her daughter's taking a music lesson at the piano teacher's house.
Most of the remaining fifteen scenes, each dated sometime in the next seven years,
detail Yuki's grief, survival, and understanding of her mother's death, but this
journeys far beyond a "problem novel" in scope. It is a fully realized portrayal of a
Japanese family to the depth of three generations and at least six individuals, in-
cluding the cold father and stepmother whom Yuki defies, as well as the warm
grandparents whose richly traditional patterns of living bring aching recollections
of Yuki's mother. The tension of the characters themselves serves as driving ac-
tion. The strong will and sense of artistry that isolate Yuki finally save her, and
readers will be moved beyond cultural boundaries by the author's ability to render
nuances of childhood with an immediacy devoid of nostalgia. Most impressive,
technically, is Mori's flow of a narrative voice that subtly translates aesthetic obser-
vations into readers' experiences-the color and texture of flowers, of clothing, of
pottery, of human love's pain and release. Such authenticity illuminates the fic-
tional realities and motivations without intrusion or distraction, so that readers
will feel themselves enlightened by an encounter with that rare achievement, a
powerfully understated story. BH
MUREZ, DIANE 
A Day on the Boat with Captain Betty; illus. with photographs by
Steve Murez. 
Macmillan, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-02-767430-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Two young boys (children of the author and photographer) go island hopping
along the Florida coast, where they birdwatch, search for sea shells, observe mana-
tees, do some fishing, and explore a mangrove swamp. The color photographs are
vivid, inviting, and varied in composition. The text is a little more problematic;
it's dialogue loaded with information that sounds more like a lecture than a natu-
ral conversation between Captain Betty and the boys. Nevertheless, the wildlife is
intriguing, however it's presented, and adults who are reading this aloud-it looks
like a picture book despite the small print-can tailor the facts to the audience.
The book will be of interest to families preparing for a vacation, to students ex-
ploring marine ecology, and to kids who love fooling around with boats. BH
PARASKEVAS, BETTY Junior Kroll; illus. by Michael Paraskevas. 
Harcourt,
1993 
34 p
ISBN 0-15-241497-5 
$13.95 
M 
5-8 yrs
Junior Kroll, who according to a publisher's note has been "a weekly feature in
Dan's Papers, Bridgehampton, New York, since June 8, 1990," makes his picture-
book debut here in fifteen poems limning his escapades. Junior, almost always
pictured in his "brand new, navy blue, double-breasted suit/ With shiny brass
buttons and a tiny bow tie," has mishaps with a pot pie, upsets a garden club
meeting, rescues some lobsters from their dinner-table fate, and charms his elderly
acquaintances and relatives. The slapstick of the adventures is occasionally amus-
ing (although the friendlier encounters are cloyingly sentimental-"The old lady
292 
* THE BULLETIN
laughed for the first time in weeks;/ Junior the thief had brought color to her
cheeks"), but the poems scan poorly and are rather involved for a Junior-Kroll-age
audience. More importantly, the mild and predictable adventures lack punch:
Junior possesses none of the oomph of will-of-iron kids such as Thompson's Eloise
and Dahl's Matilda, and the viewpoint is likelier to appeal to adults thinking of
children than children themselves. The illustrations feature strong and speedy
lines, sometimes filled in with or tinted by brushy gouache and sometimes stand-
ing alone, with lively figures and frequently tilting angles; they picture Junior as a
restrained-looking young lad whose mixing-bowl haircut, conservative garb, and
inscrutable expression make him resemble a follower of the late Chairman Mao. If
strongly encouraged by adult enthusiasm, kids may find the drollery in the illus-
trations and the silliness of the adventures entertaining. DS
PARNALL, PETER 
Water Pup; written and illus. by Peter Parnall. 
Macmillan,
1993 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-02-770151-4 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Even more than Parnall's Marsh Cat (BCCB 11/91), this will grab animal lovers
from the beginning, when an old, pregnant, yellow Labrador is abandoned by her
owner and lives to bear and suckle her pups, but not much longer. The only
female and the smartest of the litter, Lop is the heroine of this story, an involving
account of physical and social survival. Lop manages not only to fend off starva-
tion, but also to attach herself to a family of foxes that nurtures her need for com-
panionship. Halfway through the book, Parnall introduces new characters of the
human variety, a difficult maneuver which he pulls off smoothly, after the first
little jolt, by recounting the fox's desperate winter raid on a farmer's chickens.
Naturally, the farmer and his son track the culprit. They find Lop in the den, and
the dog must now survive the vicissitudes of civilization. Parnall seems to have
immersed himself in natural history to the point of developing a comfortable fa-
miliarity that's reflected in the story's content and style. The point of view is
consistently canine when Lop is center stage, and the plot never becomes a vehicle
for descriptions of fauna and flora. On the contrary, facts serve to heighten sus-
pense or pace it with humor: a favorite refrain, after Lop has first investigated
some new creature, is "She ate him"--quick and clean as a fairy tale but always
true to the laws of hunger in the wild. The villain is overdrawn ("The man's lips
parted, revealing the coated brown teeth in what might have been regarded as a
grin, down in a sewer somewhere"), but this fits Parnall's occasionally naive tone
("They were cat kibbles, but when you don't have a dog, you generally don't have
a lot of dog food around!"), which also has its appealing aspects. The book will
capture both dog lovers and kids interested in woodlore; or read it aloud to lure
students into an environmental unit. BH
QuALEY, MARSHA 
Revolutions of the Heart. Houghton, 1993 
184p
ISBN 0-395-64168-3 
$13.95 
R* Gr. 7-12
Cory meets Mac when she accompanies her mother Margaret and her Indian friend
Roxanne to a powwow one evening near their small town in northern Wisconsin.
While there are Indian kids in Cory's high school, they keep-or are kept, actu-
ally-to themselves, so her budding romance with Mac is definitely news, never
more so than when the town becomes divided over the issue of Indian fishing
rights, and Cory and her brother find themselves on opposite sides. Qualey's first
MAY 1993 
* 
293
young adult novel was the excellent Everybody's Daughter (BCCB 3/91); with this
second book she definitely proves herself a natural for the genre. Cory is a smart,
smart-mouthed, heroine with a sense of humor about herself; while the character
of Mac is somewhat idealized, he's an appealing love interest. The dynamics within
Cory's family are funny and real if ultimately shadowed, and it's unfortunate that
the flap copy reveals Cory's mother's death, a crisis that is skillfully prepared and
sensitively handled by the author. The Indians in the book never succumb to
nouveau stereotyping as ecological nature-children; there are several teasing mo-
ments, as when Roxanne explains powwows to Cory and her mother: "The first
thing you should know is that they start with a blood initiation involving select
male virgins." Qualey can move from the comic to the sad or dramatic with ease,
and the dialogue is quick and characterful. Turning down a date with a boy who
sneeringly asks if she likes Indians better, Cory swiftly ripostes, "Better than you."
Good for her, and it's good to see such confidence matched by such confident
writing. RS
RANA, INDI 
The Roller Birds ofRampur. Holt, 1993 
298p
ISBN 0-8050-2670-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
"I had to get to grips with four parallel problems. I was female; I was educated and
I would go on being as educated as my brain could handle; I was Indian living in
England; andl had no traditions that told me what to do." These are compelling
conflicts, and the setting-sixteen-year-old Sheila Mehta's return to a family farm
near Rampur after a traumatic jilting by her English boyfriend-are vivid. There's
even a dramatic and moving climax in which a young friend's husband is mur-
dered during Sheila's pilgrimage to a local shrine. Unfortunately, this incident,
along with the suspenseful family dynamics and vivid details of travel, is nearly
buried in monologues about religious, philosophical, social, and political life.
Grandpa, particularly, talks and harumphs his way interminably through several
chapters, which reduces the strong-voiced narrator to echoes ("'Beyond our capac-
ity to think!' I repeated. Well, that certainly was a new thought!") or silence ("'Oh?'
I said. I seemed to say 'oh' a lot around Grandpa"). It's a tribute to the author that
the characters in this ambitiously long first novel predominate over a naive and
occasionally awkward style ("The greatest soggy maw of fatalism and resignation
was covering the event! The tragedy had made as much of a ripple as a pebble
dropped into a vast scummy lake, causing small concentric circles, widening to
join, and disappearing into, the generalized ache of living"). For patient readers,
the fictionally realized aspects of the story are memorable enough to overcome the
exposition disguised as conversation; ideally, a story reaches beyond the circle of its
characters' experience, but this is a novel whose appeal may be limited to readers
especially interested in India. BH
REIss, KATHRYN 
Dreadful Sorry. 
Harcourt, 1993 
[272p]
ISBN 0-15-224213-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Molly's terrifying recurrent nightmare about a girl in an old house presents itself
with increasing frequency after Molly, always scared of water, is confronted with a
school swimming test. Her mother, an excessively rational lawyer, dismisses Molly's
fears until a boy at a party throws Molly into a pool and she almost drowns. Molly
feels that this boy, Jared, and she are linked somehow, but it's not until Molly goes
294 
* THE BULLETIN
to visit her father and stepmother on the Maine coast that she learns the secrets
and tragedy that bind her and Jared together. Back in the early years of the century
Jared (as Hob) loved Molly (as Clementine), an orphan working as a servant/tutor
for her rich uncle's family, who lived in the old Maine house that Molly's father is
renovating. More conventionally structured than the author's previous time-slip
fantasies (Time Windows, BCCB 4/92 and The Glass House People, 10/91), this is
a spooky and satisfying past-life romance that should appeal to readers of Barbara
Michaels and similarly cozy gothic writers. Molly and Jared are a sympathetic pair
whose attraction to each other makes a contemporary teen-type foil to the more
turbulent relationship between Hob and Clementine, whose intentions toward
her village suitor were not nearly as pure as his towards her. Clementine is a
complicated ghost for whom readers will feel equal amounts of sympathy and
censure, a fabulous symbiosis. RS
ROBERTS, BRENDA C. 
Sticks and Stones, Bobbie Bones. 
Scholastic, 1993 
83p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-46518-X 
$2.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Few paperback-original school stories have the snap and economy of this one, which
features a brainy but shy new-girl-in-school, Bobbie, fighting against the odds when
she incurs the wrath of Myra, the class bully. "Myra was actually not a bad-look-
ing girl, if you didn't mind large." Bobbie's having worn those red tights on her
skinny legs the first day of school had occasioned Myra's initial scorn ("Don't rub
'em together, girl. They might catch on fire"), but now she's in real trouble be-
cause the teacher has asked her to help grade quizzes, and Myra has sent a thought-
ful note: "If you get my test, you no what to do." The plot is focused, the action
occurring over just a couple of days, and each character in the African-American
cast is distinctly drawn. After much dramatic confrontation, Bobbie and Myra
negotiate a wary truce, but let's hope it's not the end: these kids deserve a series.
RS
RUBY, Lois 
Miriam's Well 
Scholastic, 1993 
[288p]
ISBN 0-590-44937-0 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Related in alternate chapters by high school classmates Adam Bergen and Miriam
Pelham, this is the story of their unlikely romance during Miriam's diagnosis of
and treatment for bone cancer. Adam's a Jewish underachiever interested in "typi-
cal male pursuits," especially his pretty, popular girl friend Diana. Miriam's a
prim, fundamentalist Christian whose church forbids medical healing. Their rela-
tionship starts the day an English teacher assigns them a project together-the
same day Miriam faints in class-and develops during a hospitalization and court
battle that draws national attention when Adam's father, a lawyer, defends Miriam's
right to refuse treatment. The author deepens Miriam's ambivalence by portray-
ing the religious group and its leader with respect and by showing that all parties
are sincere in seeking her best interests, even while they are prone to interpret her
best interests in light of their own. Though Adam seems exaggeratedly flip at first,
his conflict with his father is realized gradually and subtly, and his maturation by
the end of the novel, as measured against the friends he has outgrown in the course
of his experience with Miriam, is convincing. The conclusion is all the more
realistic for combining physical recovery with emotional pain. Occasionally the
dialogue seems selfconsciously clever ("Do you realize, Adam, that this holiday
weekend you'll be having your first tofu turkey and also going to your first bone
MAY 1993 
* 
295
scan?"), but in general the conversations are natural and credible. It's hard to
know whether Adam's remark after their visit to the Indian Center ("Oh, so you
think you'd make a terrific Indian squaw: Going out to shoot dinner with babies
strapped to the front and back of you") reflects misplaced sophomoric humor or
authorial irony, but it does conflict with Adam's budding sensitivity. Apart from
these quibbles, Ruby has explored some controversial issues of religion and civil
rights, without making her characters mouthpieces. That's a real achievement,
and one that high school readers will appreciate even as they speed-read to find out
what happens next. BH
SKURZYNSKI, GLORIA 
Get the Message: Telecommunications in Your High-Tech
World. Bradbury, 1993 
64 p
ISBN 0-02-778071-6 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Face it: you probably don't know any better than the kids how a car phone really
works, so this easy introduction to telecommunications could be just the thing for
both them and you. Skurzynski covers plain old phones, cellular phones, beepers,
fax machines and video phones, clearly explaining the various technologies (radio
towers, satellites, fiber optics) that make them possible. Her explanations of scien-
tific principles, such as radio waves, are equally comprehensible and accompanied
by clear diagrams (the many color photographs are more often atmospheric than
informational). A running story about two teens using the various tele-devices
gives the book a frothiness that's occasionally fatuous, as when Kristin uses a color
fax machine to send her grandmother a photo from the homecoming dance. (In-
cidentally, the author's assertion that the first facsimile system was used in the
1840s to send "news photos" cannot be true: early facsimile machines could not
transmit photographs, which were also experimental at that time.) Still, this is
loaded with a strong blend of the interesting and the informative, and kids will
especially enjoy a look into the future, when technology will make it possible for
them to spend basically their entire lives in front of the television. A glossary and
index are appended. RS
SLEATOR, WILLIAM 
Oddballs. Dutton, 1993 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-525-45057-2 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Like Paul Zindel's The Pigman andMe (BCCB 12/92), this autobiography reveals
scenes from the childhood of an irreverent writer-to-be, or, in Sleator's own terms,
an "oddball." And like Zindel's book, this one attributes the process of becoming
an oddball to the influence of a profoundly quirky family. Where Zindel struggled
to survive, however-revealing pain as well as humor-Sleator evidently thrived
without pause on his permissive parents' steady encouragement to violate social
taboos. The ten stories here show four children growing up with minimal super-
vision by their mother, a pediatrician, and father, a university physiologist-all
close-knit and secure enough to play constant tricks on each other and the rest of
the world. Their "games"-from anonymous phone calls for help to a bus game
where two friends torment a third to shock the other passengers-seem designed
to show how stupid most adults can be, along with the children they raise. Some
situations are genuinely funny, as in Sleator's early car game with his sister, which
they called BM ("We'd wrap ourselves up in an old brown blanket in the back of
the station wagon and tell each other our life stories as excrement"); others seem-
forgive the pun-strained, as in faking a concert breakdown by an "insane pianist"
296 
* 
THE BULLETIN
(Sleator's sister). When Sleator tells us something is or should be funny (in one
story of a home drama production, he repeatedly interrupts the humorous devel-
opment to describe how hard everyone is laughing), the tone becomes self-con-
sciously subversive. Overall, however, there's enough spontaneous detail to generate
a gleeful readership, especially among fans of Sleator's popular science fiction, but
also among oddball readers themselves, those who have enjoyed young adult mem-
oirs such as Zindel's, or Roald Dahl's Boy (2/85). BH
STEFOFF, REBECCA 
Women ofthe World: Women Travelers and Explorers. Oxford,
1993 
152p 
illus. with photographs 
(Extraordinary Explorers)
ISBN 0-19-507687-7 
$20.00 
R Gr. 5-9
Stefoff chronicles the life and peregrinations of several of the best known women
explorers and travelers, including Isabella Bird Bishop, Mary Kingsley, Alexandra
David-Neel, Freya Stark, and five others whose stamping grounds range from the
Arctic to the Himalayas and through mountain ranges, deserts, and jungles around
the world. The biographies are competently written, incorporating excerpts from
each woman's writings to demonstrate individual attitude and style. The explorers
are a varied lot with varied personalities (Stefoff is open about prickly dispositions
and politically incorrect attitudes) and their contributions have been variously re-
ceived; some are important as writers, some contributed military information, some
expanded geographical and anthropological frontiers. The format is textbook-
stodgy, with maps often poorly annotated and photographs not always relevant
(although the portraits are fascinating); the picture-essay (in a color insert) on
"Mary Kingsley's African Trophies" is interesting but seems out of place. Despite
these drawbacks, however, the enterprising lives of the women shine through, and
kids-particularly girl kids-may find that these stories of intrepid explorers lend
some piquancy to geography and history as well as providing excitement in their
own right. An afterword describing other women travelers, a chronology, a good
bibliography, and an index are included. DS
STEVENS, JANET, ad. 
Coyote Steals the Blanket: A Ute Tale; ad. and illus. by Janet
Stevens. 
Holiday House, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-0996-1 
$15.95 
R* 4-8 yrs.
"I go where I want, I do what I want, and I take what I want," brags Coyote, so
when Hummingbird warns him not to touch the beautiful blankets "up ahead,"
we know he will, and we know he'll suffer the wrath of the rocks on whom the
blankets are draped. With a bold mix of crayon and watercolor, a motion-picture
page design, and the unerring sense of animal anatomy that she exaggerated to
such funny effect in The Bremen Town Musicians (BCCB 11/92), Stevens rivets a
viewer's attention on this extended chase scene. Her desert colors, sandstone shapes,
and loose-limbed, scraggly-whiskered coyote will keep every eye moving to keep
up with the characters. The cover shows Coyote quivering with canine defiance,
and he will need all the energy he can muster to escape the huge rock determined
to get its blanket back ("RUMBLE, RUMBLE RUMBLE"). Neither mule deer
nor Big Horn Sheep can stop this stone; it takes modest, moral little Humming-
bird to free Coyote's flattened tail so the trickster can run off with more blankets.
An apt story hour companion for Goble's Iktomi and the Boulder (BCCB 7/88),
this proves an inherent kinship between Coyote's line of action and Janet Stevens'
line of artwork. BH
MAY 1993 
* 297
SULLIVAN, GEORGE 
How an Airport Really Works. 
Lodestar, 1993 
122p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-525-67378-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Sullivan does a steady job of synthesizing the many technical and social variables
that go into making an airport work. Or not work: "Once in a while, a passenger's
bag fails to show up in the baggage-claim area." While frequent fliers may veer
from such blithe imprecision, young readers will appreciate Sullivan's practiced
blend of summary description and interesting anecdote; a chapter called "Behind
the Scenes" has some particularly intriguing information about "bird annoyance
devices" designed to minimize the real safety hazards posed by flocks of birds near
runways. Otherwise, there are chapters on weather, airport planning and design,
various terminal operations such as security, and the problems airports face in light
of ever-increasing numbers of passengers and flights. Black-and-white photos add
interest; a glossary and index are appended. RS
SWEENEY, JOYCE 
The Tiger Orchard. Delacorte, 1993 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-385-30841-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Zack's terrifying nightmares about a mysterious man and a tiger have driven him
to a psychologist, much to his mother's disdain. Mom and Zack's younger brother
Josh get along fine, but Zack, a misfit artist, feels like an outsider in the family and
longs for the father who died when Zack was little. Well, so his mother says. As
Zack's nightmare progresses, it unlocks a childhood memory of his parents' di-
vorce and his father's attempt to take Zack away with him. The psychologizing is
'50s movie-melodrama with a '90s twist: as Nancy, Zack's psychologist, tells him,
"Your main problem wasn't nightmares. It was co-dependence." 
Zack goes to
meet his father (alive and well and regularly sending child support), who is perfect,
and he then goes back to face his mother and her stony lack of forgiveness for
either father or son. This is enjoyable melodrama, but the author thinks the char-
acters are more complicated than they really are; likewise, a sexy subplot about
Zack and his girlfriend Clara (burdened with her own nightmare) is appealing but
off the subject. Easier to read and less convoluted than Chris Crutcher's soap-
sagas, this will be appreciated where those books are popular. RS
WALLACE, KAREN 
Think of a Beaver; illus. by Mick Manning; ISBN 1-56402-
179-3. 
Candlewick, 1993 
$14.95 
32p 
(Read and Wonder) 
R 
4 -7 yrs
Think ofan Eel; illus. by Mike Bostock; ISBN 1-56402-180-7 
Candlewick,
1993 
$14.95 
32p 
(Read and Wonder) 
R* 4 -7 yrs
See the Big Picture, p. 273, for review.
WALSH, JILL PATON 
Matthew and the Sea Singer; illus. by Alan Marks. 
Farrar,
1993 
4 6 p
ISBN 0-374-34869-3 
$13.00 
R* Gr. 2-4
"Once there was a little girl called Birdy who paid a shilling for a living boy,"
saving him from a cruel orphan master on the ferryboat rowed by her father. Thus
begins Walsh's companion to Birdy and the Ghosties (BCCB 2/90), and the story
continues with the compressed pace of a fairy tale, or rather a legend; for the
298 
* THE BULLETIN
unwanted orphan boy, Matthew, has a golden singing voice that leads to his kid-
napping by seal-folk, whose pups sound "like old rocks rubbed together." It's
Birdy who rescues Matthew again, refusing the treasure offered by the seal-queen
and training a pup to sing (a comic sequence-it stays wet in the church font) as
ransom for Matthew's return. The exchange is dramatic when Matthew finally
matches his bright voice to the pup's dark one: "You could grasp the whole world
in your mind." Like all fairy tales, this one ends happily, with the hint of Birdy's
eventual marriage to Matthew, who might still be heard occasionally joining his
voice with the seal's at the edge of the sea. Walsh is as effective in layering short
stories with depth and style as she is elaborating complex novels. In spite of the
text's easy reading level, it will prove less an exercise for practicing readers than an
etude for their enjoyment, and Marks' watercolors have a bit of lightly mythic
resonance about them, as well as an ambiance of Celtic coastline. BH
WILD, MARGARET 
Space Travellers; illus. by Gregory Rogers. 
Scholastic,
1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-45598-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
Homeless, Zac and his mother Mandy sleep in a playground space rocket and Zac
imagines they are flying into the stars, so he's a little disappointed when his mother
tells him she has found them a place to stay. Although there is an attempt here to
convey the difficulties of not having a place to live, the overall tone is idyllic, not
only in the depiction of the cozy camaraderie of Zac and Mandy and their fellow
homeless friends Ron, Simon, and Dorothy but also in the quick solution to the
problem: not only have friends of Mandy's invited them to stay for a while, Mandy
tells her homeless friends that when it's cold and rainy, they can stay too. Might
be difficult getting Dorothy inside, though: she's pleased as punch to be taking
over the rocket, and "Zac can tell she is just itching for it to be night." Pastel
crayon illustrations are inviting and comfortable-kids won't be able to wait for
their turn in the rocket. RS
WOLFSON, EVELYN 
The Iroquois: People of the Northeast; ISBN 1-56294-076-
7. 
The Teton Sioux: People of the Plains; ISBN 1-56294-077-5. 
Each book:
Millbrook, 1993 
$13.90 
6 4 p 
illus. with photographs 
(Native Americans)
R 
Gr. 5-8
This series on Native American cultures offers several advantages for students re-
searching the subject. First of all, the emphasis of each book on a different group
makes abundantly clear the diversity of peoples across the continent, including
richly varied traditions and lifestyles that evolved in different geographical regions.
Secondly, the series presents a fairminded assessment of the social spectrum pre-
ceding Europeans' settlement, and how devastating that settlement was to all Na-
tive Americans. Wolfson is careful to air Indian viewpoints, as when she notes: "It
amused confederacy sachems that Europeans could not carry speeches, or even
sentences, in their heads. They had to put their thoughts on paper to remember
them." The texts are necessarily generalized, considering the amount of informa-
tion covered in such brief, homogenized series packaging. However, they are com-
petently written and illustrated (drawings, photographs, maps-mostly in full color),
with solid bibliographies in addition to glossaries, chronologies, and indices. Teach-
ers and librarians will welcome these volumes as a refreshing balance to materials
on Irish, Italian, and other more recent immigrants to the U.S. BH
MAY 1993 
* 299
YOLEN, JANE, comp. 
Weather Report; illus. by Annie Gusman. 
Wordsong/Boyds
Mills, 1993 
[6 4 p]
IS.BN 1-56397-101-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Divided into sections covering rain, sun, wind, snow, and fog, this anthology of
fifty-two poems shows a great breadth of styles and selections, including both con-
temporary children's poets (Yolen, Livingston, Merriam, Moore) and classic Ameri-
cans (Dickinson, Longfellow, Frost, Hughes). Staples such as Sandburg's "Fog"
and Rossetti's "Who Has Seen the Wind" are here; it's also nice to have Shakespeare's
"Blow, Blow, Thou Winter Wind" and Archibald MacLeish's "The Snow Fall":
"Listen!/ This is the snow./ This is the slow/ Chime/ The snow/ Makes." Black-
and-white graphic motifs illustrate the selections, and sometimes the page design
gets a bit busy and repetitive, but the collection is a useful resource and almost all
the poems make for fine reading aloud. An author, title, and first line index is
appended. RS
YOUNG, ED 
Red Thread; written and illus. by Ed Young. 
Philomel, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-399-21969-2 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Wei Gu's search for a wife, which has been unlucky, seems further doomed when
an old man from the spirit world shows him the future bride heaven has in store
for him: an ugly three-year-old carried on the back of a half-blind old woman in
the vegetable market. Wei tries to change his fate by hiring a servant to stab the
girl, only to discover, when he eventually marries, a mark on his wife's forehead
revealing that she is the orphan he almost murdered. Typical of folktale amorality,
the hero's villainy goes unpunished-it even wins the day: "After this day the
couple grew even closer"-after which they have a son who prospers. Like Lafcadio
Hearn's The Voice of the Great Bell (BCCB 9/89), which Young also illustrated,
this will ruffle some feminist feathers (see the thought-provoking exchange on that
book in the letter section of School Library Journals February, 1990 issue). And
like all of Young's books, this one is intelligently designed, with the red thread that
links "a couple's feet together when they are born" also linking together these
pages in the form of a red line running above the text, which is compressed along
the bottom of each double spread. The pastel and watercolor illustrations are
velvety in texture and most effective when the hues are tonally modulated; occa-
sionally the contrasts get a bit too blatant for the subtle effects at which Young
usually excels. Although the CIP cites this as Chinese folklore, there are no notes
or other clues in the book to suggest background or substantiate a source. BH
300 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
Opie, lona. The People on the Playground (Oxford University Press, 1993. 240p.,
ISBN 0-19-811265-3, $23.00)
Who says professional reading can't be fun? Iona Opie's account of playground
culture may be one of the most entertaining books you'll read all year. The People
on the Playground chronicles two years' worth of Opie's weekly visits to a British
school, watching seven through eleven-year-olds during what Americans would
call recess. Officially she comes to collect the lore of games, rhymes, and jokes for
which she and her late husband Peter are famous; in reality she also observes the
mercurial social construct of the playground full of kids as it seethes around her.
There's no narrative progression (which makes this a great book to read bit by bit
in stolen moments), and the only running threads are recurring games or roles
(unless you count the periodically reappearing legend of someone's putting a foot-
ball through a school window).
What's here is a collection of games both intricate and pointless and
some of the most vulgar jokes you've ever encountered (if you sneer, you're honor-
bound not to tell any of them yourself). There's also an assortment of endearing
and fantastic characters, including lona Opie as she portrays herself-Alice in
Wonderland, a "serious and enquiring person" among other very different serious
people-creating an irresistibly funny conjunction as she veers between being hapless
audience member, hopeful voice of reason, aficionado of novel toys, and private
commentator of the future personalities of "her" children. Who else would de-
scribe the popularity of an updated old rhyme about a cat with measles by stating
"The introduction of another animal and two new diseases has had the vivifying
effect of a new spring fashion"? Opie also has useful expedients when diplomacy is
overtaxed by repetition or excess, such as beating her sources to their own punch
line or drawing their attention to higher authority ("'You'd better go in,' I retorted
unfairly. '[The teacher] arrived long ago'"). Personalities and brand names have
explanatory footnotes, but British-and perhaps specifically regional-terms some-
times go unexplained, which makes some games ("twizzling," for instance) seem
mysterious and exotic.
Like Jane Goodall, another observer, Opie also is a good judge of the
global as well as a meticulous chronicler of the specific. Pleasures of reading aside,
this is an in-depth survey of a world most people have time to see only in flashes;
all of the truths about playground gestalt are revealing, some surprising, some
expectable. So put your feet up, enjoy, and gain a better understanding. DS
A new edition of Children's Books: Awards and Prizes is now available from the
Children's Book Council. The book lists nearly two hundred awards, with crite-
ria, sponsor's address, and a complete list of recipients for each award. Coverage
includes both adult and children's choice awards, and awards for the U. K., Canada,
Australia and New Zealand are included along with the U. S. (Trade ed. $85.00,
ISBN 0-933633-01-7; Paper ed. $57.50, ISBN 0-933633-02-5. 
4 04 p.) Copies
may be ordered from the CBC, Attn: Order Center, 350 Scotland Road, Orange,
NJ 07050. Add $3.50 per order for postage and handling; schools and libraries
may be billed when order is accompanied by purchase order or official letterhead.
MAY 1993 * 301
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this new index, which
will appear in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In no way meant to be a cataloging aid, this rather
idiosyncratic index is instead intended to lead readers to those books that could fill
a particular gap in a collection, to help teachers and librarians find books that
might be useful in various school or recreational settings, and to help in those
requests for a "love story" or a "scary story." In the case of subject headings, the
subhead "stories" refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those
books intended for independent reading.
African Americans-biography:
Cwiklik
African Americans-fiction: Roberts
African Americans-stories: Johnson
AIDS-fiction: Kaye; McDaniel
Amish: Bial
Archeology: Bendick
Archeology-fiction: Cavanagh
Arctic Regions: Alexander
Art history: Heslewood
Aunts-fiction: Cavanagh
Australia-fiction: Klein
Aviation: Sullivan
Baseball: Helmer; Macy
Baseball-stories: Mochizuki
BIOGRAPHIES: 
Cwiklik;
Heslewood; Sleator; Stefoff
Bullies-fiction: Roberts
California-fiction: Kudlinski
Child care-fiction: McDaniel
Children's literature: Sleator
China-stories: Lawson; Young
Civil Rights: Cwiklik
Communication: Aliki; Skurzynski
Dance: Ancona
Death-fiction: Jukes; McDaniel;
Mori; Qualey
Disasters-fiction: Kudlinski
Dogs-fiction: Parnall
Dragons-stories: Lawson
Ecology: Allen, Judy; Alexander;
Andryszewski; Clark; Greene
Emotional problems-fiction: Hahn;
Sweeney
Ethics and values: Ruby
Everglades: Clark
Everglades-fiction: Cavanagh
Explorers: Stefoff
FAIRYTALES AND FOLKTALES:
Allen, Jonathan; Bierhorst;
Lawson; Stevens; Young
Falconry-fiction: Grover
Family problems-stories: Sweeney
FANTASY: Jones; Reiss; Walsh
Farm life: Andryszewski; Bial
Fathers and sons-fiction: Kaye
Fathers and sons-stories: Bartone
Florida: Clark; Murez
Florida-fiction: Cavanagh
Flying-stories: Jukes
FUNNY STORIES: Jones; Sleator
Grandfathers-stories: dePaola
HISTORICAL FICTION: Klein;
Kudlinski
History, American: Bendick;
Wolfson
History, U. S.: Andryszewski;
Cwiklik; Kudlinski
History, world: Hull
Holocaust-fiction: Matas
Homelessness-stories: Wild
Horses: Jauck
Illness-fiction: Ruby
Islands: Jacuk
India-fiction: Rana
Italian Americans-stories: Bartone
Japan-fiction: Mori
302 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Japanese 
Americans-stories:
Mochizuki
Jews-fiction: Matas; Ruby
Korea: McMahon
Language arts: Aliki
LOVE STORIES: Hahn; Qualey;
Reiss; Sweeney
Maine-fiction: Reiss
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
McDaniel; Mori
Native Americans: Alexander;
Ancona; Bendick; Wolfson
Native 
Americans-fiction:
Cavanagh; Qualey
Native 
Americans-folklore:
Bierhorst; Mayo; Stevens
Nature study: Clark; Cousteau;
Greene; Hewett; Jauck; King-
Smith; 
Machotka; 
Murez;
Parnall; Wallace
Papua New Guinea: Margolies
Pigs-stories: Johnson
POETRY: Paraskevas; Yolen
Reading aloud: Hewett; Murez;
Walsh; Yolen
Reading, beginning: Cousteau;
Greene
Reading, easy: Mayo
Reading, family: Aliki
Reading, reluctant: Grover; Roberts
Religious education: Bial; Bierhorst;
Ruby
Saudi Arabia-fiction: Grover
SCHOOL STORIES: Roberts
Seals-fiction: Walsh
SHORT STORIES: Jones; Klein
Sisters-fiction: Klein
Social issues: Kaye; McDaniel;
Qualey; Wild
Social studies: Alexander; Margolies;
McMahon
Sports: Helmer; Macy
Story hour: Allen, Jonathan;
Bartone; Bierhorst; dePaola;
Hindley; Johnson; King-Smith;
Lawson; Stevens; Wallace
Summer vacation-fiction: Gilmore
Teachers-fiction: Kaye
Theater-fiction: Gilmore
Transportation: Sullivan
Uncles-stories: Jukes
Weather-poetry: Yolen
Whales-stories: Allen, Judy
Wisconsin-fiction: Qualey
Women's studies: Helmer; Macy;
Stefoff
World War II: Helmer; Hull; Macy
World War II-fiction: Matas
World War II-stories: Mochizuki
Zoos: Hewett
Correction:
In our review of Lee Bennett Hopkins' Through Our Eyes (BCCB 2/93) we stated
that all of the poems had been previously published; in fact three of the sixteen
selections are new.
Knopf presents the imprint for the '90s
Alfred A. Knopfr-
*"As perceptive as it is hilarious"*
ALICE IN APRIL
By Phyllis Reynolds Naylor
Illustrated by Alan Daniel
* "Building on her earlier books about the motherless, independent-
minded Alice, Naylor flawlessly weaves concerns prompted by two birth-
days -
Alice's 13th...and Dad's 50th...into another delightful chroni-
cle....There are poignant moments here...comedy is perfectly integrated
into every episode.... Next installment impatiently awaited."
-*Pointer, 
Kirkus Reviews
* "With Alice now in seventh grade, Naylor continues to write with wit
about the farce and embarrassment of growing up female today. There
are beautifully paced laugh-out-loud episodes: Alice's physical exam -
with a new male doctor; her banter with Lester, both furious and affec-
tionate....Whether the messages are about family, friendship, feminism, or
sex, the tone is gentle; and people have a lot of fun." -Boxed, 
Booklist
"Readers new to Alice's adventures won't be lost, and Alice fans will wel-
come another sweet and witty chapter in the Alice McKinley bildungsro-
man." -The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
$14.95 SBE/0-689-31805-7/Ages 9-13
SBE indicates a reinforced hardcover edition,
A 
ATHENEUM
An impnnt of the Macmillan Children's Book Group
866 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022
M. E. KERR
Winner of the 1993
Margaret A. Edwards Award
for her lifetime achievement in writing books for young adults
M. c. ine
DINKY HOCKER
SHOOTS SMACK!
Ages 12 up. $14.89t (023151-3)
HarperTrophy paper ed. $2.95*
(447006-7)
ALA Best of the Best Books (YA)
1970-83
GENTLEHANDS
Ages 12 up. $16.89t (023177-7)
HarperTrophy paper ed. $3.95*
(447067-9)
ALA Best of the Best Books for Yo
Adults, 1966-1988
1978 Christopher Award
HarperCollins ISBN prefix: 0-06 *Paper ed 
Libra
Publisher's prices only and in no way reflect the pric
available from any other source
For a free biographical brochure descri
M. E. Kerr's many books for young adu
A HarperCollinsChildr
10 E. 53rd St., New York 10022
"M. E. Kerr is one of the
oneers in realistic fiction for
enagers. Her courage to be
fferent and to address touchy
irrent issues without compro-
ising, but with a touch of
avening humor, has earned
er a place in young adult
erature and in the hearts of
enagers." -ALA 
Young Adult
Library Services Association
' 
ii 
,
rrs cited DooKs:
ME ME ME ME ME
Not a Novel
Ages 12 up. $16.89t (023193-9)
1983 ALA Best Books for Young
Adults
NIGHT KITES
Ages 12 up. $14.89t (023254-4)
HarperTrophy paper ed. $3.95*
(447035-0)
ALA Best of the Best Books for Young
Adults, 1966-1988
ung 
1987 ALA Recommended Books for
Reluctant Young Adult Readers
ryed
es at which
bing
ilts, write:
en'sBo
% Starred in ALA Booklist 
Kirkus Reviews pointer+
and School Library Journal
"Using a montage
of characters, a fine
novelist and poet
offers sixty vignettes
from sixteen individ-
uals who describe
experiences from Fort
Sumter to [the first
major engagement of
the Civil War]. Crafting
unique voices for each,
Fleischman selects
telling incidents to
reveal character and to
evoke the [war's]
impact on ordinary
people. An unusual,
compelling look at
the meaning of war."
-Kirkus Reviews
"Unforgettable as
historical fiction ...
an important book
for every library."
-SLJ
"An excellent choice for readers' theater in the classroom
or on stage."-Booklcist
Ages 10 up. $14.00* (021446-5); $13.89t (021447-3)
The Newbery Medal-winning author of Joyful Noise:
Poems for Two Voices, Paul Fleischman's novels include:
The Borning Room
1992 ALA Notable Children's Books
and Best Books for Young Adults
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
Ages 11 up. $14.00* (023762-7)
$13.89t (023785-6)
Harper Trophy paper ed. $3.95' (447099-7)
A Laura Geringer Book
Wl For a free Paul Fleischmnan biographical brochi
m HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
Saturnalia
1991 ALA Notable Children's Books
and Best Books for Young Adults
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
Ages 12 up. $14.00* (021912-2)
$13.89t (021913-0)
Harper Trophy paper ed. $3.95* (447089-X)
are write: 
HarperCollins ISBN prefix: 0-06. Trade and
paper eds. tUbay ed.
Pblsher's price noly and In no way reflects the
price at which available from any other source.
m
* 'A stellar addition to Larrick's many themed anthologies."*
The Night of the Whippoorwill
Poems selected by Nancy Larrick
Illus. in full color by David Ray
+ "Ray's soft dark acrylics, swirling with
cloud, stardust, and mist, are extraordinar-
ily sensitive to the texts....a must."
-Kirkus Reviews, pointer review*
"These often sophisticated pieces have
images that vividly capture the imagination
of children'"-School Library Journal
"What makes this collection so good is
the range of mood and landscape, from
the hush of de la Mare to the storm of
Kuskin.'-Booklist
All ages/0-399-21874-2
$19.95 ($25.95 CAN)
PHILOMEL BOOKS
Member of The Putnam & Grosset Group
200 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
@ 1993 The Putnam & Grosset Group
Multicultural Children's Literature in the
United States: A Research Agenda for the
1990s-Issues, Concerns, Directions
/TAT-' ..... 
1- g fgf Q \ 
-J1*.- 
J 
1
vvinter 1993), eadite 
by
Karen Patricia Smith
This timely issue of Library Trends discusses
and analyzes multicultural children's
literature over time as well as its availability
and promotion within various settings. The
focus is on literature by and about African
American, Hispanic, Asian, and Native
American people.
Library Treads is published by the Graduate
School of Library and Information Science at the
LIBRARY
TRENDS
Multiulltural Children' Literatur
in the United States: A Retearch
Agenda o. the 1990
lsue. Concetn, Direction
(Winter IW9)
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library
and Information Science
University of Illinois. Single copies are $18;
annual subscriptions are $60 ($65 foreign). To
order, contact the University of Illinois Press, Journals
Department, 54 East Gregory Drive, Champaign, Illinois 61820.
1993 NEWBERY HONOR BOOK
"Asa-possessed of rare sweetness, humor, and inner
strength-survives intact cruel tests of his integrity, intellect, and
sense of decency. From an outstandingly perceptive writer, a
moving portrait of a boy, observed at four revealing turning
points." -pointer 
review, Kirkus Reviews
1993 ALA Notable Children's Books and Best Books for Young Adults
Ages 10 up. $14.00* (021131-8); $13.89t (021132-6)
A Laura Geringer Book
For a free Bruce Brooks biographical brochure write:
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, NewYork 10022
HarperCollins ISBN prefix: 0-06.
*Trade ed. tLibrary ed.
Publisher's prices only and in no way
reflect the prices at which available
from any other source.
"[A] winning mixture of fantasy and reality....When 12-year-old Emily Volnik
receives the desk she sent back to her Canadian home from Castle Keep, the
Scottish castle her family inherited from a distant relative, she has no idea that
opening it will loose the Boggart, a mischievous spirit who's lived in the castle for
centuries. But liberate him she does, and his contact with the modem-day world
and with Emily and her younger brother, Jess, leads to all kinds of humorous and
dramatic consequences." -Booklist
*"The Boggart is entrancing -
a magically witty mix of fey spirit, comfort-loving
cat, old man set in his ways, and child taking gleeful delight in his own mischief -
of which there is plenty, all splendidly comical." -Pointer, Kirkus Reviews
*"The intelligently thought-out clash between the ancient folkloric creature and
modem science guarantees a wide audience." -*Starred, SchoolLibraryJournal
$14.95 SBE/0-689-50576-0/Ages 9-12
SBE indicates a reinforced hardcover edition.
\ 
MARGARET K. McELDERRY BOOKS
An imprint of the Macmillan Children's Book Group
Illustration copyright © 1993 by Trina Schart Hyman
ARTHUR'S
FAMILY
VACATION
A trip no Arthur fan
will want to miss!
Arthur's best friend is going to summer camp,
but Marc Brown's popular hero has to go on
vacation with his family. Their hotel room is
tiny, the swimming pool is tinier, and then it
starts to rain. Eventually, Arthur has a brilliant
idea-one that's bound to please his fans as
much as it does his family!
Ages 4-8. (14.45) $14.95 0-316-11312-3
Joy Street Books
LITTLE, BROWN and COMPANY
University of Illinois
Press journals
Send for our free catalog today
HISTORY
Journal of the
Abraham Lincoln Association
Law and History Review
PSYCHOLOGY
American Journal of Psychology
EDUCATION
Journal of Aesthetic Education
Bulletin of the Center
for Children's Books
library Trends
MATHEMATICS
Illinois Journal of Mathematics
Journal of Symbolic Logic
MUSIC AND FILM STUDIES
American Music
Ethnomusicology
Cinema Journal
LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE
Journal of English and
Germanic Philology
For a complete catalog write to:
Cat Warren
Journals Department
University of Illinois Press
54 E. Gregory
Champaign, IL 61820
(217) 244-6488
Fax (217) 244-8082
"Highly recommended."
- Library JournaL
"A grand slam....
An entertaining,
insightful history of
the national pastime
set within the context
of major issues in
American society."
- Larry R Gerlach,
author of The Men in
Blue Conversations
with Umpires
mus. Cl: $24.95
Order toll free 800/545-4703
University of Illinois Press
54 East Gregory Drive * Champaign, IL 61820
University of Illinois Prs 
SecoND Cuss
54 East Gregory Drive 
POSTAG
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAWD
U.S.A. 
CsHAMPAIN, IL
RrruRN POSTAGE GUAwRA ED
