I LLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
and Information Science
Univrsity of Illinois Press
e 
4
- -
0 
Ar···
i~Oiiiii-·; 
-
·ii;
4F 
*
*"An extraordinary anthology"
...a multicultural celebration of poetry
to open a door...to touch the heart
THIS SAME SKY
A Collection of Poems from around the World
Selected by Naomi Shihab Nye
•~~ 
+~
inal comment:
ry." -Starred,
inary apthology, not only in its global range
Doets froi 68 countries, their work translated
.- 
but also ithq quality of the selections
f their appeal. From Palestine, Argentina,
Lebanon to India, New Zealand, and El
ces connect us all. Many poets, especially
3urope and the Middle East, have barely
Sbefore. Editor Nye...shows us what we've
>tes on each contributor include some terse
nd stories that are nearly as stirring as the
oklist 
-
An Ameican Bookseller "Pick of the Lists"
$1.95 SBE/0-02-768440-7/Ages 10 up
S 
SBE iinicadst a rcinforced hicover cdiiom
* FOUR WINDS PRESS
An imprint of the Macmillan Children's Book Group
866 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
January 1993
Vol. 46 No. 5
A LOOK INSIDE
137 THE BIG PICTURE
Fox on Stage, written and illustrated by James Marshall
138 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
140 * Emily by Michael Bedard; illus. by Barbara Cooney
150 * The Big Lie by Isabella Leitner
153 
* The Prince ofthe Pond by Donna Jo Napoli
154 * The King's Equal by Katherine Paterson; illus. by Vladimir Vagin
159 * The Call and Other Stories by Robert Westall
161 1992 BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS
163 SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 54 East Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, U. of II. at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education
Violet J. Harris, Assistant Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, U of II. Library
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Dept. of Speech Communication
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Carol Fox, Youth Services Consultant, Illinois State Library
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $3.00. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois, and additional mailing offices
© 1993 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by James Marshall, from Fox on Stage, © 1993 by James Marshall and used by
permission of Dial Books.
JANUARY 1993 
* 
137
THE BIG PICTURE
Fox On Stage
written and illustrated by James Marshall
Fox has been around for a while now-on the job, at school, in love, on wheels,
and simply getting through the week. Wherever he is, trouble lurks nearby ("What
could go wrong?" says Fox, setting the stage for a dramatic disaster). This time
he's involved in making a videotape (about himself, of course) for grumpy Granny
in the hospital; starring (unexpectedly) in Mr. Yee's magic show; and, when the
television breaks ("'Oh, that is terrible!' said Mom"), putting on a spooky play
called "The Mummy's Toe." Fox is Everychild, cocky at the wrong times and
always caught in the act-here, literally. When he mouths off about the feline
magician putting his chicken assistant to sleep ("'This is so dumb,' said Fox"), the
magician turns the spotlight right on him in anyone's nightmare of unwanted
attention. "Sit here, Mr. Smarty," says Mr. Yee.
That passage and that picture reveal why Marshall makes such magic for
kids. His characters talk like kids, and his pictures show exactly how they feel, but
it's all done with a witty craftsman's skill. And his characters, while they have
some predictable, even folkloric, characteristics, are just quirky enough to surprise
readers, especially those used to practicing their decoding on cliched, boring text-
books. The cover picture, for instance, accompanies the following: "When Gran-
nie Fox had a bad spill on the ski slopes, she broke both legs. 'Grannie Fox will
have to be in the hospital for some time,' said Doctor Ed. 'Old bones take longer
to heal.' 'Oh, what doyou know?' said Grannie." (I forgot to mention that Marshall's
grownups also talk like kids.) Positioning Grannie completely upside down is the
kind of graphic slapstick that makes Marshall such a visual trickster.
Is this Fox book better than all the others? No, it's more of the same.
But Marshall's same is funnier than just about anybody else's, and while Fox's
nature is irrepressible, this will be, to our infinite sadness, Fox's last appearance.
James Marshall died on October 13, 1992. It is almost unbearable to think how
much we will miss the books he won't be alive to create. The only comfort is, that
when you think of James Marshall, it's hard to stay sad because he was just so
funny. "I love what I do," he said to me once, "which is fortunate, because it's the
only thing I can do." The truest humor always has a touch of pathos. "Poor Fox,"
138 
* THE BULLETIN
we say to ourselves. "There but for the grace of God go I." So you can't help but
think about James Marshall's exuberant graphics for Harry Allard's book The Stupids
Die: "This isn't heaven," says Grandfather Stupid, breaking through the living
room wall on his motorcycle, "This is Cleveland."
James Marshall never won a Caldecott Medal, but in the guise of Fox,
the Cut-Ups, George and Martha, Goldilocks, Red Riding Hood, Cinderella, the
Three Little Pigs, Old Mother Hubbard, Miss Nelson, Mary Alice, Mrs. Rat, the
Stupids, three by the sea, four by the shore, and other assorted characters, he won
the hearts of children wherever his books went. They knew one of their own kind.
Mr. Mischief.
Betsy Hearne, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AARDEMA, VERNA 
Anansi Finds a Fool: An Ashanti Tale; illus. by Bryna
Waldman. 
Dial, 1992 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1165-4 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1164-6 
$14.00 
R 4-6 yrs
"I'm going to find a fool for a partner-someone who will do all the work while I
get all the fish," says Anansi to his wife Aso. In the grand tradition, the trickster is
tricked as his friend Bonsu offers to take the weariness if Anansi will cut the palm
fronds for the fishtrap; to suffer sore fingers and aching back ifAnansi will weave
the trap; to do the dying ifAnansi gets caught by a crocodile in the river; but not to
take the shame when Anansi tries to sell the broken fish trap! In her retelling from
a 1930 collection, Aardema displays once again the direct but graceful simplicity
and low-key sound effects that have made her such a notable interpreter of old
traditions for new listeners. Waldman's watercolors are also graceful, with warm
hues and curving figures that round off the sharp edges of the story with humor.
Occasionally the homogenous look of the characters lends an overpretty sheen,
but the overall artistic effect is cheerfully exuberant. Read this one with Nina
Jaffe's Jewish tale In theMonth ofKislev(BCCB 11/92), in which the Rabbi awards
a stingy miser the sound of silver to defray the expense of the smell of latkes for
which he's charging the poor man's children. BH
AESOP 
The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse; ad. and illus. by Helen
Craig. 
Candlewick, 1992 
26p
ISBN 1-56402-102-5 
$13.95 
R 
4-6 yrs
In this cozy version of the old Aesop fable, Helen Craig alternates full-page and
smaller pictures, sometimes as many as three or four on a page. The pen-and-wash
illustrations have a comic-book-format appeal and a bucolic air. The country
mouse, Charlie, is warm brown and cuddly, but the town mouse looks like a fuzzy,
JANUARY 1993 
* 
139
dark rat. Sometimes the busy pages appear crowded, but the presentation of the
text is clear and simple. Although some of the wit of the Aesop tale is missing, this
book will get the story across to a young audience because of its simple style ("The
cat could smell Charlie. Charlie could smell the cat"). For livelier versions, see
Janet Stevens (BCCB 7/87) or Lorinda Cauley (BCCB 12/84)-but if a comfy
mood is your objective, buy this one. KJ
AFANASIEV, ALEXANDER 
Salt: From a Russian Folktale; ad. by Jane Langton; tr. by
Alice Plume; illus. by Ilse Plume. 
Hyperion, 1992 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-179-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-178-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
No matter how many times the story is told, it's always satisfying when a foolish
younger son succeeds over his superior older brothers. In this traditional Russian
version, Ivan has several misadventures before he wins his bride and proves his
worth to his father. The adaptation has been modernized from the Afanasiev
version, also widely known from Old Peter's Russian Tales by Arthur Ransome,
(1916). Here, for instance, when Ivan carries his princess away on his ship, it is
with her approval, not as a kidnapping. The story is smoothly written with con-
temporary humor, yet still maintains its folkloric flavor ("Without salt there is no
savor"). The ornate colored pencil illustrations, meant to look like gold-inlaid
Eastern Orthodox icons, are dominated by a glaring yellow hue and self-conscious
stiffness in the characters' postures and expression. Still, there's fresh variety in the
compositions, and Ivan's long, complicated story will make an exotic story hour
companion for the slapstick Jack tale called "Salt." KJ
ASBJORNSEN, PETER CHRISTEN East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon; tr. by Sir
George Webbe Dasent; illus. by P. J. Lynch. 
Candlewick, 1992 
42p
ISBN 1-56402-049-5 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Dasent's lilting nineteenth-century translation of this Norwegian folktale is intro-
duced by Naomi Lewis and accompanied by literal paintings that portray the char-
acters in lush detail. The troll scenes, in fact, get a bit too ornate, but the landscapes
through which the red-haired heroine must travel to rescue her betrothed, first
from his bear shape and then from the long-nosed princess holding him captive,
are subtler in color and stronger in composition. It's is a long story, but one that
has held children's attention for centuries and will continue to do so. Libraries
without a picture book edition (Gillian Barlow's illustrations for Dasent's text in
1988, for instance) will find this a solid companion to its myth-variant, "Cupid
and Psyche," and its fairy-tale-variant, "Beauty and the Beast." BH
BARRON, T. A. 
The Ancient One. Philomel, 1992 
367p
ISBN 0-399-21899-8 
$17.95 
M 
Gr. 4-8
In this earthbound companion to the space fantasy Heartlight (BCCB 12/90),
Kate, mourning the death of her grandfather (while apparently forgetting the in-
tergalactic quest the two shared in the first book), is visiting her great-aunt Melanie
in Oregon and is soon swept into a controversy that pits Aunt Melanie against the
logging industry. Kate is also soon swept a few centuries back in time, where she
meets a fantasy Native American tribe called the Halami, a god-like owl-people
called the Tinnanis, some lizard people called the Slimni, and their evil leader
140 
* THE BULLETIN
Gashra. Perhaps due to the fact that the setting is a large volcanic crater, the action
shifts rapidly: whenever trouble comes too close to Kate and her friends, a tremor
shows up to help them along ("suddenly" is a favorite transitional adverb here).
Like Heartlight, this novel owes too much to Madeline L'Engle; it also owes quite
a bit to the Oz books. The tone is sometimes twee (the major helper figure is called
Kandeldandel Zinzin) and the language cliched ("'Aaarghh,' groaned the warrior"),
and while the plethora of action, often violent, may draw in readers, there's a numb-
ing predictability to events that vitiates their effectiveness. For fans of the first
book, this is more of the same. RS
BEDARD, MICHAEL 
Emily; illus. by Barbara Cooney. 
Doubleday, 1992 
4 0p
ISBN 0-385-30697-0 
$16.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
"There is a woman on our street they call the Myth," begins this picture book that
depicts a fictional encounter between the young narrator and Emily Dickinson.
When the little girl's family moves to the neighborhood, her mother receives a
note asking her to play the piano for Emily; the girl, visiting along with her mother,
brings the poet some lily bulbs for planting the next spring and receives a poem in
return. The language is grave and formal but retains liveliness; the occasionally
affected poetic turns ("Like flakes of flowers the words fell to the sheets") may not
be credible as the young narrator's words but have deftness and restraint enough to
blend smoothly with the story. Both Bedard and Cooney have kept Dickinson's
spirit: the text's overall message is not how neat it is to live near a celebrity but
what wonder there is in a world where "so many, many things are a Mystery." The
mixed-media illustrations depict a New England town in winter with precision,
tenderness, and a complete absence of cuteness, with warm sepia-toned interiors
contrasting with frosty snowscapes and the eventual pale green of spring. It's cer-
tainly not necessary to know Emily's identity to appreciate the book (the text never
states outright who she is), but it could serve as an introduction to her poetry. The
young audience for this book may, like the narrator, have the sense of encounter-
ing something important that is not yet quite within their grasp, but the mood and
rhythm of this story of a gentle meeting will keep them listening. DS
BELTING, NATALIA M. 
Moon Was Tired of Walking on Air; illus. by Will
Hillenbrand. 
Houghton, 1992 
4 8p
ISBN 0-395-53806-8 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Fourteen myths are adapted from various South American Indian groups and ac-
companied by earthy, and earth-toned, paintings. The artist's figures are appropri-
ately monolithic in shape, for these are tales of the world's beginning; elementary
graders can compare them to the Judeo-Christian story of creation and to familiar
Greek or Scandinavian mythology for a broader understanding of cultural diver-
sity. Campas Indians tell of Averiri, who blew his pipes and sang the seasons into
being; the Selkam explain why Rainbow has a bent back; the Chorote describe
how Moon makes the Earth from dampened dust. The images are vivid and the
selections all brief and easy to read. Perhaps it's a quibble to wish that the anthol-
ogy had concluded with a tale explaining the population of the earth with Ances-
tors, rather than with the light Bororo myth of how the birds got beaks, which
comes across as a rather abrupt and anticlimactic ending. Few children will peruse
the whole book at once, however, so its overall shape is less important than its
value as a resource. BH
JANUARY 1993 
* 
141
BLUMBERG, RHODA 
Jumbo; illus. by Jonathan Hunt. 
Bradbury, 1992 
40p
ISBN 0-02-711683-2 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
In an appropriately oversized volume, Blumberg relates the life story of Jumbo the
elephant, whose name has now passed into the English language as a synonym for
"huge." In simple and clear prose the book describes Jumbo's growth from a runty
childhood, his fame in Britain and attachment to his English keeper, and his life in
the American circus after his purchase by P. T. Barnum. The book seems to end in
midthought as Jumbo and his keeper play in a river; this abrupt finish is presum-
ably to avoid telling of Jumbo's abrupt finish (he was hit by a freight train), but
some sort of closure should have been found, especially since the information about
Jumbo's death immediately follows in an author's note. It's still an involving story
of the darling of two countries and his human friend, and kids will relish the true
story of the popular pachyderm. Watercolors in subdued tones but with a lively (if
occasionally awkward) line give Jumbo his massive due as well as lending a period
flavor to the chronicle. In addition to the author's note, a bibliography is in-
cluded. DS
BREATHED, BERKELEY 
The Last Basselope: One Ferocious Story; written and illus.
by Berkeley Breathed. 
Little, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-316-10761-1 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Vividly colored and slickly airbrushed pictures by Breathed illustrate a dryly hu-
morous picture book based upon the Bloom County comic strip of yore. Opus, the
chubby-beaked penguin, declares himself a "Great and Famous Discoverer" and
recruits his friends in a search for the world's last basselope. Most of the jokes
throughout the book will tickle adults more than kids (Opus nibbles from a box of
squid bits while reading a "National Geographic Enquirer"; "The Hurlaldo Show"
and "CNNN" send in film crews to get a scoop on the basselope's capture). When
the friends finally do find the last basselope, he bears a close resemblance to Max,
the Grinch's dog in the Seuss Christmas classic, and is calmly eating dandelion
fluff. "Fluff" is a good summary of the whole plot, with the group of friends not
doing much to save the basselope from exploitation by the media. The story ends
on a whimsical note as the basselope inflates his antlers and floats off into the
sunset in search of a "less ferocious" place. There's not much to it, but it's an
attractive book that will please Bloom County and Outland fans. KJ
BURGIE, IRVING 
Caribbean Carnival; illus. by Fran6 Lessac. 
Tambourine,
1992 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10780-X 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10779-6 
$15.00 
R 
5-9 yrs
"Michael Row the Boat" aside, these thirteen calypso melodies, some composed by
Irving Burgie, some folksongs, will be new to most children; their parents will
probably remember Burgie's "Day-o" or "Jamaica Farewell." This a nice collec-
tion, somewhat unvaried in tone but brightened by Lessac's folklike paintings that
picture a Caribbean paradise of sun and palm trees and water and fellowship. Some
of the songs ("Little Girl in the Ring," "Chi Chi Bud") offer possibilities for games;
all of the songs beckon extroverted participation. The piano/guitar arrangements
are easy; a note by Rosa Guy elucidates many of the songs' Caribbean references.
RS
142 
* THE BULLETIN
CHOCOLATE, DEBORAH M. NEWTON, ad. 
Spider and the Sky God: An Akan Leg-
end; illus. by Dave Albers. 
Library ed. ISBN 0-8167-2811-9; Paper ed. ISBN 0-
8167-2812-7.
Talk, Talk; An Ashanti Legend; illus. by Dave
Albers. 
Library ed. ISBN 0-8167-2817-8; Paper ed. ISBN 0-8167-2818-6.
MIKE, JAN M., ad. 
Gift of the Nile: An Ancient Egyptian Legend; illus. by Charles
Reasoner. 
Library ed. ISBN 0-8167-2813-5; Paper ed. ISBN 0-8167-2814-3.
MOLLEL, TOLOLWA M., ad. 
The Princess Who Lost Her Hair: An Akamba Legend;
illus. by Charles Reasoner. 
Library ed. ISBN 0-8167-2815-1; Paper ed. ISBN 0-
8167-2816-X.
Each book: Troll, 1992 
32p 
(Legends of the World) 
Library ed. $11.89;
Paper ed. $3.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
These four folktales-each competently adapted, illustrated in smoothly commer-
cial styles that are varied in tone, and concluded by a note on the country of ori-
gin-will make an especially useful series for African studies since they can be read
either aloud to preschoolers or independently by advanced primary graders. Talk,
Talk, about the objects that surprise people with their speech, is familiar, as is
Ananse's winning the Sky God's stories by capturing Python, Hornets, Leopard,
and Fairy. More unusual are the legends about a vain Akamba princess who learns
to love a beggar boy after losing her beautiful hair, and about an honest Egyptian
girl who befriends a pharaoh. This latter tale, Gift of the Nile, is particularly valu-
able as one of the few picture book versions of Egyptian lore, which include Climo's
The Egyptian Cinderella (BCCB 10/89). BH
CONLON-MCKENNA, MARITA 
Wildflower Girl; illus. by Donald Teskey. 
Holiday
House, 1992 
173p
ISBN 0-8234-0988-0 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-7
This sequel to Under the Hawthorn Tree (BCCB 12/90) follows the fortunes of the
three children who have endured a trek during the Irish famine and found refuge
with relatives. Here, the youngest becomes the focus as she makes her way to
America, leaving behind her betrothed older sister and her brother, who has found
work. After a sickening voyage of forty days in steerage, Peggy finds work as a
domestic in Boston, first with a cruel alcoholic who runs a men's boarding house
and later with a wealthy family who work her hard but treat her more fairly. The
plot is programmed and the style is somewhat studied, but the substance has the
same import of the first book: dramatic history individualized through the action
of a determined survivor. BH
CROSS, VERDA 
Great-Grandma Tells of Threshing Day; illus. by Gail
Owens. 
Whitman, 1992 
40p
ISBN 0-8075-3042-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
A long picture book describes an old-fashioned threshing day, as narrated by a
child observer. The narrator's naivete is revealed by the exclamatory sentences:
"Oh, it was good!" "Threshing day is the best day of the year!" However, most of
the story is descriptive ("If we did it wrong the kernels would get wet and sprout.
We did it right") and informative of the collective rural harvest festival of thresh-
ing. Illustrations in soft pastels depict the characters in natural poses but are tinted
primarily with a dominating orange hue. If the colors are meant to suggest a
JANUARY 1993 
* 
143
golden harvest, the orange casts a sunset glow instead. Despite the occasional
sentimentality, this book's old-fashioned allure will carry it. Both kids and teach-
ers will benefit from the author's firsthand knowledge of rural life. KJ
DILLON, EILfS 
Children ofBach. Scribner's, 1992 
164 p
ISBN 0-684-19440-6 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
When three children come home from school one afternoon to their Budapest
apartment, they discover that their parents, prominent musicians, and their aunt
have disappeared. Their disagreeable, nosy neighbor Mrs. Nagy tells them that
German soldiers, in a roundup of the Hungarian Jews, took the adults away and
may perhaps be back for the children. Aunt Eva manages to escape, comes home,
and is soon plotting with another neighbor an escape from Hungary for the re-
maining members of the family. Unlike the many horrific Holocaust memoirs
published for children, Dillon's book is an old-fashioned adventure story with
plucky, admirable characters and a strong straightforward plot, as the family, now
accompanied by Mrs. Nagy, who has revealed herself to be part Jewish, travels
hidden in a van for the long journey across the mountains to Italy. Without
resorting to the nalvetd of The Sound of Music or Serraillier's The Silver Sword,
Dillon has made a grand story out of tragic history. While the group does safely
make it to Italy (not without exciting near-misses) their happiness is shadowed by
the probability that the parents will never be seen again. And, on a more immedi-
ate level, Mrs. Nagy, who has surprised everyone with brief flashes of kindness
during the dangerous trip, remains just as whiny and demanding in the safety of an
Italian mountain hamlet as she was back in Budapest. RS
DOHERTY, BERLIE 
Dear Nobody. 
Orchard, 1992 
185p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08611-9 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05461-6 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Chris is a British teen just finishing school and looking forward to going to univer-
sity, as is his girlfriend Helen, but when Helen discovers she's pregnant all plans
are called into question. Chris loves Helen, wants the baby, but he wants to go to
university too; Helen at first plans an abortion but then chooses to stay home and
have the baby, withdrawing from Chris and her plans for music school as she
focuses on the "little Nobody" inside her, to whom she writes a series of letters.
Doherty explores family in all directions here: Chris's mother left when he was
ten, and he meets her again after years of absence; Helen's mother's bitter fury at
Helen's plight and decision arises from her own never-before-mentioned illegiti-
macy; and Helen's most supportive family member, her grandfather, isn't a blood
relative at all. Chris's narration is touching and heartfelt (and will make teenage
girls wish they had a boyfriend just like him), and Helen's interspersed letters to
her unknown child are thoughtful and ambivalent (if rather unrealistically well-
composed). The ending has an excess of sunniness that seems at odds with the
emotional ambiguities of the rest of the book, especially when one considers the
likely hard times of an unwed teen mother: Chris rejoins Helen, after long separa-
tion, at the hospital just after their daughter is born, and the baby helps heal the
old wounds in Helen's family. Doherty's excellent writing, combined with the
unusual dual point of view from the narration and the letters, makes this a richly
nuanced examination of a familiar situation. DS
144 
* 
THE BULLETIN
DRUCKER, OLGA LEVY 
Kindertransport. Holt, 1992 
14 6p
ISBN 0-8050-1711-9 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Drucker's memoir begins in 1932 when she's five years old and moving into a
beautiful new house in Stuttgart. Her Jewish family is classically Germanized:
established in a successful old business (publishing children's books); entrenched
in traditions such as the celebration of Christmas and Easter; educated in the best
German schools; served by trusty German cooks and nannies. All that changes on
Kristallnacht, and the book chronicles a descent into desperation that is at times
awkwardly described but is always true to a child's viewpoint as privilege turns to
suffering, in this case emotional rather than physical. Ollie is sent away, not to a
concentration camp but to England on one of the children's transport trains. She,
her brother, and her parents all escape Nazi Germany, but they do so separately,
and the cost is isolation, estrangement, and a sense of exile for the children. The
account is especially honest in expressing Ollie's anger at her parents' escaping to
America after promising to join her in England "soon"-she's shunted from one
well-intentioned situation to the next from 1939 to 1944, her crucial teenage years.
The tone is almost self-consciously low-key, but the situation is dramatic by impli-
cation, and the witness is consistently authentic: "I asked Mama, what if they
don't like me? 'Of course they will like you,' she said. Even if they do, I thought,
I won't like them"-and, for the most part, she doesn't. BH
EHRLICH, AMY 
Lucy's Winter Tale; illus. by Troy Howell. 
Dial, 1992 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-0661-8 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-0659-6 
$14.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
For what seems a fairy tale, Ehrlich sets the stage with a realistic framework: an old
woman who tells her the story swears that it is true. Young Lucy has fallen asleep
in the loft of her northern farm when she is kidnapped by a circus juggler; he has
quarreled with his sweetheart, who wants to settle down and have a child. Lucy
sings one show with them, which brings them back together, and is returned home.
She sees them once again a year later, whereupon their bear does all its tricks for
her, they let her hold their newborn baby, and they leave behind as a remembrance
the chimpanzee that has always passed the hat for their performances. This is a
long and unlikely story, beautifully written but wavering between haunting and
nostalgic. The romanticized paintings tip the balance toward the latter, each full-
page illustration glowing with rich colors that will make every child yearn to be
stolen away into a gypsy caravan. Although the details of both text and art are
realistic, we feel none of the cold and terror that must accompany such an event,
only a lingering sense of wonder for a beautiful couple who bring a glamor into the
life of the child they've stolen. BH
EPPLE, WOLFGANG 
Barn Owls; tr. from the German by Amy Gelman; illus. with
photographs by Manfred Rogl. 
Carolrhoda, 1992 
4 8p 
(Nature Watch)
ISBN 0-87614-742-2 
$14.96 
R* 
Gr. 3-5
Numerous color photographs, astoundingly sharp and intimate, merge with a
straightforward text describing life within a family of barn owls. The photos were
taken at a small European village where barn owls are plentiful. Although the
original was written in German, the translator maintains the factual integrity of
the text with easy informality: "Croooh-croooh. This hoarse, rasping cry isn't
JANUARY 1993 
* 
145
very pleasant to human ears, but female barn owls find it appealing." The pictures
are abundant and exceptional in quality. Included among them are one of five
young monkey-faced, down-covered owls, standing in a comical line-up; another
of a baby owl cuddled against its mother's breast; and several showing the adult
owl hunting at night for the vast amounts of food needed to feed the family. Stu-
dents will find this an intriguing-as well as an expert-presentation. KJ
GIBBONS, GAIL 
Stargazers; written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. 
Holiday House,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-0983-X 
$14.95 
M 
4-6 yrs
Using a very simple format, Gibbons attempts to outline the art of astronomy to
the preschool audience. In most cases, she provides a sufficient explanation of the
subject: "Stargazers are people who watch the night sky. Some stargazers are
called astronomers. Astronomers know a lot about stars." Occasionally, essential
information has been edited away to create an unclear, pre-Copernican text: "Dur-
ing the night, the stars move across the sky from east to west. This is because the
planet Earth turns slowly from west to east. The stars rise and set just like the sun
does." Once, in the descriptions of the two types of telescopes, the concepts com-
pletely overreach the intended audience, and difficult terms like "concave mirror,"
"objective lens," and "ocular lens" are barely explained. The illustrations, mostly
with a midnight-blue, star-dusted background, show Gibbons' trademark happy
cartoon-people studying the night sky. Although there is no glossary, the last two
pages give a timetable of "Stargazing History" complete with interesting astro-
nomical trivia (but it also introduces a third type of telescope, contradicting Gib-
bons' previous assertion that there are only two kinds). KJ
GRANT, CYNTHIA D. 
Shadow Man. Atheneum, 1992 
14 9p
ISBN 0-689-31772-7 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Gabriel McCloud is dead after drunkenly crashing his pickup into a tree, and his
friends and relatives take turns narrating the story of the aftermath. His girlfriend
Jennie, secretly pregnant with his child, is in shock and disbelief; his alcoholic
father and brother are uncomprehending and angry; his English teacher recalls
Gabe's bright promise before he dropped out of school. Gabe's own voice is heard
through badly-spelled assignments (mostly about his favorite superhero, Shadow
Man) that he wrote for that English teacher. The stress finally leads to an ocean-
front scene where Gabe's father finds the missing Jennie and saves her from a half-
hearted suicide attempt. There are too many narrators here (there's also Gabe's
uncle, Gabe's best friend, and Jennie's friend who's the son of the local mortician),
so characters can become confusing. Nor is there much originality in the emo-
tional landscape, with every person having a clear reason for pain, alcoholism, or
resentment, and many characters (the loving teacher, the bitter drunken brother)
painted in broad and familiar strokes. The rapturous anguish of characters con-
templating a young life cut short is credible but sounds rather eerily like a young
teen's romantic fantasy of how his suicide would devastate those around him. Grant
has a real feel for the small-town, everybody-knows-your-business-and-holds-old-
grudges atmosphere, however, and she depicts quite well the impact that a first
peer death can have on kids; she also has the courage to play down any final opti-
mism, leaving this as a genuinely and appropriately sad book. DS
146 
* THE BULLETIN
GREENWALD, SHEILA Rosy Cole Discovers America!; written and illus. by Sheila
Greenwald. Joy Street, 1992 96p
ISBN 0-316-32721-2 $13.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Rosy (of Rosy's Romance, BCCB 7/89, etc.) is back, and she's perturbed: her class
is doing a project on family histories, called "The USA is US," and she's uneasy
about her family's undistinguished past. Instead of famous debutantes and Su-
preme Court Justices, her ancestors include horse thieves and sweatshop workers,
guaranteed to elicit an "Ugh" from Rosy's snobbish classmates and perhaps from
her new friend Blaine ("from a very old family"). A family reunion, however,
causes Rosy to regret her wild embroidery of her heritage-she had labeled a pic-
ture of Emperor Franz Joseph as her uncle-and to claim her real relatives with
pride. Rosy remains an enduringly entertaining heroine, and the simple and funny
language (aided by sardonic contributions from Rosy's irascible sidekick Hermione)
keeps the story galloping along. The extent of Rosy's fabrication may be a trifle
unlikely, but the feelings that inspire it are real and will be completely understand-
able to Rosy's readers and cohorts. DS
GuY, ROSA 
Billy the Great; illus. by Caroline Binch. 
Delacorte, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-385-30666-0 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
A soul sibling to Mary Hoffman's Amazing Grace (BCCB 9/91), also illustrated by
Caroline Binch, Rosa Guy's Billy is an energetic boy whose parents amiably dis-
agree about his future. Dad thinks he's going to be a great soccer player; Mom sees
him in a more professional role: "One day Billy bandaged his dog from head to
paws, except for his nose. Mom said, 'How intelligent. Billy left room for Rover
to breathe. My Billy's going to be a doctor.'" The priceless picture accompanying
this text shows a longsuffering border collie with only a snout, one slit of eye, and
tufts of fur sticking out of a mummified encasement of gauze. There is a plot,
once it gets going; racial prejudice is implied in the tension between Billy's black
parents and next-door Rod's white parents ("Besides, his father has tattoos," says
Billy's mother), and the air crackles when Dad accidentally kicks the soccer ball
through the neighbors' window. But Billy and Rod resolve things nicely, and
Mom's sense of humor wins over the dads' bickering ("'He broke my window,'
Rod's father said .... 'He shouted at me,' Dad said.'"). Thanks to the tongue-in-
cheek writing and lively watercolor illustration, the message never gets heavy.
Binch's faces and bodies manage to suggest nonstop action, even during the cata-
loguing of Billy's growing up from babyhood to his seventh year, when the story
takes place. Billy and Grace definitely belong in the same irrepressible company.
BH
HALEY, GAIL E., ad Mountain Jack Tales; ad. and illus. by Gail E. Haley. Dutton,
1992 
131p
ISBN 0-525-44974-4 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
"Most of the stories in this collection were gathered by Poppyseed when the bean
tree fell on Story Mountain." Well, maybe, but most of them-seven out of nine-
are also in Richard Chase's Jack Tales or Grandfather Tales (the latter not listed in
the bibliography), two collections widely familiar to storytellers and available to
children in an accessible format for fifty years. Haley's versions are not, it is true,
always word-for-word the same, but the adaptations are very dose to Chase's, and
JANUARY 1993 
* 147
his dialect is more consistent. Here, in one sentence "Jack and his maw was living
alone," while in the next, "Jack's paw and brothers were off working"; similarly,
eaten appears in one sentence, et in the next (all italics mine). That's not to say
these aren't cracking good stories. "Jack and the Northwest Wind" (same title in
Chase), "The Lion and the Unicorn" ("Jack and the Varmints"), "Jack and
Catherine" ("Cat 'n Mouse!"), "Jack and the Flying Ship" ("Hardy Hardhead"),
"Jack of Hearts and King Marock" ("Jack and King Marock"), "Muncimeg and
the Giant" ("Mutsmag"), and "Jack and Old Raggedy Bones" ("Soldier Jack") will
always be great favorites. Moreover, Haley's black-and-white wood engravings
have a skillfully textured, artistically homespun strength to match, and the book
design is handsome enough to attract young readers as well as adult storytellers. It
just seems important, as Chase did in citing R. M. Ward, Council Harmon, etc.,
to mention specific sources. The storyteller Poppyseed is somewhat stagey as a
framing device ("Well, howdy. Pull up a chair, and grab you-uns a knife and a
pan"), but the afterword about the art, along with the glossary and the general
bibliography, are very helpful. BH
HASELEY, DENNIS 
Dr. Gravity. 
Farrar, 1992 
322p
ISBN 0-374-31842-5 
$17.00 
SpR 
Gr. 6-9
Like Shadows (BCCB 7/91), but in a very different way, Haseley's latest book has
brilliant aspects. A fantasy about gravity, this starts out heavy, gets very light, and
ends up in balance. The first part, when Dr. Gravity returns to the midwestern
childhood hometown where his awkwardness began, drags a bit. Then, when his
master plan begins to work and the citizens levitate four miles into the air (houses
and all) and leave their cares behind, the tone turns to cerulean-blue ecstasy, thin-
ning to tension as the mayor's daughter, whom the scientific hero has come to
love, realizes the tenuousness (one is tempted to say gravity, but it's the wrong
clichd) of their situation. All this is rendered in minute detail, which lends great
credibility but occasionally overloads the book, though the writing is always air-
tight, with a control reminiscent of Natalie Babbitt's style. To his credit, Haseley
lets his metaphor speak for itself, and you'll have to read for yourself to find out
how and why the town comes down. There's a pressing reason, and it's not grav-
ity. Despite its weight, good readers will get caught up in this carefully crafted
science fantasy. BH
HAUTZIG, ESTHER 
Riches; illus. by Donna Diamond. 
Zolotow/Harper,
1992 
4 4p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022260-3 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022259-X 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Samuel and Chaya-Rivka are an old Polish Jewish couple who have put in fifty
years working hard at a successful store and raising a fine family. Considered
wealthy and blessed, they wonder if there is not more to the rest of their lives.
Samuel seeks and heeds the advice of a revered Rabbi in nearby Vilna, and he
leaves the store for the humble work of driving a horse and cart while Chaya-Rivka
stays home to study as she has always dreamed. What Samuel learns, in helping
the poor he encounters, is to give of himself with the same generosity he has always
given of his money. This is clearly a moral tale, and one more instructive to chil-
dren than involving of them. Hautzig's style is smooth, and a number offolkloric
elements benefit the plot, while Diamond's sincere gray-and-white illustrations
148 
* THE BULLETIN
charge the words with sentiment. The book's most likely use will be in religious
collections or public libraries with families reading aloud to nurture their Jewish
traditions. 
BH
HOLDER, HEIDI 
Carmine the Crow; written and illus. by Heidi Holder. 
Farrar,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-374-31119-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Fastidious, quietly eccentric watercolors illustrate this fable of a crow who finds his
wish come true only after granting wishes to others. For rescuing a beautiful swan
from a hunter's snare, Carmine the crow receives a box filled with magical stardust
that can make wishes come true. Carmine dreams of youth and romance, but
soon finds that he has generously given all the dust away to other animals in equal
need of miracles. In a pallid conclusion, Carmine discovers that he in fact has not
given away all the stardust, puts the remaining grain under his pillow, and awakes
in the morning a new bird. Lacking the irony of a true fable, the story here serves
as a hanger for Holder's elegant paintings of impeccably turned out mink and
frogs, swans and crows in a somberly magical landscape. Holder is a better and
more interesting artist than many who have turned their craft to the handsome,
adult-appealing picture book: her art deserves a better story. RS
HOUSTON, GLORIA 
ButNo Candy; illus. by Lloyd Bloom. 
Philomel, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22142-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
This rather lengthy and subdued story explores the World War II-at-home experi-
ence through a little girl's longing for a Hershey bar, unavailable-even though
her father owns a store-as the war drags on. The metaphor is certainly appropri-
ately childlike, but the story is static: Lee misses her candy, she misses her Uncle
Ted gone off to fight; when the war ends he comes back, bringing Lee a Hershey
bar that she finds herself unable to enjoy fully. "Somehow at that moment Lee
knew her world had changed. She had changed. She would never be the same
again." Like Jane Yolen's All Those Secrets ofthe World(BCCB 4/91), this has the
feel of a mulled-over reminiscence that won't entirely communicate itself to the
picture book audience (unlike James Stevenson's Don't You Know There's a War
On, BCCB 11/92, which gains its impact through a more immediate perspective).
But the tone and memory ring true and honest, a feeling helped by Bloom's warm,
dark, and thickly textured paintings. Lee's family is solid and loving; one of the
most mysteriously comforting paintings shows no people at all, just the family car
driving home from the movie newsreels through a star-studded night. RS
HOUSTON, JAMES 
Drifting Snow: An Arctic Search; written and illus. by James
Houston. 
McElderry, 1992 
150p
ISBN 0-689-50563-9 
$13.95 
M 
Gr. 5-9
Suffering from tuberculosis, Elizabeth was taken from her Inuit family as a baby to
a hospital in southern Canada where her identity tag and papers were lost. Raised
in the hospital and later in boarding school, Elizabeth, now thirteen, has returned
to the Arctic to find her family or, failing that, to gain a sense of her true heritage.
It's a good premise, but the story (based, according to a prefatory note, on real
events) is awkwardly told, including lots of detail about Inuit customs and survival
techniques, but with an almost utter lack of characterization. The plot goes no-
JANUARY 1993 
* 
149
where until near the end of the book, where it turns ludicrous, with Elizabeth
suddenly revealing a heretofore unmentioned tattoo that identifies her to her grand-
mother. There's an exciting central section of the story when Elizabeth and her
adopted group ofNesarmiut people become trapped on an ice floe spinning them
out to sea; here, the information on igloo-building and seal-hunting is interesting,
because the details are essential to the survival of the characters. Otherwise, the
book suffers from information-packing that impedes the flow of the story: "First
they split [the fish] open so that they looked like giant red-and-silver butterflies.
Then they tied them like clothing onto long sealskin lines between the tent-tops so
that they would dry and stiffen in the night wind. Later they would put these fish
inside half-a-dozen ancient stone caches, each as big around as a large tractor tire
and higher than a hunter's waist." There are readers who love survival tales pre-
cisely for such details, of course, but even they need a well-told story to pull them
along. RS
JONES, ROBERT J. Jake: A Labrador Puppy at Work and Play; illus. with photo-
graphs by Bill Eppridge. 
Farrar, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-374-33655-5 
$15.00 
R Gr. 2-4
There's no doubt that little Jake is an adorable subject for Bill Eppridge's color
photos, but what makes this book more than a cute-puppy gallery is the emphasis
Jones puts on the Lab's need to work: "All puppies want to have jobs to do in a
family, and it's up to their human masters to train them for those jobs." Jake is
being trained for hunting, and Jones' older Lab, Luke, is just as important a teacher
for Jake as is Jones himself (there's a telling photo of Luke's face, expressively
ambiguous as he meets the new puppy). Jake and Luke work and play together as
Jones patiently trains the puppy; Jake is a year old at the end of the book and seems
to have passed his first.hunting season with flying colors, although no details are
given. The photos are clear, the format is open; the book as a whole is a rugged
companion to more placid new-puppy stories. RS
KOLLER, 
JACKIE 
FRENCH 
The Primrose Way. 
Gulliver/Harcourt,
1992 
277p 
(Great Episodes)
ISBN 0-15-256745-3 
$17.95 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Rebekah Hall is sixteen, and she's come to join her Puritan father in Agawam,
soon to be Ipswich, in seventeenth century Massachusetts. Headstrong and intel-
ligent Rebekah befriends Qunnequawese, a Pawtucket girl, in order to learn her
language so that Rebekah can do valuable interpreting, but Rebekah's growing
attraction to the Pawtucket-and to Qunnequawese's kinsman, Mishannock-
leads to condemnation from the English settlers, who fear that Rebekah is going
"down the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire." After smallpox wipes out
most of the local Pawtucket but spares Mishannock, Rebekah realizes her feelings
for him and joins him rather than returning to England. Despite some anachro-
nisms (Rebekah says "okay" and addresses ministers as "Reverend"), the writing
style has a reasonably old-fashioned flavor, with the physical setting of the Puritan
and Pawtucket communities well conveyed. As a historical novel, however, this
has serious problems. The reverential treatment of the Pawtucket includes some
incongruous fantasy elements, as Mishannock communes with wolves or trans-
mutes into an eagle. Rebekah is a modern girl in Puritan dress, possessing the
consciousness of our time rather than that of hers, which gives the whole novel a
150 
* THE BULLETIN
time-travel feeling as Koller, through Rebekah, argues with history in the hopes of
changing it (and the book's ending is historically unbelievable, despite a note plead-
ing the contrary); there's no hint of sympathy for or understanding of Puritan
beliefs, which are denigrated in a way that makes one wonder why the author
bothered to write about them at all. Best, perhaps, to play down historical and
play up fiction, offering this as a good reading adventure and costume drama (which
it is). A historical note, glossary of Puritan (really British) terms, Algonquian
terms, and bibliography are included. DS
LAUTURE, DENIZ£ Father andSon; illus. by Jonathan Green. Philomel, 1993 [32p]
ISBN 0-399-21867-X $14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 4-6 yrs
"Father and son/ Hand in hand/ Up on the road/ In the sun," chants the Haitian
poet Lauture as he enumerates ways in which a boy reflects his father: "The mind
of one/ Sparking/ The mind of the other,/ The heart of one/ Reaching out to/ The
heart of the other,/ And the soul of one/ Knowing/ The soul of the other." The
image is admirable, though it stays at a level that's verbally abstract for the picture
book audience seeking a story or even the kind of action represented in Jonathan
and His Mommy, by Irene Smalls-Hector (reviewed below). Green's oil paintings,
thickly brushed and distinguished by deep-hued contrasts depicting an all-black
cast in a southern seaside setting, do provide some of that action, with the two
main characters sharing activities-from kite-flying to reading-that demonstrate,
vary, and specify the repetitious pattern of text. BH
LEITNER, ISABELA 
The Big Lie: A True Story; by Isabella Leitner with Irving A.
Leitner; illus. by Judy Pedersen. 
Scholastic, 1992 
79p
ISBN 0-590-45569-9 
$13.95 
R* Gr. 3-6
In an outstanding example of simple writing that never becomes simplistic or con-
descending to the child audience, Leitner tells the story of her family's ordeal at the
end of World War II. She, her mother, brother, four sisters, and the Jewish citi-
zens of their small Hungarian town are first herded into a ghetto and then trans-
ported to Auschwitz, where her mother and youngest sister are immediately gassed.
The others survive until three of them escape during a forced march (their oldest
sister dies in Bergen-Belsen) and shelter with Russian troops, eventually making
their way to the U.S. These events are compressed into sixty generously spaced
pages that are direct in address, easy to read, and punctuated with the kind of
details that keep the account personal and authentic: "My beautiful camel's hair
coat which I had guarded so carefully, was left on the cattle car floor." The horror
is kept to a minimum by the author's steady, matter-of-fact tone: "Dr. Mengele
sent Mama and my sister Potyo to the left," states the text, and goes on to describe
how she and her sisters, sent to the right, are stripped and shaved. In the next
chapter, we learn what has happened to everyone sent to the left. Those few pages
of distance allow a young reader to assimilate the knowledge without becoming
overwhelmed. The six-page afterword sets the story into historical context and
explains the title, which might better have been drawn from Leitner's personal
account. This is a must for elementary-grades Holocaust units, for poor or prac-
ticing readers who are so often forced to read trivial materials, and for reluctant
readers who will be drawn by the compelling human drama here. Simple charcoal
drawings keep the art to an appropriately minimal suggestion of reality, leaving the
rest up to the imagination. BH
JANUARY 1993 
* 151
LENT, BLAIR 
Molasses Flood; written and illus. by Blair Lent. 
Houghton,
1992 32p
ISBN 0-395-45314-3 
$14.95 
R 
4-6yrs
Charley Owen Muldoon loved molasses... "on bread, on crackers, or just spooned
out of a jar," but he's overwhelmed along with the rest of Boston when one warm
January day a huge tank of the sweet stuff expands and explodes, sending a flood of
molasses across the city (and moving Charley's harborside house to a posh spot on
Beacon Hill). Following the thaw comes a freeze, enabling the populace to chop
and store more molasses than anyone-including Charley-would ever want to
eat. This simply but exuberantly imagined tall tale has clean structure and focus,
a welcome change from the many over-elaborate picture books that have captured
the market. Lent's block-printed illustrations, all tawny-toned with brick and
olive accents, drolly contrast the prim lines of the Victorian houses (and the harbor
ferry, in a nod to Noah) awash in a sticky sea. An appended note indicates that
such an explosion did once occur in Boston, but that Lent's extravagant variation
is told as he imagined it whenever his mother would tell him the story. RS
LEVOY, MYRON 
Kelly 'n'Me. Zolotow/HarperCollins, 1992 
202p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020839-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020838-4 
$15.00 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Anthony meets Kelly on a hot summer day in Central Park, where they are both
sidewalk musicians, and she horns (well, sings) in on his act. Rivalry rapidly turns
to sweet duets, as the two join musical forces, become friends, and (Anthony hopes)
begin a romance. They both come from tough families: Anthony's mother is an
off-Broadway actress who spends more time drinking than working; Kelly's father
is a janitor and her mother is a nanny... at least, so she says, and readers will figure
out long before Anthony that Kelly's stories are not all they seem. She's actually
quite rich and-no surprises here-quite troubled, with a pair of hostile, indiffer-
ent parents who would be at home in any YA problem novel of the 70s. In fact,
this book seems like a throwback to the old days, with lots of plot, tough talk, and
reader-flattering portrayals of good kids versus useless parents. Given the com-
plexities brought to the genre by books such as Cole's Celine and Voigt's The
Runner, the old formulas look a little creaky; on the other hand Levoy's book is
easy to read and lots of fun, with a twist in the end that resists didactic wrap-up.
RS
LUTZEIER, ELIZABETH 
The Wall. Holiday House, 1992 
153p
ISBN 0-8234-0987-2 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
What a first sentence: "After they shot Hannah's mother, they made her go with
her father to a dark building behind the police station." Hannah's mother was
killed while trying to drive through a checkpoint between East and West Berlin;
the beginning of the book is set in 1989. In order to protect themselves from the
repressive Communist regime, Hannah and her father must pretend not to care
much about Mama's death, until Hannah's rebellious new friend Steffi begins to
open Hannah's eyes to the evils of the system and the necessity for change. It
would probably not have been possible to publish this book ten or twenty years
ago; its anticommunist stance is strident and unsubtle and would have been seen
as unsuitable for children in an era of supposed "detente." Hannah and Steffi's
school is a hotbed of informers, and, outside, there's a member of the feared Stasi
152 
* THE BULLETIN
secret police around every corner. Nevertheless, the cold war struggle has always
made for exciting fiction, and Lutzeier's book is an adroit combination of spies
and secrets, as well as a convincing portrait of one girl's maturing political aware-
ness. RS
MCCAUSLIN, 
MARK 
Lesbian and Gay Rights. 
Crestwood House,
1992 
4 8p 
illus. with photographs 
(The Facts About Series)
ISBN 0-89686-751-X 
$12.95 
M 
Gr. 5-9
There's some enlightening material here, presented in an unthreatening way (both
sexually and textually: the book's basically a hi/lo), but the author's use of fiction-
alized dialogue to make his points rarely rings true. "'Doctor, I don't know how to
say this,' Mrs. Johnson said nervously. 'But I need your help.' She took a deep
breath and then said, 'My son Alan told me he's gay. Can you cure him?' Dr.
Evans shook his head. This was not the first time a parent had come to him with
this question." These vignettes are so obviously artificial that the information they
present becomes less than convincing. Too, the photographs in the book generally
bear such a tangential relationship to the subject or even to their individual cap-
tions that they perplex more than they clarify: "A gay or lesbian couple may have
a hard time finding a place to live because people discriminate against them" cap-
tions a photo of some houses; a photo of a woman in a lab coat holding a vial is
captioned by "some researchers believe that the cause of homosexuality is biologi-
cal." What do you suppose is in that vial? There are enough true stories and
photos of gay people around to fill several books; while this one is sympathetic to
the gay rights cause, it needs more facts to back up the feeling. There are no notes
or bibliography; a brief directory of gay organizations is appended, as is a glossary/
index. RS
McKISSACK, PATRICIA C. 
Sojourner Truth: Ain 't Ia Woman?; written by Patricia
C. and Fredrick McKissack. 
Scholastic, 1992 
186p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-44690-8 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
For those familiar only with Sojourner Truth's famous "Ain't I a Woman" speech,
this biography is an eyeopener, describing the eventful life of a woman who took
part in some of the most important movements in American history. After a brief
historical note explaining the slavery laws in New York, the book follows Sojourner's
life from her birth in slavery in 1797 to her troubled path to freedom, her renam-
ing of herself, and her long career as an abolitionist and feminist. A pioneer even
before her remarkable speaking career, she was one of the first black women to
make successful use of the law, suing to gain possession of her son and, later, for
damages against the authors of a libelous pamphlet. Although the writing is some-
times awkward or unclear ("If people had bothered to notice, there was a change in
Belle"), the many quotes from Sojourner Truth herself convey her wit and elo-
quence (she marketed a postcard with her likeness on it, bearing the caption "I sell
the shadow to support the substance"). The McKissacks supply historical context
for both pro-woman and anti-slavery movements, and Sojourner Truth's life as a
feminist and former slave is a unique one for following them both. Period photos,
engravings, and historical documents scattered thickly through the book keep it
visually lively; an index, bibliography, and brief biographies of important persons
mentioned are included. DS
JANUARY 1993 
* 
153
MARSHALL, JAMES 
Fox on Stage; written and illus. by James Marshall. 
Dial,
1993 
48p 
(Dial Easy-to-Read)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1357-6 
$10.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1356-8 
$10.99 
R Gr. 1-3
See this month's Big Picture for review.
MARSHALL, LAURA, ad. 
The Girl Who Changed Her Fate; ad. and illus. by Laura
Marshall. 
Atheneum, 1992 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-31742-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
This adaptation of a Greek folktale describes a young girl whose bad luck makes
her miserable until she finds her fate and confronts it. The blue-toned oil paint-
ings portray traditionally costumed peasants in a bucolic countryside; the shapes
are organically rounded and the human figures expressively drafted. In contrast to
the darker compositions, the personification of the girl's fate looks like a fire-streaked
Bride of Frankenstein. Structurally, this is a simple journey-folktale, but there are
some breaks and twists in the plot that the adaptor has not smoothed over and that
may puzzle children unfamiliar with this oral tradition. How does the girl's sleep-
ing position reveal her fate? Why does the ruthless fate finally give in to the girl's
pleading? This interesting variant would be best used not as a readaloud, but in a
middle-grade unit on folklore in a comparison with "East of the Sun, West of the
Moon" and "Cinderella." KJ
MIKE, JAN M., ad. 
Gift of the Nile: An Ancient Egyptian Legenda illus. by Charles
Reasoner. 
See review under Chocolate, above.
MOLLEL, TOLOLWA M., ad. 
The Princess Who Lost Her Hair: An Akamba Legend;
illus. by Charles Reasoner. 
See review under Chocolate, above.
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
The Prince of the Pond: Otherwise Known as De Fawg Pin;
illus. by Judith Byron Schachner. 
Dutton, 1992 
151p
ISBN 0-525-44976-0 
$13.00 
R* Gr. 3-5
Point of view is all here, and Napoli uses it to involve the reader in a touching story
narrated by a female green frog who befriends the large, bewildered male appear-
ing suddenly under a human hat. He is bewildered, readers realize, because he's
just been turned from prince to frog by a witch. He cannot talk properly (rs, ss,
ths, and Is are beyond the power of his newly long tongue); he doesn't realize who
his enemies are; and he eventually teaches the narrator, whom he names Jade, how
to love both himself and their tadpoles--only to be transformed back into a hu-
man by a princess' kiss before Jade's very eyes. Froglike, she has no idea what
happened ("Where was my beautiful Pin?") which makes readers feel for her all the
more. The consistency and mini-drama of a frog's-eye view (one at a time), coupled
with a poignant ending that doesn't shy away from loss, makes this an animal
fantasy that fairy tale readers will relish. The prince's lisp occasionally becomes
wearing, but it will be fun to read aloud, and the humor ofJade and Pin's develop-
ing relationship keeps sentimentality at bay. Schachner's numerous ink-and-wash
drawings go far in supporting the characterization; they're skillfully drafted, com-
154 
* THE BULLETIN
bining anatomical fluidity, witty expression, and subtle modeling of light and dark
values, all to handsome effect. BH
NEIMARK, ANNE D. 
Diego Rivera: Artist of the People. 
HarperCollins,
1992 116p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-21784-7 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021783-9 $17.00 
R Gr. 4-7
The author's introductory note calls her book a "fictionalized biography," since
she has invented some of the scenes and dialogue; it's no more fictional than many
biographies, but much more honest about the author's imaginative contribution.
This is a well-crafted biography of an artist of tremendous importance both in his
native Mexico and out of it. Neimark chronicles Rivera's life through his child-
hood artistic impulses, his European apprenticeship, his political activism, and his
importance as an adult artist, as well as addressing his turbulent and important
relationship with his second (and third) wife, artist Frida Kahlo. The merit in this
book is not so much in writing style as in organization, or, more specifically, exclu-
sion: Neimark has managed to streamline a crowded life into a flavorful and un-
derstandable account, without overstuffing the biography with lists of people and
events. Diego Rivera as a man important to his people-and, by extension, the
possible importance of art to any people-is made clear here, and the linkage of
Rivera's murals to those locally-produced ones that young readers may see every
day puts both Rivera and art in an accessible context. There are no notes, but a list
of books for further reading and a list of important murals in the United States-
some Rivera's, some not-are appended. Reproductions of the artist's work, some
in color, most in black-and-white, appear throughout. DS
PATERSON, 
KATHERINE 
The 
King's Equal; illus. 
by 
Vladimir
Vagin. 
HarperCollins, 1992 
64p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022497-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022496-7 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
The arrogant young prince is infuriated by his father's last words, which forbid
him to wear the crown until he marries a woman his equal in beauty, intelligence,
and wealth. Even under threat of imprisonment, his advisors cannot find such a
princess, but unbeknownst to them all, a shepherdess in the mountains is being
primed by a magic wolf to prove herself more than the prince's equal; in fact,
between Rosamund and the wolf, the prince becomes not only humble but happy.
This has many qualities of an eighteenth-century French court fairy tale, including
a formal style and lengthier development (six chapters) than its picture book ap-
pearance first implies. While the search for the princess seems a bit overextended,
the contest between hero and heroine is lively and cleverly resolved. Vagin's illus-
trations are more problematic; while the tone is appropriately ornate in a
longstanding tradition of Russian illustration, the drafting is stiff, and the compo-
sitions are crowded with both shapes and colors. Without the folkloric efficiency
of Paterson's The Tale ofthe Mandarin Ducks (BCCB 9/90), which was so grace-
fully illustrated by the Dillons, this may be more limited in appeal to young fan-
tasy enthusiasts. BH
POWELL, PAMELA 
The Turtle Watchers. Viking, 1992 
115p
ISBN 0-670-84294-X 
$13.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
JANUARY 1993 
* 155
After staying up one night to watch a leatherback turtle lay her eggs, three sisters
determine to protect the nest from a villainous neighbor who's carving artifacts
from turtle shell and selling them, with the protection of a corrupt customs offi-
cial, to tourists. There's plenty of suspense here, but it's obviously calculated,
deriving from a plot-driven story that leaves little room for the development of a
complex cast of characters. The three sisters are almost indistinguishable, the bad
guy is stereotyped ("His face twisted into an ugly mask"), and the interesting old
man who helps the girls because his "duppy wife" haunts him (she died in child-
birth while he was hunting turtles and is rumored to have become a demon) doesn't
get enough room to emerge from the action. The Afro-Caribbean culture is sym-
pathetically presented, and the West Indies island setting is sharply visualized;
that, along with the ecological theme, moves this first novel beyond formulaic
series mysteries. BH
PRICE, SUSAN 
Ghost Song. 
Farrar, 1992 
148p
ISBN 0-374-32544-8 
$15.00 
R Gr. 8-12
Ghost Songis a dark story in which life is as hopeless as death, yet it is also a magical
tale of a shaman's power versus love and loyalty. A parallel book to the author's
The Ghost Drum (BCCB 10/87), the story is set in the same dismal and cold
northern land. After the hunter Malyuta speaks a wish before a dead sable's angry
spirit ("So should my first son be-black, black hair . . . White skin, white
teeth... Red lips, red cheeks ... Black, white and red; sable, snow and blood"),
he is pleased when his newborn son fulfills his wish but distressed when the child
turns out to have an immortal shaman's soul. A shaman appears on the night of
the boy's birth to claim him as his apprentice, but Malyuta will not give him up.
The angry shaman does everything he can to take his apprentice, but the boy is
protected by his father's love. Price's plot is as mystical as the words she weaves
("He would drop into a deep sleep, as far below dreams as a stone in the deep sea
is below the waves"), but the story is hardly fey: the shaman has Malyuta violently
murdered so that his loyal son is forced to follow the shaman's wishes in order to
save his father's soul. This complex story will appeal to sophisticated fantasy read-
ers. KJ
RAPPAPORT, 
DOREEN 
The Lizzie 
Borden 
Trial. HarperCollins,
1992 
176p 
illus. with photographs 
(Be the Judge, Be the Jury)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025114-X 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025113-1 
$14.00 
R Gr. 5-9
Lizzie Borden remains a potent American legend, and even those kids who don't
know the "forty whacks" rhyme will be intrigued by the account of the two sensa-
tional murders presented here. Using extracts from the trial transcriptions and
reproductions of contemporary photos and newspaper excerpts, Rappaport invites
readers to become part of the jury, allowing them to sift through the evidence, hear
the rhetoric of the opposing attorneys and the judge's charge, and conclude for
themselves Borden's innocence or guilt. It's an unusual slant for a history book; as
well, it's an easy introduction to legal procedures (which are somewhat different
from today's, as the author elucidates in an afterword). Sacrificed to the dry pro-
ceedings is any sense of suspense or vividness, and the questions Rappaport directs
to readers at the end of each chapter ("How could Lizzie be the murderer if her
clothing showed no blood?") are not accompanied by enough context to give read-
156 
* THE BULLETIN
ers much chance of supporting an argument for their answers. They'll fight it out
anyway, of course-and in fact, the book presents some interesting possibilities for
round-robin read-alouds. A reading list and an index of the trial proceedings are
appended. RS
ROBINSON, 
NANCY K. 
The Ghost of Whispering Rock; illus. by Ellen
Eagle. 
Holiday House, 1992 
6 5p
ISBN 0-8234-0944-9 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Fourth-grader Amy is looking forward to having Erika, a childhood friend whom
Amy played with as a toddler but doesn't remember, come for a week's stay at
Amy's family's summer cabin. But Erika hates the woods, won't eat outside, misses
TV, and when she isn't playing with her handheld video games or reading horror
comics, all she does is complain. Thanks to a ghost story, an abandoned school-
house in the forest, and a copperhead, the two girls eventually become friends, and
while this conclusion is long foregone, it's still a satisfying pattern placed in an
appealing setting. In this early chapter book, the sentences are short but not choppy
and the dialogue is often entertainingly grouchy; occasional, slightly stiff pencil
illustrations provide snapshot views of the conflict. RS
RUEMMLER, JOHN 
Smoke on the Water: A Novel of Jamestown and the
Powhatans. Shoe Tree, 1992 
171p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55870-239-3 
$6.95 
M 
Gr. 7-10
This novel about the difficult lives of the early Jamestown settlers and their Native
American neighbors features two teenage boys, one a Powhatan and the other a
British colonist. During a time of relative peace, the two boys encounter one
another outside the settlement walls and begin a tenuous friendship. Although
they rarely meet, the boys live almost parallel lives (a literary device that soon gets
redundant), complete with enemy rivals for the attention of the girl each boy loves.
At times the prose is overwritten, and occasional spiritual allusions stand out awk-
wardly and mysteriously in the middle of an otherwise realistic story: "the old
savage they all believed to be dead opened his mouth-or his mouth simply fell
open-and out flew a white dove." When the Powhatans eventually lead a massa-
cre against the whites, it is surprising that young Eagle Owl can give up his wish
for peace so easily to join the warriors. On the other hand, the book is historically
well-researched and gives a realistic view of life in 1622. KJ
SAXBY, MAURICE, ad. 
The Great Deeds of Heroic Women; illus. by Robert
Ingpen. 
Bedrick, 1992 
151p
ISBN 0-87226-348-7 
$24.95 
R 
Gr. 6-10
While Saxby's companion volume, The Great Deeds ofSuperheroes (BCCB 2/91),
deals only with myth and legend, some of the subjects here, including Joan of Arc
and Pocahontas, are historical. From the goddess Athena to the unwitting adven-
turess Mary Bryant, the broad-ranging collection of eighteen stories about Greek,
Chinese, Jewish, Arabic, French, Russian, Native American, and British heroines
is densely written, often in a more descriptive than storytelling mode. Ingpen's
haunting portraits seem poised in the mists of time and offer welcome respite from
the close print. Whether the book is used more as a teacher's resource or a selec-
tion for independent young readers, champions of multicultural literacy will wel-
come the celebration of such a strong, diverse cast of women. BH
JANUARY 1993 
* 
157
SHUSTERMAN, NEIL 
The Eyes ofKidMidas. Little, 1992 
185p
ISBN 0-316-77542-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Kevin Midas, tired of being pushed around by class bully Bertram, is determined
to beat Bertram to the top of the Divine Watch, a mountain the class is visiting on
a school trip. Kevin does gain the summit and there finds a pair of sunglasses
which, he soon finds out, have the power to grant him any wish in the world. Re
the allusion in the title, be careful what you wish for. Kevin soon finds that the
magic glasses are controlling his life in ways he did not anticipate. While the novel
is a lot of fun and not nearly so didactic as it could have been, the fantasy is too
manic and uncontrolled, lacking the internal logic that makes William Sleator's
novels (Singularity is a good comparison) so satisfying. Eventually, Kevin stops
the universe, it seems, and only restores order by bringing the glasses back to their
source: "'Here,' he said to the top of the mountain. 'These look better on you.'"
That's a funny line, but it's not an effective conclusion, given the extent of the
havoc Kevin has created. However, the extremities of Kevin's wishes and imaginings
have a bold drama, the storytelling is swift, and the over-the-top audacity of the
book has contagious energy. RS
SMALLS-HECTOR, IRENE 
Jonathan and His Mommy; illus. by Michael Hays. 
Little,
1992 
32p
ISBN 0-316-79870-3 
$14.95 
R 4-6 yrs
No wonder Jonathan likes "to go walking and talking" with his mom. She's the
kind who doesn't mind taking zigzag steps, big giant steps ("I say, did you see/
That hu-mon-gous mammoth among us?"), itsy-bitsy baby steps, racing steps,
slow-motion steps, ballet twirls, crisscross steps, reggae steps, backward steps, and,
finally, Jonathan-and-Mommy steps all the way home. Let the comfortably
rounded, imaginative mother here be an inspiration to us all. She'd better be; once
kids get a look at this book, they're going to turn every walk into a dance of their
own. The poetic text turns a situation into a story through homely details and
cumulative rhythms, which are picked up and further developed in Hays' designerly
urban murals. While the characters are African-American, the scenario is the envy
of every child. BH
STINE, MEGAN 
The Story of Laura Ingalls Wilder, Pioneer Girl; illus. by Marcy
Dunn Ramsey. 
Dell, 1992 
101p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-440-40578-5 
$3.25 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The popularity of Laura Ingalls Wilder's Little House books makes her life a natu-
ral subject for juvenile biographies. However, because her books are largely auto-
biographical, many of the biographies about Laura written for young readers have
little new information, and Stine's book is no exception. Despite the author's
claims of extensive research, there is not much here that Wilder fans won't already
know. The last four chapters, describing her life with and marriage to Almanzo
Wilder, contain the best, freshest material. The black-and-white pencil drawings
have the homey feel of Garth Williams' illustrations for the Little House books,
although the figures are often stiff. For reluctant readers who find the original
series of seven books daunting, Stine has done a good job condensing the main
story into a slim volume. For those who want more rather than less, try Donald
Zochert's Laura or William Anderson's Laura Ingalls Wilder: A Biography (BCCB
12/92). KJ
158 
* THE BULLETIN
STOLZ, MARY 
Stealing Home. 
HarperCollins, 1992 
154 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021157-1 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021154-7 
$14.00 
R Gr. 4-6
Thomas and Grandfather, who have appeared in a progression of two younger
books (Storm in the Night, BCCB 2/88 and Go Fish, BCCB 5/91), center a longer
story here when they are joined, to their mutual dismay, by an uninvited guest.
Life has been cozy and predictably easygoing until Aunt Linzy, terminated from
her accounting job in Chicago, shows up with a determination to clean up their
act and with no patience for baseball, fishing, or casual clutter. Characterization is
Stolz' strong suit: Grandfather is all-wise but does lose his temper; Aunt Linzy is a
believable mixture of annoying and vulnerable; Thomas, although sometimes in
action too good to be true, does rebel in spirit; Ringo the cat is pure-and-simply
feline and the ugly duck, Ivan, pure-and-simply funny. The family, pictured as
African-American in Pat Cummings' cover though ethnic background never en-
ters the story, hews to pre-television habits and old-fashioned family values. The
tiny cottage and its environs on the Gulf of Mexico are sharply realized; the happy
ending gives this easy-to-read text a comforting tone overall. BH
STOWE, CYNTHIA 
Dear Mom, in Ohio fora Year. 
Scholastic, 1992 
180p
ISBN 0-590-45060-3 
$13.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Cassie is spending her sixth-grade year with her Aunt Emily and Uncle Fred be-
cause her mother has gone off to college for the year. Fred and Emily live in rural
western Massachusetts (Cassie misses her suburban Boston home); Fred and Emily
are also vaguely countercultural and organic vegetarians to boot (Cassie is a con-
formist who misses her Doritos). What Cassie misses most, of course, is her mother.
This is a fresh, friendly variation on the sixth-grade story: Cassie eventually be-
comes close to her relatives (not without some major battles with her aunt), finds
some things to love about the country, and confronts her mother about the way
she felt abandoned. Cassie is the perfect middle-grades heroine, ordinary enough
to be familiar, individual enough to be interesting. RS
TAYLOR, WILLIAM 
Knitwits. 
Scholastic, 1992 
101p
ISBN 0-590-45778-0 
$13.95 
R Gr. 5-7
Having sharpened our wits with Agnes the Sheep (BCCB 3/91), Taylor has taken
on a slightly less quirky project, putting the twist on a classic new-sibling yarn.
Nine-year-old hockey player Charlie gets suckered into a bet with tough-talking
Alice next door: if he finishes a sweater he says he's knitting for the baby his
mother is expecting, he gets Alice's skull collection; if he doesn't knit the sweater,
he pays her five dollars a week for the rest of his life. It's Charlie's efforts to knit
the sweater against a fast-approaching deadline that score the most humor. The
peer insults get repetitive, albeit always authentic, but the surprising warmth at-
tendant to the baby's birth introduces a moving quality that deepens the book. In
fact, under the rough surface, these are loving characters. It's nice to see a happy-
but not sappy-family story. BH
WALLACE, BILL 
The Biggest Klutz in Fifth Grade. Holiday House, 1992 
14 8p
ISBN 0-8234-0984-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Patrick Berry is a tad clumsy, always acquiring stitches, casts, or what have you,
JANUARY 1993 
* 
159
but that's no reason for Neal Moffett, king of the fifth grade, to change his taunt
from "Fat Pat Berry, the Twinkletoes Fairy" (Pat takes dance lessons) to "The
Biggest Klutz in Fifth Grade." In fact, nasty Neal bets Pat that he "can't get
through the summer without breaking something or getting stitches." After some
delicate negotiations, they agree that the loser of the bet will have to kiss Kristine
Plimpton, known as The Blimp, in front of everyone on the first day of school.
The summer then becomes filled with Pat's attempts to have a good time in spite
of Neal's sometimes vicious attempts to get him damaged and the well-meaning
but annoying attempts of Pat's friends to keep him from getting hurt. It's also
intertwined with the boys' ogling of a sexy classmate who likes to sunbathe in her
bikini and Pat's alternating dread and guilt about either his or Neal's kiss with
Kristine (who consents to the kiss because she's had a crush on Pat). Pat begins to
have some misgivings about using Kristine as punishment, and he in fact indulges
in a bit of chivalry in losing the bet; he's rewarded for his sensitivity by having
Kristine blossom into a grade-school sexpot on the first day of school. Despite the
book's occasionally unpleasant relish of girls' having "curves in all the right places,"
"full, pouting lips," and clothing that "clung-to all the right places," the slapstick
of the rough and tumble rivalry (and its darker undertones) is entertaining, and
those who appreciate Wallace's pre-teen humor should enjoy it. DS
WALTER, MILDRED PITTS 
Mississippi Challenge. Bradbury, 1992 
206 p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-02-792301-0 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Because Walter's focus on the role that African-Americans have played in Missis-
sippi is sharp and unremitting, and because the subject itself is dramatic and mov-
ing, this becomes a history book that will make readers think carefully about the
democratic process as a whole. From the 1860s to the 1960s, Mississippi--of all
the southern states-was the scene of the cruelest economic, political, and physical
oppression of African-Americans, who had technically been freed from slavery but
were in fact maintained almost inescapably in servitude. Walter describes the
development of that situation, letting carefully footnoted facts speak for them-
selves without sensationalizing or overstating them. Her attention to detail may
bog down some readers, but the action is, sadly, nonstop and violent; the black
cast, though often anonymous, is just as often heroic. This is not easy to read and
was probably not easy to write, but it represents a stern and important synthesis.
Black-and-white photographs illustrate the text; sources, notes, a bibliography,
and an index are appended. BH
WESTALL, ROBERT The Call and Other Stories. Viking, 1993 120p
ISBN 0-670-82484-4 $13.00 
R* Gr. 7-12
This is how spooky stories should be: "It was as if she had moved out of her tall
frail body, into the bricks and mortar, the glass and wood, the very soil itself,
poisoning the intruding weeds." Subjects range here from a truant but orderly
schoolboy's discovery of a house in disrepair ("Woman and Home"), to a badger's-
or some of his friends'-revenge on a poacher ("The Badger"), to a young woman
puzzled not only by her prodigious young son, but also by her disappointment
with the things she had thought she wanted ("Warren, Sharon and Darren"). At-
mosphere is what Westall excels at. He takes loving and enjoyable time to set up a
situation, which makes the payoff less a scary punch line than a part of the whole
160 
* THE BULLETIN
creepy experience, and he varies point of view from story to story. The two best
stories, "The Red House Clock" and "The Call," are masterpieces of the genre,
with guilt, anger, and revenge overlaying them both; in the first the supernatural
influence may be simply the narrator's imagination, but the second is a classic
ghost story. This is a writerly collection, filled with British idiom, protagonists,
and references, but readers accustomed to transatlantic literary travel won't want
to miss the trip to a zone of English twilight. DS
ZACH, CHERYL 
Benny and the No-Good Teacher; illus. by Janet Wilson. 
Bradbury,
1992 
76 p
ISBN 0-02-793706-2 
$12.95 
R Gr. 3-4
In a sequel to Benny and the Crazy Contest, Benny is looking forward to fourth-
grade as taught by the popular Ms. Jackson; instead, he's shunted off to a new
teacher, Mrs. Rumpbill, who promises to be less than charismatic: "Tomorrow
we'll do some creative writing. Your assignment is to imagine that you are a veg-
etable." Much angst and pratfall humor later, Benny and Mrs. Rumpbill both
learn to lighten up. Quick, short, and peppered with snappy dialogue, this is an
undemanding easy read for boys who, like Benny, can't seem to sit still for too
long. RS
ZEMAN, 
LUDMILA, ad. 
Gilgamesh the King; ad. and illus. by Ludmila
Zeman. 
Tundra, 1992 
24 p
ISBN 0-88776-283-2 
$19.95 
R* 6-9 yrs
An engrossing Sumerian myth adapted from versions inscribed onto clay tablets
more than five thousand years ago, this recounts the struggle between Gilgamesh,
a demigod who rules his people cruelly, and Enkidu, who falls in love with the
singer, Shamhat, sent to lure him into combat. In an ancient twist on Beauty and
the Beast, Shamhat transforms Enkidu from his animal appearance into a human
one, whereupon Enkidu defeats Gilgamesh but then saves his enemy's life, trans-
forming him, in turn, into a friend with human feelings. The storytelling is smooth,
and the compositions, golden-hued and variously textured, are powerful in evok-
ing monumental faces and figures framed with motifs suggestive of cuneiform
writing and early Mesopotamian art motifs. This will fit well, with other picture
book presentations of mythology, into a primary-grades study of ancient cultures,
or simply into an imaginative discussion of brotherhood as an alternative to win-
ner-take-all competition. BH
JANUARY 1993 
* 
161
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1992
Wilbur won a blue ribbon at the county fair not for being the world's greatest pig,
but for being Some Pig! That's exactly the spirit in which we present to you this
list. Some Books! Here's a range of literature that has captivated a staff of profes-
sional reviewers enough to sustain both enthusiasm and argument. We think
these titles stand out, among many others published this year, as worthy of the
attention, the energy, and sometimes the struggle involved in a child's reading.
They're worth your time, as well, so be greedy: read up.
PICTURE BOOKS:
Alexander, 
Lloyd. 
The Fortune-Tellers; illus. 
by Trina Schart
Hyman. 
Dutton. 
(September)
-Gerson, Mary-Joan, ad. 
Why the Sky Is FarAway: A Nigerian Folktale; illus. by
Carla Golembe. 
Joy Street. 
(October)
,Grimm, Jakob Ludwig Karl. 
The Bremen Town Musicians; ad. and illus. by Janet
Stevens. 
Holiday House. 
(November)
,Hinton, 
Leanne, ad. 
Ishi's Tale of Lizard; illus. by Susan L.
Roth. 
Farrar. 
(November)
Lindenbaum, Pija. 
BoodilMy Dog; written and illus. by Pija Lindenbaum, retold
by Gabrielle Charbonnet. 
Holt. 
(December)
Martin, Jacqueline Briggs. 
The Finest Horse in Town; illus. by Susan
Gaber. 
HarperCollins. 
(July/August)
McCully, Emily Arnold. 
Mirette on the High Wire; written and illus. by Emily
Arnold McCully. 
Putnam. 
(October)
Meddaugh, Susan. 
Martha Speaks; written and illus. by Susan
Meddaugh. 
Houghton. 
(November)
Miller, Margaret. 
Where Does It Go?; written and illus. with photographs by
Margaret Miller. 
Greenwillow. 
(October)
-Olson, Arielle North. 
Noah's Cats and the Devil's Fire; illus. by Barry
Moser. 
Orchard. 
(March)
.San Souci, Robert D. 
Sukey and the Mermaid; illus. by Brian Pinkney. 
Four
Winds. 
(March)
-
Scieszka, Jon. 
The Stinky Cheese Man and Other Fairly Stupid Tales; illus. by
Lane Smith. 
Viking. 
(October)
Van Allsburg, Chris. 
The Widow's Broom; written and illus. by Chris Van
Allsburg. 
Houghton. 
(October)
162 
* THE BULLETIN
Wells, Rosemary. 
Voyages to the Bunny Planet; written and illus. by Rosemary
Wells. 
Dial. 
(December)
Winter, Jeanette. 
Klara's New World; written and illus. by Jeanette
Winter. 
Knopf. (September)
-- Young, 
Ed. 
Seven 
Blind Mice; written 
and 
illus. 
by 
Ed
Young. 
Philomel. 
(March)
- Zeman, Ludmila, ad. 
Gilgamesh the King; ad. and illus. by Ludmila
Zeman. 
Tundra. 
(January 1993)
FICTION:
Bauer, Joan. 
Squashed. Delacorte. 
(October)
Bawden, Nina. 
Humbug. Clarion. 
(November)
Berry, James. 
Ajeemah and His Son. 
Perlman/HarperCollins. 
(November)
Hall, Barbara. 
Fool's Hill. Bantam. 
(September)
Higyilmaz, Gaye. Against the Storm. Joy Street. 
(April)
Mahy, Margaret. 
Underrunners. Viking. 
(March)
McKay, Hilary. 
The Exiles. 
McElderry. 
(November)
Rylant, Cynthia. 
Missing May. Jackson/Orchard. 
(March)
Vail, Rachel. 
Do-Over. Jackson/Orchard. 
(December)
Walsh, Jill Paton. 
Grace. Farrar. 
(June)
Whelan, Gloria. 
Goodbye, Vietnam. Knopf. (October)
NON-FICTION:
- Bierhorst, John, ed. 
Lightning Inside You and Other Native American Riddles;
illus. by Louise Brierley. 
Morrow. 
(July/August)
Byars, Betsy. 
The Moon andI. Messner. 
(March)
Edwards, 
Michelle. 
Alef-Bet; 
written 
and 
illus. 
by 
Michelle
Edwards. 
Lothrop. 
(May)
Everett, Gwen. 
Li Sis and Uncle Willie: A Story Based on the Life and Paintings
of William H. Johnson; illus. by William H. Johnson and with
photographs. 
Rizzoli. 
(April)
Freedman, Russell. 
An Indian Winter; illus. by Karl Bodmer. 
Holiday
House. 
(June)
Jacobs, Francine. 
The Tainos: 
The People Who Welcomed Columbus; illus. by
Patrick Collins. 
Putnam. 
(May)
Kennedy, X. J. 
The Beasts ofBethlehem; illus. by Michael McCurdy. 
McElderry.
(December)
Krull, Kathleen, comp. 
Gonna Sing My Head Off; illus. by Allen
Garns. 
Knopf. (October)
Leitner, Isabella. 
The Big Lie: A True Story; by Isabella Leitner with Irving A.
Leitner; illus. by Judy Pedersen. 
Scholastic. 
(January 1993)
Opie, lona, ed. 
I Saw Esau: The Schoolchild's Pocket Book; ed. by lona and Peter
Opie; illus. by Maurice Sendak. 
Candlewick. 
(May)
Schwartz, Alvin, ed. 
And the Green Grass Grew All Around: Folk Poetry from
Everyone; illus. by Sue Truesdell. 
HarperCollins. 
(May)
Zindel, Paul. 
The Pigman andMe. Zolotow/HarperCollins. 
(December)
JANUARY 1993 
* 
163
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this new index, which
will appear in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-
CAPS refer to genres and appeals. In no way meant to be a cataloging aid, this
rather idiosyncratic index is instead intended to lead readers to those books re-
viewed that could fill a particular gap in a collection; to help teachers and librarians
find books that might be useful in various school or recreational settings; and to
help in those requests for a "love story" or a "scary story." In the case of subject
headings, the subhead "stories" refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fic-
tion," to those books intended for independent reading.
African-Americans: 
McKissack;
Walter
African-Americans-fiction: Powell;
Stolz
African-Americans-stories: 
Guy;
Smalls-Hector
Africa-folklore: Chocolate
Arctic regions-fiction: 
Houston;
Price
Art History: Neimark
Astronomy: Gibbons
Babies-fiction: Taylor
Basselopes-stories: Breathed
Berlin Wall-fiction: Lutzeier
Biographies: 
Drucker; Leitner;
McKissack; Neimark; Stine
Birds-stories: Holder
Boston-stories: Lent
Caribbean Islands-fiction: Powell
Caribbean Islands-songs: Burgie
Cartoon characters: Breathed
Circuses: Blumberg
Circuses-stories: Ehrlich
Civil rights: McKissack; Walter
Colonial life: Ruemmler
Crime and criminals: Rappaport
Dogs: Jones
Ecology: Barron; Powell
Elephants: Blumberg
Ethics and values: Hautzig; Lutzeier
EVERYDAY LIFE STORIES:
Greenwald; Robinson; Stolz;
Stowe; Wallace; Zach
FABLES: Aesop
FAIRYTALES AND FOLKTALES:
Asbjornsen; Belting; Chocolate;
Haley; Marshall, L.
Family reading: Smalls-Hector
FANTASY: 
Barron; Haseley;
Napoli; 
Paterson; 
Price;
Shusterman
Farm life-fiction: Cross
Fathers and sons-stories: Lauture
Food and eating-stories: Lent
Foxes-fiction: Marshall, J.
Friends-fiction: Robinson
Frogs-fiction: Napoli
FUNNY STORIES: 
Greenwald;
Marshall, J.; Napoli; Taylor
Gay rights: McCauslin
Grandparents-fiction: Stolz
Greece-folklore: Marshall, L.
Historical fiction: 
Conlon-
McKenna; 
Dillon; Koller;
Ruemmler
History, Ancient: Zeman
History, U. S.: Conlon-McKenna;
Koller; McKissack; Rappaport;
Ruemmler; Stine; Walter
Holocaust: Drucker; Leitner
Holocaust-fiction: Dillon
Homosexuality: McCauslin
Immigration-fiction: Conlon-
McKenna; Greenwald
Irish-Americans-fiction: Conlon-
McKenna
Jews: Drucker
Jews-fiction: Dillon; Hautzig
164 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Kidnapping-stories: Ehrlich
Law: Rappaport
Literature, American: Bedard
Literature, children's: Stine
LOVE STORIES: Doherty
Mexico: Neimark
Mice-stories: Aesop
Mothers and sons-stories: Smalls-
Hector
Music and musicians-fiction:
Levoy
Music: Burgie
Mythology: Belting; Zeman
Native Americans-fiction: Hous-
ton; Koller; Ruemmler
Native Americans-folklore: 
Belt-
ing
Nature study: Epple
New York City-fiction: Levoy
Norway-folklore: Asbjornsen
Owls: Epple
Pet care: Jones
Pioneer life: Stine
POETRY: Lauture
Poets-stories: Bedard
Pregnancy, teen-fiction: Doherty
Reading aloud: Napoli
Reading, beginning: Marshall, J.
Reading, easy: Greenwald; Leitner;
Robinson; Stolz; Wallace; Zach
Reading, reluctant: Leitner; Levoy;
McCauslin; Shusterman
Religious education: Hautzig
SCARY STORIES: Westall
Sex roles-fiction: Paterson
SHORT STORIES: Westall
Sisters-fiction: Powell
Social studies: Lutzeier; McCauslin
South America-folklore: Belting
Story hour: Aesop; Asbjornsen;
Bedard; Chocolate; Lent; Smalls-
Hector
Suicide-fiction: Grant
SURVIVAL STORIES: Houston
Time travel-fiction: Barron
United States-folklore: Haley
Vacations-fiction: Robinson
Wishes-fiction: Shusterman
Wishes-stories: Holder
Women's studies: McKissack; Saxby
World War II-stories: Houston
CORRECTIONS: 
J
Laurie Sale's Growing Up with Music, reviewed in December's Professional Con-
nections, is published by Avon Books.
The publisher's imprint for James Berry's Ajeemah and His Son, reviewed in the
November issue, should have been Perlman/HarperCollins. That publisher has
also informed us that their Messiah is in fact available in a gift set with two cassettes
(Christopher Hogwood conducting the Academy of Ancient Music). The ISBN
is 0-06-021148-2; the price is $35.00.
Naomi Shihab Nye's This Same Sky, reviewed in December, is published by Brad-
bury.
KAQHl
Ly'An open invitation to
Syoung mystery fans."*
"Children will be immediately captivated by the
clever clues. Jonas has worked the messages inventively
into the motif of each scene;... some hints are written
backwards, others upside down, and still others as a
rebus.... The book will have wide appeal for would-be
detectives, and it should also be an effective choice for
reluctant readers. A guaranteed-to-please selection."
-* School Library Journal (starred review)
Ages 4 up. 32 pp.
TR $14.00/0-688-09742-1 
Greenwillow Books
LE $13.93/0-688-09743-X 
A division ol William Morrow & Co. Inc
1350 Avenue ol the Americas. New York NY 10019
"j- 
Starred in 
Kirkus Reviews pointer
School Library Journal
"With the warmt
characteristic of his cl;
novel The Pigman, Zi
talks about ['the time I
a teenager' and] those
meaning-of-life questic
that trouble everyone-
especially teens.
Thoughtful, humorous
-ALA 
Booklist
"In this tragicomic men
Zindel describes one o
his own teen years [wf
among many other
events, he met his owi
pigman]. While he's n(
the first to turn teenag
angst into humor, he
is certainly among
the best. [Here, he]
provides many
examples of universal
experiences that will
make readers laugh
and cry." -SLJ
Photographs A Charlotte
Ages 12 up. $14.00' (02
Among Paul Zindel's Novels
THE PIGMAN
Ages 12 up. $14.00* (026827-1)
$13.89t (026828-X)
Outstanding Children's Books of
1968 (N.Y Times)
1940-1970 ALA Notable
Children's Books
1966-1988 ALA Best Books for
Young Adults
THE PIGMAN'S LEGACY
$13.89t (026854-9)
Outstanding Children's Books of
1980 (N.Y Times)
1980 ALA Best Books for Young
Adults
HarperCollins ISBN prefix: 0-06.
'Trade ed. tLibraryed.
Publisher's prices only and in no way reflect the prices
at which available from any other source.
i HarperCollinsChildren'Books
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
-.~ --- ·-- ~ ~--V--u,,
A hand-clapping, toe-tapping,
island-hopping celebration
"A vibrant and vigorous collection of 13 original songs
from the West Indies." 
-ALA Booklist
*"Even 
the art has rhythm in this splendid book."
-Publishers Weekly (starred review)
S"Lessac's brilliantly decorative primitive paintings...
sing with gloriously intense island colors."
-Kirkus Reviews (pointer)
"A valuable addition." 
-School Library Journal
Ages 6 up. 32 pp. TR $15.00/0-688-10779-6; LE $14.93/0-688-10780-X
T4n 
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
Tambourine Books (1 
T~b.Yne s~l~•".''3/~~·Or 1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
*
f
3
I
I 
= 
t 
s 
C:D 
.W
0' 
o=-- 
4---. 
(D ( 
C 
-D
Q d 
CD 
c
:2 
o -- 
D CD o
l 
0 ~ 
0I 
D 
CL
-Q 
, 
0 
57 
0 
cD CD 
a 
-- -
k 
o 
•- 
ýEo 
oC 
r D, 
< 
o
C' 
^ D 5- 
C) c 0
5D -,o 
ým 
aI- 
-
E^ 
^f 
ff .b 
§^. 
"
2______o 
-_?__ 
Z 
5- 
° 0
<- 
Q.12 
0W =3
8s " s^§o
L 
=m 
a 
< 
-)
3 
C=(D-
S 
CD
67 
C
c~
~ ~ox 
sl 
d
O'iC
~,~,,
=f:
H 
25 
cb
Im 
-r 
-~ 
~,
A new Faith Ringgold
is about to light up the sky!
In time for
BLACK HISTORY
MONTH
In Tar Beach, Faith Ringgold
combined spectacular art,
soaring imagination, and
traditional African-American
themes in one of the most
honored picture books of 1992.
Now, in her second book
for children, she again weaves
history and fantasy into an
equally magical celebration
of Harriet Tubman and the
Underground Railroad. Here
is a new star children will
reach for not only during
Black History Month, but
every month of every year.
Available now
Full color. Ages 4-9. $15.00 (0-517-58767-X).
GLB $15.99 (0-517-58768-8).
-Cou- 
fm 
DPbdl" 1ih 
1--
r 
wn 
u 
s 
ers, 
nc.
"Dr. Rex, star of We're Back!, provides an extensive tongue-in-
cheek guide to living with a dinosaur.... These dinos are
comical, endearing, and satisfyingly fierce." -Kirkus Reviews*
"Besides lots of useful information (diet, discipline, house-
breaking) the book also contains wonderful 40's style art with
such scenes as a dino and master going to the movies to see
Godzilla." -ALA 
Booklist (boxed review)
", i r:II 
j 
-
££ 
-r 
r .. 
-_ 
_ 
-
will draw guraws from appreciative
young readers." -The Bulletin 
*
Ages 7 up. 40 pp. TR $15.00/0-688-11337-0
LE $14.93/0-688-11338-9
Morrow Junior Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
__ _
Here is the ideal nonfiction companion to Hamilton's classic
folktale collection-- again illustrated by the two-time Caldecott-
winning Dillons and published in the same distinguished format
and design.
Many Thousand Gone and The People Could Fly, together,
encompass the black experience. As Americans lived it. As only
Ages 9-14. 8" x 10" 160 pages.
BLACK HISTOR
$16.00 (0-394-82873-9). GLB $16.99 (0-394-92873-3).
Virginia Hamilton award-winners-now available in paperback!
MOTHE 
PEOPLE 
COULD FLY 
ANTHONY BURNS
American Black Folktales 
The Defeat and Triumph
Illustrated by Leo and Diane Dillon 
of a Fugitive Sldve
All ages. Paper, $10.00 
Ages 10 up. Paper, $3.99
(0-679-84336-1). 
(0-679-83997-6). A Bor9oi Sprinter.
Alfred A. Knopf Y
*'A stellar blend of
story and illustration"*
A4 
, 'AH~l
FEATHERS AND TAILS
Animal Fables from Around the World
Retold by David Kherdian
Illustrated in full color by Nonny Hogrogian
*"Like the fables they illustrate, HogrogiE
pen-and-ink-and-watercolor drawings
spare, uncluttered, and engaging .... C
dren will flock to this volume."
-School Library Journal, starred revie
"An engrossing, handsomely desigr
anthology... Kherdian's stylish retellir
exhibit a satisfying variety, while Hogrogia
graceful illustrations enliven the collect
with a sense of play and movement."
-Publishers Wee
"There's at least one of Hogrogian's w
derfully appealing animals on most pag
she's also designed the clean, attractiv
balanced layout .... a nice addition to mi
cultural collections."-Kirkus Reviews
0-399-21876-9/$19.95 ($25.95 CAN)/AII age
© 1993 The Putnam & Grosset Group
hil- 
Also by David Kherdian
and Nonny Hogrogian
)W*
THE CAT'S
ied 
MIDSUMMER
ngs 
JAMBOREE
in's
ion 
0-399-22222-7/$14.95 ($19.50 CAN)
kly 
THE GREAT
FISHING CONTEST
on- 
0-399-22263-4/$14.95 ($19.50 CAN)
les;
'ely 
A SONG FOR
ulti-
UNCLE HARRY
0-399-21895-5/$14.95 ($19.50 CAN)
s
PHILOMEL BOOKS
Member of The Putnam & Grosset Group
200 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Bhat
Hearts
Bruce Brooks
especially the child's relationship with his emotionally fragile
mother and his hostile competition with his stepfather. These
are sophisticated stories... whether [when at seven, Asa and
his mother leave his father, or with Asa's] seventh-grader's
declaration of love. The sports story combines fast, exciting
action with an astonishino endino that nroves the nower
of the individual imagination." -i
"From an outstandingly perceptive
a moving portrait of a boy of
extraordinary intelligence and
sensitivity."-Kirkus Reviews
A Laura Geringer Book
Ages 10 up. $14.00* (021131-8); $13.89t
A.lthnr fi the 191Q5 No.w
The Moves Make the Man, Midnight Hour Encores, and
No Kidding, Bruce Brooks's most recent HarperCollins novel is
EVERYWHERE
1990 ALA Notable Children's Books
Ages 9 up. $13.00* (020728-0); $12.89t (020729-0)
Harper Trophy paper ed. $3.95* (440433-1)
For a free Bruce Brooks
biographical brochure write: 
e
rim 
1-laro 
ir C1 ii e 
peiCoffns ISBN pefix: 006. *Trade ed tUbrary ed
H- arperCollinsChildren'sBooks 
Pubshei's prices only and in no way relt 
the prices at
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022 
which available from any other source
"Gentle. evocative...warm emotions here alow."*
BUT NO CANDY
By Gloria Houston
Illustrated in full color by Lloyd Bloom
"In melodious prose, Houston
looks at WW II through the eyes of
Lee, an American girl living in the
country....Bloom's oils capture the
unfettered freedom of childhood
with an underlying thoughtful-
ness...the paintings' homey details
create a reassuring setting for
Houston's affecting narrative:'
-Publishers Weekly
"An innocent child's eyes are
opened to a wider world in this
quiet, sensitive story."--Booklist
PHILOMEL BOOKS
Member of
The Putnam & Grosset Group
200 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
"Houston recalls the period
through nicely plotted, childlike
events. Bloom's mannered, beauti-
fully constructed paintings are
pensive, even somber, yet the
warm emotions here glow from the
shadows.'-Kirkus Reviews*
0-399-22142-5/$14.95 ($19.50 CAN)
Ages 4 up
© 1993 The Putnam & Grosset Group
Also by Gloria Houston-
LITTLEJIM
Illustrated by Thomas B. Allen
An IRA Teachers' Choice
0-399-22220-0/$14.95 ($19.50 CAN)
Trnlae by Georg Webbe Daent
W~ith an inrd~to by Naom Leis
illustrated in full color by PJI. Lynh
4) 
"BRAVO! .., This wondrous tale is
brilliantly matched by ~Lynch's 
elegant
yet auccessible watercolors. . .. Ever
page a deight., bre~athtaking .... The
b~est edition now available."
Kirku Re~vies (Poiter)
* "A beautifully illustrated
tale, pleasing in design and layout
and dramatic in interpretation .
An edition wort~hy of the tale itself in its
beauty, mytry, and nairrative power."
-Boklist 
(Starrd)
"t1he definitive picture bok version o
this belovred NJorwe-
gian folktale. ...
Respected historian
and critic Naomi 
Lewis
provides a fascinatinig
backgond to the story."
-School Library Journal
$15.95 
AC~4.nd.,r 
LC 91-5tW727
4(li'~ 
L-%4OK24M49( 
5
"As a teenager in Kaposvar, Hungary, the author dreamed of studying litera-
ture at the Sorbonne. At age 19, her reality was forced labor in the notorious
camp of Auschwitz Her memoir of that experience is a testament to the
resilience of the human spirit, kept alive, as her own was, through humor
and creativity. Isaacson tells of evading selection by the feared Dr. Mengele
for transport with other young women to the Russian front; of her transfer to
Lichtenau; and, after the Allied liberation, meeting the American intelligence
officer who became her husband. Based on indelible recollections, a return
trip to Hungary and research into the Hungarian Holocaust, this is an
eloquent picture of a life before and after." - Pblirhers Wetk
Cloth, $1895; also in paper, $12.95
Order toll fre 800/5454703from
University of Illinois Press
54 E. Gregory Drive * Champaign, IL 61820
Univa 
y of lnois Pres 
SEOND CMss
54 East Gregory Drive 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAAIGN, IL
RETrRN POSTAGE GUA 
uANTu
Coe ly dthe New York Pblic Library
for its 1991 Books for the Tn Age List
Seed of Sarah
Memoirs of a Survivor
Second edition
Judith Magar Isaacson
This gripping and highly acclaimed
account of a young woman's experiences
in concentration camps includes a new
final chapter, "A Time to Forgive? detail-
ing the author's recent trips back to her
former forced labor camp in Germany.
