H
IL 
INOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
9 
7
.... 
**:
,I
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
October 1995
Vol. 49 No. 2
A LOOK INSIDE
43 
THE BIG PICTURE
When Plague Strikes: The Black Death, Smallpox, AIDS written by James
Cross Giblin and illustrated by David Frampton
44 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
53 
* You Want Women to Vote, Lizzie Stanton? written by Jean Fritz; illus-
trated by DyAnne DiSalvo-Ryan
61 
* Slot Machine by Chris Lynch
66 
* Bearing Witness: Stories of the Holocaust; comp. by Hazel Rochman and
Darlene Z. McCampbell
68 
* Math Curse written by Jon Scieszka; illustrated by Lane Smith
75 
* Cowboy Charlie: The Story of Charles M. Russell written and illustrated
by Jeanette Winter
77 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
78 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
^^0
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Editorial Assistant (HMW)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
Gerry Drive, Champaign, IL 61820
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1995 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by David Frampton, from When Plague Strikes: The Black Death, Smallpox, AIDS
©1995 and used by permission of HarperCollins.
OCTOBER 1995 
* 43
THE BIG PICTURE
When Plague Strikes: The Black Death, Smallpox,
AIDS
written by James Cross Giblin and illustrated by David Frampton
More often devoting himself to the intriguing particulars behind our mundane
experiences of eating (From Hand to Mouth, BCCB 12/87), drinking (Milk, 11/
86), and getting comfortable (Be Seated, BCCB 12/93), James Giblin has now
decided to shake things up. Books about disease-and those about AIDS espe-
cially-are supposed to be informative, helpful, and above all cautionary; Giblin
has the courage to be something else: interesting.
Those concerned with youth and their reading often remark upon young
people's interest in the morbid and ghoulish. We wring our hands over R. L.
Stine, Stephen King, Christopher Pike, Richie Cusick . .. just as every decade
brings its Forever (Peyton Place, Valley of the Dolls), each one also has its Fear
Street. (And please, let's not look upon these as particular phenomena of youth;
sex and death find their places on the adult bestseller lists with predictable regular-
ity.) We need to remember, though, that readers don't need trashy fiction for
cheap thrills. A dictionary will do, an anatomy book, a really bloodthirsty piece of
historical fiction (when it comes to exciting violence, I've always thought Katherine
Paterson's Rebels of the Heavenly Kingdom had it all over Cormier). No doubt
readers will come to When Plague Strikes with some gruesome expectations, and
while Giblin's quiet tone and respectful approach never pander to sensationalism,
he is clearly aware that the subject he is handling has inherently grisly appeal.
Giblin's three examples-bubonic plague, smallpox, and AIDS-work
cannily to bring readers from thrillseeking to sober consideration. The Black Death
as rendered here is vividly menacing, but distant enough to seem like a good hor-
ror story. Giblin, however, won't let readers rest easy: bubonic plague killed
thirty-eight people in 1938 in Los Angeles; an even more virulent outbreak oc-
curred in India in 1994. And while you might think the following chapters on
smallpox through the ages would be boring in comparison, Giblin does an elegant
job of braiding medical and cultural considerations, discussing, for example, the
inoculation vacations the eighteenth-century well-to-do would take with their
friends. His coverage of the disease comes right up to the smallpox-free present,
including the current controversy over destroying the sole remaining samples of
the virus in Atlanta and Moscow.
It's as much a spectrum of hope as history: bubonic plague had its most
dramatic moments centuries ago and can now be contained; in a triumph of medi-
cine, smallpox has been eradicated; AIDS is all around us and shows no end in
sight. Giblin makes us know the peculiar dread of infection, especially in a popu-
lace that has no idea why its members are dying. We see how fourteenth-century
44 
* THE BULLETIN
Jews were persecuted in the fear that they spread plague. We learn that an deliber-
ate attempt was made by British and American forces to spread smallpox among
the Indians. Giblin quotes from an officer's diary: "Out of our regard for [the
chiefs] we gave them two blankets and handkerchiefs out of the smallpox hospital.
I hope they will have the desired effect." Thus, we understand when Giblin later
explains why radical groups such as ACT-UP get so ferocious.
Historians are always writing as much about the their present as about
the past, and Giblin does this literally, making the chapters about AIDS the moral
center of this book. While Giblin covers all the controversies (although his treat-
ments of the Dr. Robert Gallo business and the debate over bathhouses are too
sketchy) and is not afraid to take sides (pro-Gallo, anti-bathhouse), his measured
tone resists polemic for quiet effect: "By the time President Reagan spoke [for the
first time] about AIDS on that May night in 1987, 36,058 Americans had been
diagnosed with the disease and 20, 849 had died." And while the book pays trib-
ute to AIDS victims such as Ryan White and Rock Hudson, it offers no sticky
sermons about clouds with silver linings or the opportunities disease presents for
being brave. There is no false hope: "Unfortunately, there were no indications in
the early months of 1995 that such a scientific breakthrough was likely anytime
soon. In fact, the latest reports from the research front were almost all discourag-
ing."
There was no small discussion in the Bulletin's office about putting an
image of two skeletons embracing a plague victim (taken from one of David
Frampton's fine woodcuts that introduce each section) on our "Halloween" cover.
But Giblin is reminding us of what Halloween used to remind us: whether we
attribute devastation to demons or microbes, this world gives us plenty of good
reason to be afraid, and that prayers, compassion, and research are all spells against
the dark. (Imprint information appears on p. 54.)
Roger Sutton, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADOFF, ARNOLD 
Slow Dance Heart Break Blues; illus. with photographs by Will-
iam Cotton. 
Lothrop, 1995 
80p
ISBN 0-688-10569-6 $14.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Adoff is insightful about the raw moments of adolescence: "You/ are a mediocre/
player sittirg on/ the bench of an intra-/ mural team during a losing/ season in
front of eripty gym bleachers."-"Real World News Flash," or in "Dear Self,"
"Your/ satellite dish/ ears/ can pick up Klingon/ quiz/ show/ reruns." He also
addresses dope dealers ("Equal Opportunity Employment"), working ("The Usual
Sunday Evening"), love ("When This Boy Loves"), love ("Your Sweet Words"),
and love ("There Is Only One Music"). Throughout, he maintains a spare accu-
racy and a casual rhythm that make these poems telling, recognizable, and readable
not just to kids living the more urban life hinted at in the verses but to teens
OCTOBER 1995 
* 45
generally. The book's approachability and hiply realistic cover make it a good
choice for reluctant readers of poetry, or just reluctant readers period. Intriguing
photo-collages add visual appeal without lowering the sophistication level. DS
ALICEA, GIL C. 
The Air Down Here: True Tales from a South Bronx Boyhood;
written by Gil C. Alicea with Carmine De Sena; illus. with photographs by Gil C.
Alicea. 
Chronicle, 1995 
134 p
ISBN 0-8118-1048-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-10
Collaborating with editor De Sena and a tape-recorder, fifteen-year-old Gil Alicea
talks frankly about his life in the drug-stricken South Bronx: "It would be hard to
change this drug thing. It's too much. It's everywhere. It's too many people."
While Gil has stayed away from drugs and gangs, he's got his own problems: with
fighting, with being in the wrong school, with his strict but loving father, and,
most pervasively poignant, with the death of his mother. (And on the lighter side,
with girls.) The book is composed of first-person fragments that read easily enough
but become too collagic in all; while Gil's voice is genuine and honest, some of the
entries tend toward thought-of-the-day homilies that get kind of dull. It's still an
engaging perspective and a good male counterpart to The Diary ofLatoya Hunter
(BCCB 12/92), also by a Bronx teen. RS
ARMSTRONG, JENNIFER 
Black-Eyed Susan; illus. by Emily Martindale. 
Crown,
1995 
[96p]
ISBN 0-517-70107-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Awed and oppressed by the vast prairie, Mama hasn't set foot outside the sod
house in months. Yet even as she shuffles around the room, vigilantly guarding
against the vermin that drop from the ceiling, Papa and ten-year-old Susie ride
into town to file a claim for additional property, committing the family to another
five years on the plain. Susie scours the Mercantile for some treat to cheer Mama,
but it will take the contagious optimism and confidence of a migrating Icelandic
family to jolt Mama from her brooding and cajole her to embrace the prairie with
her daughter's fresh enthusiasm. Even with the somber nature of much of the
book, the Little House crowd will find Susie a thoroughly engaging narrator-
bubbly, thoughtful, and precocious. Armstrong never wastes a word, allowing the
natural dialogue and Susie's incisive observations to disclose how Papa's experi-
ence in the fiery Battle of the Wilderness made him leery of trees, and how Mama's
privileged background and impulsive marriage left her ill-prepared for the rigors
and loneliness of life as a settler's wife. With a plot strongly reminiscent of Eve
Bunting's Dandelions, reviewed last month, this offers slightly older readers a look
at the pleasures and toll of early life on the prairie. Reviewed from an unillustrated
galley. EB
ARNOLD, 
TEDD 
Five Ugly Monsters; written and illus. by Tedd
Arnold. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic, 1995 
[30p]
ISBN 0-590-22226-0 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-5 yrs
Every preschooler knows about the monkeys jumping on the bed, but when it's
monsters jumping instead, the game gets a new twist. Five sets of benign monsters
begin jumping on a little boy's bed, but when "one fell off and bumped its head,"
46 
* THE BULLETIN
the boy calls the doctor-and we all know what he said: "No more monsters
jumping on the bed!" By the fifth monster, the doctor has ripped the phone out,
so the little boy solves his problem for himself, sending all of the beasts running out
the window. Children still skittish of Sendak's and Mayer's monsters will find
Arnold's just scary enough; with its thick pages and spare text, this book will help
toddlers make the leap from board books to picture books. Librarians (with a
soundproof storytime room) will have a riot letting the kids act this one out. SDL
BIAL, RAYMOND 
Portrait ofa Farm Family; written and illus. with photographs
by Raymond Bial. 
Houghton, 1995 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-395-69936-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Meet the Steidingers, Illinois dairy farmers who, despite competition from huge
agribusinesses and the vagaries of market prices and climate, manage to make their
livelihood on an entirely family-run farm. The unrelenting schedule of chores,
risks of large capital investment, and narrow margin of profit are clearly conveyed,
making this an unromanticized look at a contemporary small farm. The text,
however, at times wobbles uncertainly between describing a typical "5 to 5" work-
day and discussing the economic pressures of farming. Terms such as "turgid
udders," "silage" (defined pages after its introduction), and "artificial insemina-
tion" may leave a young audience wishing for a glossary, and some farming prac-
tices remain unexplained mysteries, such as why newborn calves are bottle-fed their
mother's milk. Color photographs, somewhat less dramatic than Bial's customary
offerings, are nonetheless well-chosen and crisply focused; the ruddy sunrise which
opens the essay contrasts effectively with the antiseptic milking room scenes which
follow. EB
BLOCK, FRANCESCA LIA 
Baby Be-Bop. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 1995 
[96p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024880-7 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024879-3 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
9 up
Dirk McDonald doesn't know it yet, but Francesca Block fans will know him as
the best friend of Weetzie Bat (BCCB 2/89). But that's still in the future; right
now Dirk is struggling with his feelings for other boys, made flesh in the person of
his best friend Pup Lambert. Block sweetly and sadly renders this picture of a first
crush; when Pup rejects Dirk ("'I love you, Dirk,' Pup said. 'But I can't handle
it'"), Dirk seeks refuge in a Mohawk haircut and the scary punk clubs of the Val-
ley, a scene Block depicts with the same wise clarity she turned on the brighter side
of LA street culture in Weetzie Bat. The second half of the book, after Dirk is
almost killed by fag-bashing skinheads, has some great moments but is not entirely
successfully integrated with the rest. As Dirk lies injured in his bed, he is visited by
the spirits of his great-grandmother Gazelle Sunday, his father Dirby and his mother
Just Silver; a genii gives him a vision of someone Dirk will meet in Weetzie Bat:
Duck. Coming as it does after the frank realism of the first half of the book, the
second seems overloaded with fantasy; while Dirk's forebears have beautiful stories
to tell, it's his that we're mostly interested in. Dirk's encounter with his ghostly
father does, however, afford one of the most simple and touching coming-out
scenes in young adult literature: "'But I'm gay,' Dirk said. 'Dad, I'm gay.' 'I know
you are, buddy,' Dirby said. And his lullaby eyes sang with love." RS
OCTOBER 1995 
* 47
BOLOTIN, NORMAN 
For Home and Country: A Civil War Scrapbook; by Norman
Bolotin 
and 
Angela 
Herb. 
Lodestar, 
1995 
98p 
illus. 
with
photographs 
(Young Readers' History of the Civil War)
ISBN 0-525-67495-0 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Unlike its narrowly focused series companions, this browsers' delight takes a broad,
topical view of military life from muster to demob, and examines civilian efforts to
cope with wartime privation. Apart from a glaring error naming Andrew Jackson
as Lincoln's successor, the overview is compiled with more care than its subtitle
might suggest; a pastiche of captioned period photos and engravings, clippings,
and memorabilia dominates each two-page spread, and a lively running commen-
tary develops themes ranging from "Outfitting the Troops" to "Photographing
the War." The authors cogently compare Union and Confederate experiences,
with particular attention to prison camps and news coverage. No index is sup-
plied, but the fou- page timeline is a useful reference; glossary, bibliography, and
comprehensive photo credits are included. EB
BRADBY, MARIE 
More than Anything Else; illus. by Chris K. Soentpiet. 
Jackson/
Orchard, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08764-6 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09464-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In this fictionalized account of young Booker T. Washington's consuming desire
to read, Bradby frequently crosses the line between inspiration and sentimentality,
attributing to the boy somewhat florid and adult verbiage. Sensing that literacy is
the key to personal prestige and a life beyond the saltworks, Booker gains confi-
dence when he hears a man of his own race read a newspaper aloud ("I have found
hope, and it is as brown as me"). His mother procures an alphabet book for him
but, as listeners will readily understand, learning to read without instruction is like
"trying to jump without legs." However, the newspaper man gets him started, and
Booker rejoices, "I have jumped into another world and I am saved." The boy's
efforts to read take place after his workday ends, and Soentpiet makes the most of
lantern, candle, and hearth-lit settings, casting deep shadows around the finely
individuated features of his characters. Nowhere does Bradby mention Booker's
full name, and it is left to the adult reader to explain to the audience the boy's
identity and historical significance. EB
BRETT, JAN 
Armadillo Rodeo; written and illus. by Jan Brett. 
Putnam,
1995 
[3 2 p]
ISBN 0-399-22803-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
Ma Armadillo keeps close watch over her four boys, knowing they "didn't see too
well, just like all armadillos," but her son Bo tends to wander. Curiously following
a lizard, he meets up with a friend, a "rip-roarin', rootin'-tootin', shiny red arma-
dillo!" which in fact is Harmony Jean's pair of brand new red leather boots. He
pursues his new "friend" to a rodeo, where he rides a bucking pony, tastes a jalapefio
pepper and dances a two-step, all the while trying to introduce himself. Brett's
previous works such as The Mitten (BCCB 12/88) maintained a quiet, wonder-
filled mood; this lively, energetic, and good-humored story, spiced up with a Lone-
Star-state vocabulary ("Harmony Jean, job done, lit off through the back forty to
the Curly H"), makes a real departure. As usual, Brett's illustrations are double-
48 
* THE BULLETIN
page spreads with borders; here the art is framed in rope and the story extended on
each side by a panel (following Ma Armadillo's search for her straying son) that
looks like stitched leather. The effect is clever but cluttered, working against the
wide-open feel of the story's setting, but children will be so engaged by the action
and details found inside the pictures that they won't care. SDL
BROWN, CRAIG 
Tractor; written and illus. by Craig Brown. 
Greenwillow,
1995 
24p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10500-9 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10499-1 
$15.00 
R 
4-6 yrs
Farm work is a long-drawn-out process and this short book takes on the tall task of
explaining it. A tractor tows each farm implement in its turn, and a handy double-
page spread at the end shows the machines in detail; it's not often that the distinc-
tions between a plow, disk, and harrow are so carefully laid out in such simple
language. Large print adds to the easy accessibility of the story, although the ardu-
ous work and sweat of each task is absent from both the text and the art. Dusty,
stippled scenes of pastels and pen-and-inks show the farmer grinning broadly as he
drives past robins catching worms in the freshly loosened soil. Brown has captured
the soft pleasures of the golden solitude of field work by painting the shadows of
sunset in the rolling Iowa hills, the ripening green corn plants, and the sole com-
panionship of a worthy farm dog. The huge lumbering machines of mechanized
farming practices are not pictured, and rural kids may wonder at the lack of pesti-
cides (this is an organic farm) or even irrigation, but country and city kids alike can
appreciate the machines that make the whole farming cycle work-from corn in
the field to corn-on-the-cob. HMW
BROWN, MARc 
Arthur Goes to School; written and illus. by Marc Brown. 
Random
House, 1995 
lOp
ISBN 0-679-86734-1 
$10.00 
R 
3-5 yrs
In this affable busy-box for preschoolers, Brown's familiar mouse, Arthur, intro-
duces numbers, letters, and opposites through a series of sturdy lift-the-flap double
spreads. At the same time he presents the adventure of going to school, so that the
numbers one through ten, for example, are demonstrated via show-and-tell exhi-
bitions ("Binky has 4 purple lollipops," "Prunella has 9 shiny red apples") and
opposites are shown with the help of familiar pre-school objets ("blocks go up"/
"blocks fall down," "big book"/"little book"). Arthur and Francine's alphabet
game, with a different flap for each letter, will probably prove the high point for
most readers. The paper is thick, the flap-hinges are tough, the concepts are ap-
propriately simple, and Arthur himself is enough of a toddler hero that the in-
tended audience should flip, flap, and point with great contentment. RS
CHU, DANIEL 
Going Home to Nicodemus: The Story ofan African American Fron-
tier Town and the Pioneers Who Settled It; by Daniel Chu and Bill Shaw. 
Messner,
1995 
[96p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-671-88723-8 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-671-88722-0 
$5.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
The tiny burg of Nicodemus, Kansas, is now a National Historical Landmark,
OCTOBER 1995 
* 
49
significant as a community dug out (literally) of the Great Plains in 1877 by Afri-
can-American pioneers. 
Its history in many ways mirrors that of hundreds of
prairie farm towns that burgeoned under the Homestead Act and waned as they
were bypassed by the railroads and scoured by the dust storms of the 1930s. Chu
and Shaw trace Nicodemus' development from its earliest settlers who spent their
first winter burrowed into the sod, and on into its brief period of prosperity and
eventual decline. Local history is an uncommon genre in children's literature, and
this is a highly readable example, delivered in a congenial narrative tone and rife
with connections to larger themes in American frontier history. Readers may,
however, be less attuned to the somewhat florid contemporary testimonials to
Nicodemus ("That love of the land and the open skies . . . compelled me to re-
turn"); sporadic black-and-white photos, ranging from family snapshots to indis-
tinct views of open prairie, lend little visual interest. A chronology, bibliography,
and index are included, making this a useful title for report writers seeking a fresh
angle on the West, as well as a model for nascent local historians. EB
CLEMENTS, ANDREW 
Who Owns the Cow?; illus. by Joan Landis. 
Clarion,
1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-70145-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Well, "the farmer owns the cow," of course, but this is a philosophical investiga-
tion rather than a market survey. There's a girl up the road who hears the cowbell
and imagines hugging the heifer, "so the girl owns the cow"; the milkman, who
delivers the cow's milk that the farmer sells to the dairy, depends on the cow's milk
to earn money for his family's supper, "so the milkman owns the cow"; so also do
the painter who sketches the cow, the garden nourished by cattle manure, the boy
who still remembers seeing the cow and who grew up to write this book, and those
who read the book about the cow. Literal-minded listeners of various ages might
not take immediately to the concept, which is more profitable when interpreted
artistically rather than economically, but it's a gently thoughtful approach and the
pastoral, cud-chewingly rhythmic text will make this a near-hypnotic readaloud.
The acrylic paintings are flat, stylized, and round-edged, deliberately old fash-
ioned and naive, but the palette is freshened by the recurrent sky blues and grass
greens and their sharp contrast with the ubiquitous Holstein's black-and-white
coloring. An offbeat book with an appealing style, this will puzzle some and be-
come the favorite of others. DS
COLE, JOANNA 
The Magic School Bus Inside a Hurricane; illus. by Bruce
Degen. 
Scholastic, 1995 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-590-44686-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
It's a credit to the freshness of this series that, after six field trips, we're still up for
seeing where Ms. Friz and her bus will take us next. Here, it's up, up, and away
into a hurricane from start to finish, from edge to eye, spinning off lots of more
general information about weather and physical science along the way. Plenty of
simple science experiments/demonstrations along with the sidebarred student re-
ports and posters add facts and pizazz; the ever-hapless Arnold falls in the ocean;
and on the fashion front, the forecast is for bees. RS
50 
* THE BULLETIN
COONEY, CAROLINE B. 
Both Sides of Time. 
Delacorte, 1995 
[2 08p]
ISBN 0-385-32174-0 
$10.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Cooney doesn't pretend to any fancy mechanics in this time-travel novel; it's basi-
cally fade out/fade in as Annie Lockwood, exploring a picturesque but decrepit
mansion, falls back one hundred years in time to when the mansion-and the
society that surrounded it-seems at its finest. Annie, who had thought herself "a
romantic in the wrong century" at first thinks she's in the time she deserves, and in
contrast to her prosaic boyfriend Sean, Hiram Stratton Jr., heir to the mansion, is
a gallant suitor who in turn is taken with Annie's free ways and scanty dress. In
time, however, Annie learns the truth about 1890s New York countryside society:
Strat must marry for money, even the richest women are chattel, and the culture
rests upon an oppressed class of immigrant workers. Cooney is trying to have it
both ways here, giving Annie a Harlequin romance but deconstructing her fantasy
at the same time; on top of the story is some hefty feminist theorizing ("None of
this was love and romance: it was power. I have the most power, [Annie] thought.
It makes me the father, the man in the story"). Girls looking for a good love story
won't be disappointed, but, like Annie, they may resent having their fantasies in-
terrupted by reality, and Cooney lays on the consciousness-raising fairly thickly.
The story is busy (there's also a murder, and Annie has family problems) but Cooney
writes suspensefully all the way to the melodramatic conclusion. RS
CUMMINGS, PAT, comp. 
Talking with Artists: Volume Two. 
Simon,
1995 
96p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-80310-9 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
In this companion to Talking with Artists (BCCB 4/92), thirteen more picture-
book illustrators answer Cummings' questions, which aim to get at what kids re-
ally want to know: "Where do you get your ideas from?" "Do you ever put people
you know in your pictures?" "What do you use to make your pictures?" The
answers (from, among others, Denise Fleming, Kevin Henkes, and Brian Pinkney)
are direct and unpatronizing, and a goodly assortment of photographs and repro-
ductions from each subject's childhood art and picture-book work gives the book
an inviting browsability. New to this volume is a "secret techniques" section,
where Julie Downing shows how to draw clothes on a clothesline so that they're
dancing in the wind and David Wisniewski tells how to layer paper for a bas-relief
effect. RS
DEEM, JAMES M. How to Make a Mummy Talk; illus. by True Kelley. 
Houghton,
1995 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-62427-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
With an enticing blend of detail, practicality, and humor, Deem, author of How to
Read Your Mother's Mind (BCCB 3/94), etc., unwraps the phenomenon of mum-
mies. Explaining the natural and manmade forces that create mummies and de-
scribing mummies in Egypt, South America, the U.S., and Europe, he debunks
the late-show myths that surround them while revealing a far more fascinating
story of culture and preservation. Lively and illuminating pencil sketches, maps,
diagrams, and boxed sidebars, which explain where particular mummies are dis-
played, keep the pages accessible and appealing. Deem grounds his writing in
OCTOBER 1995 
* 
51
serious research, including no notes but clearly citing his sources which are then
bibliographized in the back of the book. His breezy tone occasionally tips into a
flipness that undercuts his rationalist approach and general sensitivity, but most
readers won't mind. Fans of his previous books, as well as kids who enjoyed David
Getz' Frozen Man (BCCB 1/95) and Patricia Lauber's Tales Mummies Tell (BCCB
7/85), will be tickled by this trip to the tombs. DS
DUFFEY, BETSY 
Utterly Yours, Booker ones. 
Viking, 1995 
[128p]
ISBN 0-670-86007-7 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Bumped out of his bedroom by his beloved but ailing grandfather, Booker has
taken up residence under the dining room table, where he churns out science-
fiction adventure, such as his current epic, Space Cows, a la Daniel Pinkwater.
Writing also allows him to dispel his rage toward his teen sister, Libba ("A creature
so evil it could only be called ... Sistoid") and his discomforting impression that
his father no longer exists, that he has turned into his coffee cup, which is all that
Booker sees of him in the morning. But as his household gets overstressed and
disorganized, and his best friend volunteers him to write a speech defending the
school team, the Wolves, from having its name changed to that of the town's
prominent family, the Pickles, Booker's writing ability dries up. Duffey writes
honestly about a difficult situation many families face; Booker is an endearing
character who eventually sorts through his new life and makes it work. SDL
EGIELSKI, RICHARD 
Buz; written and illus. by Richard Egielski. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023567-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023566-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
The adventure begins as a boy swallows Buz the bug along with his cornflakes.
Buz pops up in the boy's eye, and a doctor says, "You caught a bug alright. I'm
going to give you some pills. They'll get rid of that bug." A pair of policemanlike
capsules pursues Buz through the boy's eye and ear; Buz narrowly escapes by float-
ing out the ear into bathwater, but returns home with a "germ" in his own eye, the
bug doctor promising him some pills of his own. Egielski's joke relies on children's
knowing that illnesses are sometimes referred to as "catching a bug"; even armed
with that information, children may find the story hard to follow (surprising for
such a short tale). Fortunately, Egielski's first time out as an author is bolstered by
his formidable skills as an illustrator. Buz, with his green face, stripy tail, expres-
sive wings, and long skinny black limbs makes a humorous hero, and though his
trip through the body is confusing, it's fun to figure out where he is going in the
brightly painted curls and curves of the sight and sound organs. The shiny cop-
capsules entertain as well, and once children get the hang of the humor, they may
enjoy remembering the adventure the next time they catch a bug. SDL
ERLBRUCH, WOLF 
Leonard; tr. from the German by Sabina Magyar, Susan Rich,
and Neal Porter; written and illus. by Wolf Erlbruch. 
Orchard, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08782-4 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09482-0 
$14.95 
R 4-7 yrs
What Babette Cole's Winni Allfours (BCCB 5/94) did for horses, this book does,
52 
* THE BULLETIN
in a more abstruse and continental way, for dogs: young Leonard is obsessed with
dogs and eventually becomes one. The complication is that Leonard is also afraid
of dogs ("Dogs had big, sharp teeth"), and when a fairy grants Leonard's wish by
converting him into a cur he's then afraid of little boys. The portrait of a child's
mixture of fascination and fear is authentic, the text has a humorous bite to it, and
kids will appreciate the irony of Leonard-the-dog's fear even if they don't quite
catch the underlying suggestion that scary things are more afraid of you than you
are of them. The illustrations, cut-outs of pastels on brown paper placed against
creamy backgrounds, match the genteel zaniness of the story with their new-wavily
misshapen people and happy beady-eyed dogs in a pristinely chaotic milieu. DS
ERNST, LISA CAMPBELL 
Little Red Riding Hood: A Newfangled Prairie Tale; writ-
ten and illus. by Lisa Campbell Ernst. 
Simon, 1995 
34 p
ISBN 0-689-80145-9 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
This is more a happy-go-lucky variant of that estimable tale than a spoof: here
LRRH (red sweatjacket with hood over her head) bikes off to Granny's to deliver
wheat berry muffins and lemonade. She encounters a muffin-smitten wolf, who
makes a cunning plan: "First I surprise that feeble old granny and steal her recipe.
Then I wait for the kid in the red jacket to show up with the treats. Soon I'll hold
the secret to those delectable muffins." Granny, however, isn't the pushover that
her predecessor was, and she leans down from her tractor and hoists the wolf up by
his suspenders as he whimpers in surprise at the size of her eyes, her ears, and her
hands ("All the better to crush you like a bug, if need be"). All ends happily: the
wolf rehabilitates for the love of muffins and helps Granny out in her new muffin
shop, and Little Red is their delivery girl. The story is neat and entertaining,
particularly in its inclusion of the capable grandmother, who may seem more real-
istic to youngsters than her hapless original. Ernst's eccentric animals are more
intriguing than her somewhat conventional-looking humans, but her pencil, ink,
and pastel illustrations have their usual quivery, broad-lined charm. A muffin
recipe is included at the end, so you could accompany a readaloud with plenty of
treats to wolf down. DS
FIEDLER, LISA 
Curtis Piperfield's Biggest Fan. 
Clarion, 1995 
[12 8 p]
ISBN 0-395-70733-1 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-8
Fiedler's first novel bucks all the trends for YA fiction-the heroine is pretty, popular,
witty, smart, and self-aware, suffering from little self-doubt and no major traumas
at all. C.C.'s thoughts are preoccupied with the same topics on the minds of many
fourteen-year-olds: the boy she has a crush on, and what it would be like to French
kiss him. She is keenly aware that her friend from kindergarten, Cluck, has always
loved her, but her heart belongs to Curtis Piperfield, "the most talented eighth-
grade guitar player in Miltondale and quite possibly the United States ofAmerica."
As she is sorting through her changing feelings towards Curtis, Cluck, and her new
boyfriend Patrick, C.C. discovers the outlet of writing poetry: "There is moonflesh
on my lips/ Night trickles down my chin/ I only wanted a taste." In fresh and
funny fashion, Fiedler examines the conflict between raging teen hormones and
the teachings of Roman Catholic schools, along with the awareness some teenagers
acquire that nuns, priests, and brothers were also once teenagers with their own
hormones and secular interests. If the Catholic school world Fiedler depicts seems
OCTOBER 1995 
* 53
a little closer to the past than the present, her depiction of the way teens feel about
school and each other is perfectly up-to-date. Tight focus, quick pacing and lively
narration will make this an easy sell. SDL
FLEISCHMAN, SID 
The 13th Floor: A Ghost Story; illus. by Peter Sis. 
Greenwillow,
1995 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-688-14216-8 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Fleischman tosses together themes of piracy, mistaken identity, ghosts, orphans,
witch hunting, and time travel to produce a bright little yarn that actually works
because of, rather than in spite of, its brazen contrivance. An answering machine
distress message from a dead ancestor lures Buddy and his grown sister Liz, a law-
yer, to the nonexistent thirteenth floor of an office building, which then deposits
Buddy aboard the Laughing Mermaid of privateer ancestor John Crackstone, and
Liz in 1692 Boston, where she must save her forebear Abigail Parsons from the
witch hunters' noose and thus ensure the continuation of the family line. Buddy
recounts their respective adventures with dramatic dash, following the improbable
twists and turns to a triumphant climax involving a dead pirate, Spanish class
notes, and a talking fish. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. EB
FLOURNOY, VALERIE 
Tanya's Reunion; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. 
Dial, 1995 
4 0p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1605-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1604-4 
$15.99 
R 
4-8 yrs
In this sequel to The Patchwork Quilt (BCCB 4/85), Grandma has recovered from
her illness and travels by bus with Tanya to the family homestead in Virginia to
help prepare for a family reunion. Tanya is ecstatic about the trip, but once she
arrives, nothing is as she expected. The house is shabby, Grandma preoccupied,
and the weather rainy; however, once Grandma sits down with Tanya and de-
scribes how she feels about the farm, Tanya perks up and pitches in. Grandma's
quilt makes an appearance, linking the two books, as family members contribute
various antiques and artifacts to the reunion. Pinkney keeps his focus on the
people, with the family members vibrant and emotional, while almost everything
else fades in the sketched backgrounds. This effect makes for an especially nice
contrast in the spread of ghostly images when Grandma is remembering the farm's
builders. Although it lacks the emotional power of the previous book, which dealt
with Grandma's serious illness, this is still a pleasant reunion for readers with Tanya
and Grandma. SDL
FRITZ, JEAN 
You Want Women to Vote, Lizzie Stanton?; illus. by DyAnne DiSalvo-
Ryan. 
Putnam, 1995 
88p
ISBN 0-399-22786-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Through a vigorous and sympathetic discussion of the life of nineteenth-century
women's-rights activist Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Fritz offers readers a glimpse of
the close friendships, uneasy alliances, and tacit rivalries that fueled the early suf-
fragist movement. Coverage is tightly focused on Stanton's suffrage activities,
with vignettes from her childhood and domestic life immediately related to the
development of her social principles and proselytizing work. Yet Fritz also tackles
the thorny contradictions within the woman who could spearhead the radical wing
of the women's movement while slavishly devoting herself to seven children and
54 
* 
THE BULLETIN
an absentee husband and courting her stern father's approval. Stanton's reliance
on the prickly, prodding friendship of Susan B. Anthony and her cool admiration
(tinged with jealousy) of Lucy Stone are details which make this textbook figure
more vulnerable and human. DiSalvo-Ryan's black-and-white illustrations lend
their subjects an unintimidating and idiosyncratic homeliness that makes them
accessible without caricaturing them. Steer those gloomy "I gotta do a biography
report" patrons to this title for a spirited and informative read. EB
GEISERT, BONNIE 
Haystack; written and illus. by Bonnie and Arthur
Geisert. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-69722-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-6 yrs
"In a time not so long ago, before machines made hay in convenient bundles,
haystacks stood high, long, and wide on the prairie." This pastoral remembrance
at the beginning of the book sets the tone for a detailed description of the haying
process from mowing, drying, and gathering to piling up the hay in immense loaves.
As the haystack grows higher, it provides both food and shelter for cattle in all
types of weather: "They stand close to the haystack through the winter." Later,
pigs and piglets too can find a place to rest under the haystack and feed to their
hearts' content. The cyclical nature of farm work is carefully laid out piece by
piece in a sequence of old-fashioned line-and-watercolor illustrations that certainly
give the feel of long-standing traditions on the long expanse of prairie. It's a slow
but restful journey through the heartland, and the seasonal changes are realistically
drawn vignettes of weighty snow drifts, thunderhead clouds, and meadowlarks
singing in the spring fields. Pair it with Craig Brown's Tractor, reviewed above, or
try this one as a spring read-aloud to show kids how farmers make hay while the
sun still shines. HMW
GIBLIN, JAMES CROSS 
When Plague Strikes: The Black Death, Smallpox, AIDS;
illus. by David Frampton. 
HarperCollins, 1995 
[240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025864-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025854-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
See this month's Big Picture, p. 43, for review.
GOODMAN, SUSAN E. 
Bats, Bugs, and Biodiversity: Adventures in the Amazonian
Rain Forest; illus. with photographs by Michael J. Doolittle. 
Atheneum,
1995 
48p
ISBN 0-689-31943-6 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
There are lots of good photoessays about the Amazon these days (see also Keister's
Fernando's Gift, BCCB 5/95); Goodman and Doolittle chronicle the experience of
a group of Michigan seventh- and eighth-graders who spent a year studying rain-
forest ecology and raising money, then went for a week to the Explorama eco-lodge
in the Peruvian Amazon. This is a fantasy realized, and while the book is fair and
thoughtful on the moral ambiguities of eco-tourism, it doesn't resist the adven-
ture. One of the more exotic moments occurs when the kids meet H. Morgan
Smith, an old savant of the jungle who teaches them about huge ants, for example,
whose bite can be used to suture a wound: "When you twist their bodies off, the
ants' mandibles remain, acting like stitches to keep the gash closed." Interpolated
OCTOBER 1995 
* 
55
spreads on such topics as "What the Rain Forest Means to Us" are a bit boring and
interruptive; appended material includes a glossary, reading list and addresses for.
information about rain forest workshops; a map would have been handy. RS
GRAY, LULI 
Falcon's Egg. 
Houghton, 1995 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-395-71128-2 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Falcon, a serious eleven-year-old who is keenly aware of her mom's shortcomings,
is the de facto parent in the household, and she adeptly maneuvers between caring
for her younger brother Toody and demonstrating her own self-sufficiency and
maturity. Then Egg, a mysterious egg, comes into her life and slowly pecks out a
place for magic, and for dragons. What makes the book unusual is that it progresses
naturally, and Falcon's life gradually unfolds within the context of Egg's develop-
ment into a fiery and unpredictable dragon. Falcon defies easy categorization-
her closest friends are adults ("The Friends of Egg" club), she is vehemently possessive
of Egg to the point of childish denial ("We can't let her go. She's mine. I found
her"), and her actions are often surprising. It's rare to find dragon fantasy for pre-
Pern readers, and Gray has succeeded in expertly capturing the wonderment of
dragons with the very real confusion of growing up: "Where would Egg go, and
would she always be alone? 'Egg, I mean,' she said aloud into the silent room."
HMW
GREGORY, KRISTIANA 
The Stowaway: A Tale of California Pirates. Scholastic,
1995 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-590-48822-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Readers lured by cover art featuring a soulfully handsome teen dangling with graceful
elan from the rope of a pirate frigate will likely be disappointed to discover that the
title hero, Carlito, is a homesick eleven-year-old whose adventures revolve mainly
around missing his father (killed by pirates), admiring the passing scenery, and
scrubbing the captain's privy. Carlito's fictional experience with Hippolyte de
Bouchard, a real-life privateer "whose brutality and violent temper terrified even
the roughest pirate," begins with the boy's ill-conceived attempt to burn the frig-
ate, proceeds through predictable encounters with shallowly drawn shipmates, and
concludes with a promised reunion with his horse, his mother, and a helping of
gazpacho. If Carlito is a tepid protagonist, villain Bouchard is even less exciting,
largely confining his legendary fits of rage to stomping, cursing (reported, not
quoted), and outbursts such as "Fools ... They all run scared from Hippolyte de
Bouchard, ha-ha." Notes and an epilogue enlarge on the historical aspects of the
tale; a glossary of nautical and Spanish terms included in the text and an extensive
bibliography are included. EB
HAVILL, 
JUANITA 
Jamaica's Blue Marker; illus. 
by Anne Sibley
O'Brien. 
Houghton, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-72036-2 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-6 yrs
Jamaica, whom we've met before in Jamaica and Brianna (BCCB 11/93), etc.,
learns another lesson about the puzzling ways people can behave. Classmate Russell,
who "never has anything he needs," borrows Jamaica's blue marker, and then uses
56 
* 
THE BULLETIN
it to scribble on her picture. When Jamaica hears he is moving, she is glad, but
when she realizes how much she would hate to move, she begins to understand the
cause of Russell's bad behavior. Havill here gives children insight into the phe-
nomenon of acting out, where a child's distress about one aspect of life comes out
in an unexpected way; Jamaica behaves realistically throughout, expressing her
anger, but finding a way to reconcile with Russell before he leaves. O'Brien paints
in warm, soft colors; her figures sometimes seem stiffly drawn but they glow with
life. SDL
HOBBS, VALERIE 
How Far Would You Have Gotten If I Hadn't Called You
Back? Jackson/Orchard, 1995 
[320p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08780-8 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09480-4 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Her family has left New Jersey to open a restaurant in small-town California, and
sixteen-year-old Bron, clearly not cast in the 1950s-California-girl mold, feels out
of place in the world of perfect Sandra Dee hair and dyed-to-match outfits. She
eventually finds a friend, starts hanging out with the hot-rodders and drag-racers,
and begins to race herself, which results in near-disaster when her opponent crashes
rather than lose to a girl. She's also involved with honorable, thoughtful Will, who
will be leaving for West Point when he finishes high school; her love for Will is
complicated by her attraction to J.C., the renowned king of cool and devil-may-
care hot-rodder. Hobbs is a smooth and insightful writer, excellent at atmosphere;
Bron's world, as her distance from classmates and family increases in a haze of
stolen cigarettes and nights at the Frostee, is well evoked. Unfortunately, the am-
bience often impedes the progress of the story, and Bron's narration tends to spell
out exhaustively what it could merely hint at; the plot is also overstuffed, including
as it does Bron's father's long-ago suicide attempt, her hidden musical gift, a friend's
abuse at the hands of her boyfriend, a dangerous summer fire that threatens to
burn the family restaurant, Bron's loss of her virginity, and Will's death. Bron's a
compelling heroine, however, reminiscent of some of Barbara Hall's young hero-
ines, and her outsider's story will strike some chords in readers. DS
HOFF, SYD 
Happy Birthday, Danny and the Dinosaur!; written and illus. by Syd
Hoff. HarperCollins, 1995 
(I Can Read Books) 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026438-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026437-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
4-7 yrs
Fans of Danny and the Dinosaur (BCCB 9/58), first published in 1958 and reis-
sued in a colorized version in 1993, may be disappointed with this return visit with
the pair. It's Danny's sixth birthday, and he's invited the dinosaur (who confesses
to being "one hundred million years and one day old") to his party. That's about
it-the dinosaur helps put up balloons, plays party games, eats lots of ice cream,
and generally enjoys himself. The two things kids love about dinosaurs-their age
and their size-aren't as creatively exploited here as they were in the first book,
and the dinosaur himself is much smaller: he used to be taller than houses, now he
fits into Danny's living room. (Note, too, that the sequel is much shorter: thirty-
two pages to Danny and the Dinosaurs sixty-four.) This is a desultory reunion;
OCTOBER 1995 
* 57
steer kids instead to better dinosaur stories, such as Carrick's Patrick's Dinosaurs,
or better Hoff, such as Captain Cat (BCCB 6/93). RS
HOPPER, NANCY J. 
What Happened in Mr. Fisher's Room. 
Dial, 1995 
[144p]
ISBN 0-8037-1841-1 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Poor Mr. Fisher tries to teach eighth-grade science but he's an incompetent disci-
plinarian, so the class has run wild. Lanie, the narrator, would like to keep her
grade at C level or above and is mildly irritated, but her friend Jill is a straight-A
princess panicked at the idea that Mr. Fisher's problems could result in damage to
her record. Soon malicious mischief starts to occur in Mr. Fisher's room (his
plants are killed, his tropical fishtank sabotaged, and finally his grade-book sto-
len), and Lanie's discovery that Jill is behind the trouble forces her to make some
difficult decisions. Hopper treated this same group of kids in I Was a Fifth-Grade
Zebra (BCCB 4/93); they're older now but still authentically drawn in their struggles
with friendship, scholarship, and courtship (Lanie finally decides that Greg, goofy
though he sometimes is, is worthy of her attention). The classroom dynamics here
are particularly apt: Lanie blames Mr. Fisher for more than she should, but he isn 't
a good teacher (although he's a nice man). Kids who appreciate a solid school saga
will enjoy Lanie's story. DS
HUGHES, MONICA 
The Golden Aquarians. Simon, 1995 
[192p]
ISBN 0-671-50543-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
The planet Aqua is the "biggest, most beautiful 'aggie' in the galaxy." Its blue-
green surface is mostly water, and Colonel Angus Elliot has proudly taken charge
of terraforming it into an industrial site. Thirteen-year-old Walt Elliott joins his
father on his godlike mission to transform a hostile world into an exploitable re-
source. Walt and the Colonel are painfully estranged after years of living apart,
and when Walt discovers that intelligent, telepathic, amphibianlike creatures in-
habit Aqua, he comes to blows with his father. The tension keeps the pages turn-
ing; Walt's beleaguered attempts to connect with his father are rebuffed by the
Colonel's harsh, grief-bitten attitude (Walt's mother died on a non-terraformed
planet), and Walt gets beaten up after school everyday because he's the Colonel's
son. Walt and his friend Solveig are able to communicate with the Aquarians who
are unconvincingly calm about the destruction of their home; they even warn the
humans about an upcoming planetary disaster. Monica Hughes, author of Invita-
tion to the Game (BCCB 10/91), uses her considerable skill in creating believable
science fiction to fashion this dripping, distracting atmosphere of exploration, funky
aliens, and family antagonism. The ending is too good to be true (conveniently
resolved with the Colonel's amnesia), but it's like a good Hollywood movie, and
kids immersed in Aqua will be having too much fun to notice. HMW
HUGHES, TED 
The Iron Woman; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Dial, 1995 
[112p]
ISBN 0-8037-1796-2 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Thirty years after The Iron Man (known in the U.S. as The Iron Giant, revised ed.
BCCB 6/88), Ted Hughes offers the story of the metallic gargantua's female coun-
terpart. The Iron Woman awakens because of the havoc the local waste-disposal
58 
* 
THE BULLETIN
plant is wreaking on the environment, and she enlists the help of Lucy, whose
father works at the plant. The Iron Man and his human friend, Hogarth, and Iron
Man's slave Space-Bat-Angel-Dragon also get into the act, and after all the resi-
dents are cursed with the ability to hear the screams of their dying ecosystem and
the plant workers are turned into a variety of river and sea creatures, sense prevails
and the plant is closed. Hughes excels at imagery: the Brobdingnagian Iron Woman
looms from the marsh like some post-industrial bog person, and her tender but
enigmatic relationship with Lucy gives the book resonance. The plot is often
arbitrary, however, giving the story a distinct resemblance to Japanese monster
movies, and the social criticism is unsubtle and poorly grounded (it's a long time
before we hear what the waste-management plant actually does). The story doesn't
have the drive and edge with which someone like Dahl might have written it, but
it's atmospheric and intriguing. Periodic engravings, usually portraits, by Barry
Moser add to the dark somberness of the tale. DS
HUNTER, SARA HOAGLAND 
Miss Piggy's Night Out; illus. by Tom Leigh. 
Viking,
1995 
[32p] 
(Viking Easy-to-Read)
Viking trade ed. ISBN 0-670-86107-3 
$11.99
Puffin paper ed. ISBN 0-14-037556-2 
$3.50
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-2
MUNTEAN, MICHAELA 
Kermit and Robin's Scary Story; illus. by Tom Leigh. Vi-
king, 1995 
[32p] 
(Viking Easy-to-Read)
Viking trade ed. ISBN 0-670-86106-5 $11.99
Puffin paper ed. ISBN 0-14-037555-4 
$3.50
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 1-2
It's not easy being tactful, and Kermit does everything within his power to warn
dining companion Miss Piggy that she's got a big blob of whipped cream on her
porcine nose. Alas, she is too wrapped up in the pursuit of stardom to notice until
it's too late: "'I want to be in your next movie,' she said. Mr. Big laughed. He
handed Miss Piggy a mirror." Kids understand this type of pie-in-the-face embar-
rassment, and the beloved Muppet characters put a secure and comfortable face on
the everyday worries of smaller children who can also laugh at the excessive silli-
ness of it all. In Kermit and Robin's Scary Story, a bedtime ritual becomes a lesson
in the importance of family reading, with some very basic warm fuzzies (that are a
little too fuzzy). The story-within-a-story device might be harder to follow than
the Miss Piggy tale, but there's enough Sesame-Street-styled humor that kids can
easily grasp: "He peeked out from the tree and looked at the ghost. It was big and
white and scary. It was also covered with little blue flowers." Readers familiar
with Kermit and friends will like the bright playfulness of the line-and-watercolor
art, and both the text and the pictures are big, inviting, and simply A-OK. HMW
HURWIN, DAVIDA WILLS 
A Time for Dancing. Little, 1995 
[27 2 p]
ISBN 0-316-38351-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Juliana-Julie-is dark and serious, close to her family and recently dumped by
her beloved boyfriend Jack; Samantha-Sam-is blonde and outrageous, playing
the romantic field and angered by her own family's dissolution. It's the summer
before their senior year, and the two girls, longtime best friends, take turns narrat-
ing the events that unfold when Julie discovers that she has cancer. Like those
OCTOBER 1995 
* 
59
stalwarts Love Story and A Separate Peace, this tells of two people who love and
depend upon each other facing the fact that one of them is dying; like those two
books, it has a generous share of soap-opera sheen that makes it more, rather than
less, readable. That doesn't mean it prettifies Julie's illness: her physical debility,
anger, and depression aren't skirted. But there's not a dramatic possibility left
untapped here, and readers who relish a classic four-hankie weeper will tearfully
revel in Sam and Julie's brave but doomed friendship. DS
HURWITZ, JOHANNA 
Elisa in the Middle; illus. by Lillian Hoban. 
Morrow,
1995 
86p
ISBN 0-688-14050-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Elisa, now five, is not the baby of the Michaels family anymore, and she relishes
her new status as big sister to Marshall. But her big brother Russell is as hard to
please as ever: he's not at all appreciative when she tries to help him "ketchup" on
his homework after an illness, or when she gives his fish a bubble bath. Another six
vignettes continue the story of this family that readers have grown to know in a
series of books beginning with Rip-Roaring Russell (BCCB 1/84). The humor now
seems forced and a little gimmicky, and there are no memorable incidents such as
the time Russell was forgotten in the bathtub. Sadly, Russell himself retains all of
his big-brotherly superiority and none of his charm (not unrealistic for his age, but
disappointing to his fans), though Elisa is endearingly earnest and always optimis-
tic. Not the strongest entry in the series, this is still a good choice for reading aloud
to new readers and for students ready for easy chapter books, and many readers
will be pleased at the closing hint of a sequel. SDL
KEEHN, SALLY M. 
Moon of Two Dark Horses. Putnam, 1995 
[218p]
ISBN 0-399-22783-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
The ghost of Coshmoo, a Delaware adolescent killed in Revolutionary War hos-
tilities, relates how he and his closest friend Daniel, a white settler's son, unsuc-
cessfully sought a magical black locust tree mentioned in a trader's tale, which has
the power to "put an end to the fighting that plagues your valley." Longstanding
prejudices of family members on both sides conspire with economic pressures on
the Delaware to abandon their neutrality, dooming the boys' friendship and ulti-
mately claiming Coshmoo's life. The narrative voice hauntingly foreshadows the
story's inevitable outcome, and the Delawares' precarious relationship with both
whites and politically committed Indian neighbors is convincingly drawn. How-
ever, the plot is encumbered with a host of visions, omens, manitous, legends,
symbols, and dreams that break the pace of ineluctable tragedy. While the main
characters are fictitious, Keehn notes that her tale was inspired by a Delaware
legend and appends a bibliography of sources for the story. EB
KOLLER, JACKIE FRENCH 
A Place to Call Home. Atheneum, 1995 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-80024-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 6-9
In a breathless, present-progressive narration, middle-schooler Anna recounts her
efforts to care for her younger half-siblings after they are abandoned by their mother.
When she discovers her mother's suicide, Anna realizes the family will soon face
separation in the state child-care system and she hides out with the youngsters in
60 
* THE BULLETIN
an empty cabin. Reality smashes that pipe dream and the three children are sent to
a money-grubbing foster family, but Anna soon takes off to find her father. In
Mississippi the list of miseries grows longer: Anna's black father had been mur-
dered years ago by her white grandfather. Back North again, Anna learns that a
kind couple will adopt her adorable white siblings, but they are reluctant to take
on a bi-racial adolescent. Then with startling abruptness, a loving home opens for
Anna, the children facilely reconcile to their separation, and the reader heaves a
contented sigh. The mawkish, movie-of-the-week plot is somewhat salvaged by
the sharp depiction of Anna's desperate energy and her very realistic temptation to
reprise her mother's drinking and abuse when the going gets roughest. Save this
one for hardcore problem-novel enthusiasts. EB
LEHNE, JUDITH LOGAN 
Coyote Girl. Simon, 1995 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-80287-0 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
When Billie's mother dies she's left only with her indifferent and uncaring stepfa-
ther, until finally she can stand it no longer and runs away. On her way to find her
great-aunt in Wisconsin, she finds an injured coyote pup, whom she cares for and
with whom she feels a kinship. When she discovers her great-aunt long ago moved
away, she sets up a home in an old root cellar with the pup, whom she calls Omen,
until fate, in the form of a kind local woman, intervenes. The writing here never
raises the story above its contrivances, cliches, and shallow characterization, and
Billie's eloquent notes in her diary sound unbelievably adult, especially when con-
trasted with her everyday speech. Stories of kids on their own have an eternal
fascination, however, and Billie's companionship with Omen adds an appealing
animal friendship to the plot. Lehne avoids sentimentalizing Omen and offers a
bibliography for her coyote information at the back of the book. Slake's Limbo it's
not, but undemanding readers who appreciate tales of kids eking out their own
living will enjoy Billie's odyssey. DS
LEVINE, ELLEN 
The Tree That Would Not Die; illus. by Ted Rand. 
Scholastic,
1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-43724-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Local history is placed within the larger arena of western settlement, technological
development, and ecological change in this sweeping saga of Austin's "Treaty Oak"
tree. Told from the tree's perspective, the text begins with the time when "the
buffalo ran, their hoofs pounded the earth and kicked up dust for miles around,"
moves forward to an age where "First People gathered my acorns and leaves, and
made sweet teas from them," and continues to accumulate a wide breadth of his-
torical events as the tree itself grows and ages. Illustrations show watercolor insets
of the Treaty Oak from sapling through old age (it is now over 400 years old)
slowly encroaching over wide spreads depicting Spanish colonists, pioneers, cattle
drives, and modern-day sightseers. The text is long and awkward in its attempts to
personify the tree's point of view, and the pictures' scale is compromised at points,
but the historical scope is appealing in its progression through time in the same
physical space. Citizens' attempts to save the blighted tree (it was poisoned in
1989) may inspire a unit on conservation and local action. HMW
OCTOBER 1995 
* 61
LINCOLN, MARGARETTE 
The Pirate's Handbook. Cobblehill, 1995 
29p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-525-65209-4 
$12.99 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Graduates of Colin McNaughton's Captain Abdul's Pirate School (BCCB 12/94)
can pick up some practical postgraduate tips here. Lincoln's handbook details
some of the finer points of the trade, drawing from historical accounts of piracy
and supplying useful advice in the form of sartorial hints for "power dressing in
East and West Africa," a self-quiz to check for scurvy, and a recipe for sea biscuits
(maggots and mold not included). The tone is light, the pace is breezy, and the
information is brief but fascinating, covering the exploits of male and female pi-
rates whose theaters of operation spanned three oceans. Illustrations abound; many
are of historical interest and are credited on the copyright page. EB
LONDON, JONATHAN 
Where's Home? Viking, 1995 
[96 p]
ISBN 0-670-86028-X 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Since Aaron's mom left and his dad lost his business and the house, there's nothing
for them in Detroit, so Aaron and his father are headed west. Aaron, fourteen,
dreams of seeing the whales, but the reality is sterner as he and his father camp out
with the other homeless in San Francisco, spend a month in a family shelter there,
live for a time on the beach, and finally end up moving from campsite to campsite
in a rusty old van. A forest fire brings life-threatening danger but eventually results
in work for Aaron's dad. London, author of picture books such as Like Butter on
Pancakes (BCCB 2/95), writes smoothly, but his highly metaphoric and distanced
style is never convincing as the narration of a fourteen-year-old and the deus ex
machina of the forest fire is not quite believable. The book is more successful at its
blend of hope and despair, and it offers an appealing (if tantalizingly brief) ro-
mance for Aaron in the form of Maria, a young street dancer. There's more art-
istry than emotional impact here, but it's a thoughtful portrayal of a father and son
facing hard times together. DS
LYNCH, CHRIS 
Slot Machine. HarperCollins, 1995 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023585-3 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023584-5 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-9
The Christian Brothers Academy brochure promises "a leg up, a jump start" on
freshman year for the young men of the incoming class, but this summer camp's
hidden agenda is to scout new sports talent and to give them a rigorous workout
before summer training legally opens. Affable Mikie slips smoothly into his bas-
ketball slot, too-cool Frank duffs his way across the golf course under the wing of
even cooler seniors, but overweight Elvin (promptly injured at football and washed
out at baseball) takes a humiliating "free fall down through the slots here, to a
bottom that goes I don't know where because I'm afraid to look down." Lynch
eschews the predictable camp story outcomes: the klutzy hero does not make the
wrestling slot he gives his all for; Frank does find an abusive and shameful hazing to
be a fair price for becoming the frosh king; there are decent Brothers willing to
foment a little underground anarchy against the system. Junior-high readers who
eye secondary education looming grotesquely on their horizon will lap up the raun-
62 
* THE BULLETIN
chy camp antics, Elvin's sardonic reports to Mom, and his self-deprecating narra-
tion that thinly masks, if not a winner, at least a survivor. EB
McCuLLY, EMILY ARNOLD 
The Pirate Queen; written and illus. by Emily Arnold
McCully. 
Putnam, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22657-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Despite the similarity in titles, McCully's work differs entirely in subject and ap-
proach from Jane Yolen's recent book The Pirate Queens (BCCB 4/95). McCully's
attention to historical fiction (as shown in Mirette on the High Wire, 10/92, and
Little Kit, 2/95) turns now to fictionalized history in this portrait of real female
pirate Grania O'Malley. Born to a powerful seafaring and pirating family, Grania
shows her strong will and ferocity from an early age, and by sixteen she has married
and taken charge of her husband's family fleet. Battles, imprisonment, the deaths
of two husbands and a son, and the theft of her riches by the British follow, until
the "old sea queen" petitions "another woman warrior," Elizabeth I, for justice.
Although the writing is somewhat desultory, the story's richness is vividly trans-
lated in McCully's paintings, which vary from the serenity of the Irish landscape
and quiet seas to the raging turbulence of a wild ocean and swirling battle scenes:
one particularly noteworthy pairing shows an angelic Grania nursing her newborn
son below deck and then coming up to fight Turkish pirates with great fierceness.
McCully masterfully ages Grania from childhood to maturity, and if she has cho-
sen a historic figure who is the modern day equivalent of a mob kingpin, Grania
O'Malley certainly is a gripping one. SDL
MCKAY, HILRY 
Dog Friday. McElderry, 1995 
[96 p]
ISBN 0-689-80383-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 4-7
Ten-year-old Robin leads a rather quiet life until the Robinsons move in next
door. Twins Ant (Antoinette) and Perry (Peregrine) are Robin's age, Beany is
younger, and youngest of all is the brilliant and extremely peculiar Sun Dance.
The Robinsons are mad and invigorating, enlivening Robin's life and his mother's
bed-and-breakfast business; Robin also finds that their benign old dog and their
encouragement when he finds a half-starved stray pup on the beach are helping
him overcome his phobia of dogs. McKay, author of The Exiles (BCCB 11/92)
and The Exiles at Home (1/95), takes what could have been a bland middle-grades
story and charges it with deranged electricity: the twins' running project is a would-
be skeleton known as Chop Bone Man; Beany, grilling guests on their towel-steal-
ing propensities, mans the B&B as hostess when Robin's mother is out of town;
and Sun Dance holds the local bully captive on a cliff edge to ensure that Robin
keeps his found dog. It's not surprising that Robin finds friendly ground with the
imprisoned bully, that he gets his dog, and that his mother's business has been
substantially improved by the interference of the Robinson children, but the book
is never less than witty, and the author's refreshing acceptance of her characters
(Sun Dance doesn't get any more normal at the end, and the bully seems to have
changed sides more than ways) adds a novel touch. Aside from her obvious British
literary relatives (E. Nesbit and Anne Fine), McKay also possesses the linguistic
fluidity and helpless humor of America's Betsy Byars. DS
OCTOBER 1995 
* 63
MEDDAUGH, SUSAN 
Hog-Eye; written and illus. by Susan Meddaugh. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 1995 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-395-74276-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A young piglet explains to her family why she didn't make it to school that morn-
ing, and boy, is her story a doozy. In her account, the school bus takes her to a
strange location and she tries to go home via the path through the forest, where-
upon she's bagged by a hungry wolf who wants pork soup for supper ("Pig in the
water,/ Water in the pot./ Soup in the wolf/ When the water gets hot!" sings the
slavering wolf). The clever piglet tricks the illiterate wolf by telling him the recipe
demands all kinds of dangerous things and finally curses him with the magical
itching power of Hog-eye-which is abetted by the amounts of poison ivy she has
made the wolf gather-until he finally releases her. This entertainingly unlikely
tale, reminiscent of Steig's The Amazing Bone, is accompanied by the commentary
of the piglet's family as they hear her spin her yarn; the action within the tale is
likewise punctuated with speech balloons as well as somewhat more formal text
which occasionally contrasts ironically with the action in the pictures. Meddaugh's
line-and-watercolor art has its usual roly-poly, slapdash charm, with the cheerful
spring colors playing against the compositional sense of barely controlled chaos.
This porcine princess (seen in the final picture regaling her bus-riding comrades
with the story) is right up there with the chatty canine Martha in Meddaugh's
gallery of humorous heroines notable for their silver tongues. DS
MORRIS, ANN 
Shoes Shoes Shoes. 
Lothrop, 1995 
[32p] 
illus. with photo-
graphs
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13667-2 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13666-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Weddings. 
Lothrop, 1995 
[32p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13273-1 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13272-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Morris gives a world-tour of shoes and weddings in two picture books illustrated
by various photographers. In rhyming text, she talks about shoes for all kinds of
activities: "There are school shoes and dancing shoes, walking shoes and riding
shoes, shoes for the ice, and shoes for the snow. Shoes keep your feet dry wherever
you go." Each book includes a map and a photograph key of the places visited,
along with a relevant caption; not every photo is in the key. Since footwear is
similar worldwide, and shoes make only a small impression in each picture, Shoes
Shoes Shoes is the less effective of the two books. Weddings works better; the
celebrations vary enormously in different cultures and religions and, in the photos,
take up the whole scene. Morris does not attempt to rhyme here, but to inform:
"It is the time when a man and a woman promise to spend the rest of their lives
together." This focuses on the fanciest of costumes and traditions, and the subject
is one potential ring-bearers and flower girls (and others) will want to examine.
SDL
MUNTEAN, MICHAELA 
Kermit and Robin's Scary Story.
See review under Hunter, p. 58
64 
* THE BULLETIN
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
GloriousAngels: A Celebration ofChildren. HarperCollins,
1995 
[40p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024823-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024822-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
4-6 yrs
In this companion to Brown Angels (BCCB 10/93), which paired antique photo-
graphs of African-American children with sentimental verse, children of all cul-
tures are celebrated, again with old photos and, unfortunately, with verse even
more sentimental than in the first book. There are three poems-"The Mother,"
"The Father," "The Village"-but they all kind of run together in a mush of smiles
and love and tenderness. With neither a rhyme scheme nor any metaphoric con-
sistency, the poems simply pile cliche upon cliche: "This tender vessel/ of blessed
innocence/ This lifter/ of my joyful heart/ This angel/ of my dreams come true."
As with Brown Angels, it's the photos that may gain kids' interest, old-fashioned,
dignified portraits of children from around the world (although it would have
been nice to know from exactly where). RS
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
The Bravest Thing. Dutton, 1995 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-525-45397-0 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
In her ten years, Laurel has had an array of pets ranging from newts to parakeets,
and while her care of them has been excellent, she has had more than her fair share
of pet tragedies. She's thrilled to acquire a rabbit at long last, and she adores Bun
Bun, but even Bun Bun proves to be a source of pain: Laurel carefully arranges to
have her bred, but then Bun Bun refuses to mother her babies and they all die.
Laurel rises to the occasion when the rabbit abandons her second litter, feeding
(with her family's help) the six babies with an eyedropper, and while most of the
babies eventually die, Laurel does triumphantly raise Blossom to adulthood. This
is one of the more straightforward books about fragile pets and the joys and sor-
rows of pet ownership; Napoli permits a certain amount of humor in the situation
(such as Laurel's boa constrictor who was killed by the mouse he was supposed to
eat) but is honest and understanding about the unpredictable fates of such ani-
mals. Laurel's interaction with her family and her best friend, Charlotte, gives
detail to the picture; subplots about Laurel's aunt's cancer and her own diagnosis
of scoliosis emphasize the carpe diem theme but don't overwhelm the main story.
Laurel is realistic and appealing in her devotion to her animal husbandry, and
readers will appreciate her success. DS
PAULSEN, GARY 
The Rifle. 
Harcourt, 1995 
[112p]
ISBN 0-15-292880-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Lovingly, almost obsessively crafted by a colonial gunsmith, the titular rifle sees
service in the Revolutionary War and then passes through a series of hands and
dusty attics until, some two hundred years later, it hangs decoratively over Harv
Kline's fireplace. On Christmas Eve a stray spark from the cheery hearth causes
the loaded rifle to discharge, sending a centuries-old ball of lead through the temple
of Richard Mesington, the teenager next door. Paulsen's tale is, at heart, an argu-
ment for gun restriction. Tim Harrow, the interim owner who cons Harv into
trading automotive services for the antique rifle, is effectively if unoriginally de-
OCTOBER 1995 
* 65
picted as a dishonest, beer-swilling, muddled-thinking NRA zealot, while victim
Richard is the archetypal American boy, the essence of innocence and promise.
But Paulsen overplays his hand, offering a protracted description of the weapon's
artistry and "sweetness" reverential enough to send a pacifist off to an antique-gun
dealer, and turning Richard's tragedy into a freak accident rather than the inevi-
table outcome of civilian gun ownership. If the novella misses its mark as a gun-
control polemic, however, it may serve YA readers as a provocative neo-Hellenic
examination of Fate, or as an intriguing lesson in chaos theory. EB
PILKEY, DAV 
The Hallo-Wiener; written and illus. by Dav Pilkey. 
Blue Sky/
Scholastic, 1995 [32p]
ISBN 0-590-41703-7 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
A little dachshund named-what else?-Oscar is constantly teased by the other
canines who call him "wiener dog," and Halloween only makes things worse when
Oscar's mother decides to dress him up as a hot dog. It's a dumb little joke, not
quite enough to stretch into a story, but it's more than enough to provide in Oscar
an object of both pity and empathy. When the dogs are threatened by a maraud-
ing "pumpkin-monster," Oscar, in true underdog fashion, gets the disguised cats
out of the bag and finally gains the respect of his friends. The harmless and not-
too-scary story is punctuated with some wit that may be more enjoyed by the adult
reader-aloud than by young listeners themselves, but the paintings are undeniably
pup-pleasing, placing cartooned canines in a mysterious Halloween atmosphere
reminiscent of the artist's The Moonglow Roll-a-Rama (BCCB 3/95) RS
PRATER, JOHN 
The Greatest Show on Earth; written and illus. by John
Prater. 
Candlewick, 1995 
[26 p]
ISBN 1-56402-563-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-6 yrs
Everyone in the circus is a spectacular performer, from Mom and Dad on the high
trapeze to "Grandma, who's so strong she can lift a trailer with one hand," to
Wellington the dog, with his amazing balancing act. The narrator, young Harry,
can't seem to master any of the tricks, however: "And this is me ... Oh, dear."
But when Wellington chases a mouse in the middle of the balancing act, Harry
learns a few tricks very quickly, and triumphantly finds his niche as a clown. Prater
makes the most of his circus setting, with large watercolor-and-pencil illustrations
capturing motion and personality (both human and dog) equally well. His style is
jaunty and loose, never cartoonish, as Harry droops with despair, stands stalwartly
in his attempts, and bursts with energy as he succeeds; the endpapers show the real
beginning and end of the story. A boy whose ego gets a big boost and a dog with
enough attitude to fill a big top will make this a storyhour hit. SDL
RASCHKA, CHRIS 
Can't Sleep; written and illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Jackson/Or-
chard, 1995 
32 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08779-4 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09479-0 
$14.95 
R* 
3-5 yrs
A quiet, incantatory text addresses the listener directly, promising that "when you
can't sleep/ the moon will keep// you safe. The moon/ will stay awake." The
moon watches over a dog family as big brother dog, mother dog, and father dog all
66 * THE BULLETIN
perform their ritual nighttime tasks and go to sleep as the lonely younger puppy
tosses and turns. Finally, however, puppy sleeps, and then in the morning, it's the
moon's turn to go to bed and "you/ may stay awake/ and keep her safe." The
simple text is paired with watercolors counterpointing dark sky blues with glowing
lunar and lamplit yellows; simple, stylized drawings offer cozily sleeping doggies
and a big friendly Cubist moon reminiscent of those on grandfather clocks. Par-
ticularly effective is the pair of wordless double spreads of deepest night just before
dawn, which slow the pace like a music-box lullaby winding down. This captures
both the magic and the uneasy mystery of day becoming night becoming day
again; many youngsters will find its guardian-moon idea reassuring and will insist
on a reading becoming a regular part of the nighttime drama. DS
RATHMANN, PEGGY 
Officer Buckle and Gloria; written and illus. by Peggy
Rathmann. 
Putnam, 1995 
[33p]
ISBN 0-399-22616-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Officer Buckle is exceedingly knowledgeable about safety tips, and his school lec-
tures are well-meaning, informative, and dull, dull, dull. This changes when he
partners up with police-dog Gloria who, unbeknownst to Officer Buckle, manically
acts out the good officer's hints behind his back, leading to cheers, applause, and
great demand for further speech engagements. Buckle is temporarily chagrined
and breaks up the partnership when he discovers that the applause has been for
Gloria all along, but he and Gloria reunite after it's demonstrated how much they
need each other and how much schools need them both. This is at heart the old
story of the importance of friendship, but the safety tips-all quite genuine-and
the rest of the plot devices give it a fresh twist (Rathmann, author of Good Night,
Gorilla, BCCB 5/94, seems to specialize in revealing what animals do behind their
humans' backs). The illustrations are the lifeblood of this book, though; Rathmann's
scratchy-edged watercolors in a luminous palette depict the safety partners as an
unassuming pair within whom greatness lurks, and the pictures reveal any number
of preventable accidents waiting to happen at every school (check out the sinister
banana pudding). Real lecturers won't, alas, measure up to this standard, but the
book will make a useful antidote when they don't. DS
ROCHMAN, HAZEL, comp. 
Bearing Witness: Stories of the Holocaust; comp. by
Hazel Rochman and Darlene Z. McCampbell. 
Kroupa/Orchard, 1995 
135p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08788-3 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09488-X 
$15.95 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
The breadth of experiences and diversity of voices featured in this shrewdly com-
piled anthology virtually assure that no reader will escape untouched. For those
distanced from the graphic enormity of Primo Levi's excerpts from Survival in
Auschwitz or Cynthia Ozick's "The Shawl," there are the subtler tragedies of Ida
Fink's survivor in "Splinter," whose lover cannot listen to his guilty tale, or Hans
Richter's character Friedrich, whose budding romance is curtailed by a yellow "For
Jews Only" park bench that will ever be an issue between him and his gentile
sweetheart. For readers who would deny the Holocaust, there is U.S. infantryman
Delbert Cooper's letter to his wife describing the liberation of the Gunskirchen
camp, and the chilling testimony, taken from the documentary Shoah, ofa Treblinka
officer who insists, "Resettlement program. No one ever spoke of killing." With
its broad spectrum of genres represented (including comic-strip format in an ex-
OCTOBER 1995 
* 67
cerpt from Spiegelman's Maus II), this collection will prove a boon for
intergenerational programs (most selections are from adult works, but all are ac-
cessible to teens) and to teachers seeking challenging yet brief Holocaust materials,
suited to in-class reading. An extensive annotated bibliography, updated from a
1989 Booklist feature article, is appended. EB
RUBINSTEIN, GILLIAN 
Galax-Arena. Simon, 1995 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-689-80136-X 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Joella, Peter, and Liane are shanghaied to an alien planet, where they are placed in
a futuristic circus to entertain the whims of the Vexa, their humanoid captors who
view real humans as a subspecies. At least, that's what they think-in actuality,
the three children have been kidnapped along with other "lost" kids and sent to an
underground site on Earth where they are subjected to vicious psychological games
and physical abuse. As in Sleator's House ofStairs (BCCB 11/74), the crux of the
novel is the interrelationships of captured children who form a community based
upon brute, competitive survival. The tension is a slow, needling process that
effectively keeps readers on their toes until the climactic moment when the secret
is revealed. What begins as an intense and serious questioning of authority and
control, however, becomes a contrived story about human greed for immortality:
the children perform dangerous stunts to give the Vexa-actually disguised hu-
man old people-life-prolonging adrenaline thrills. It's never convincing, but
Joella's gritty perspective is one kids won't forget, and the Galax-Arena itself is
chilling in its constant air of death and remorselessness. HMW
RUEPP, KRISTA Midnight Rider; tr. by J. Alison James; illus. by Ulrike
Heyne. 
North-South, 1995 
6 lp
Library ed. ISBN 1-58858-495-1 
$13.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-58858-494-3 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Charlie loves horses, and she's particularly drawn to the beautiful stallion owned
by her crotchety next-door neighbor, Old Man Grimm. After befriending the
horse, she finally succumbs to temptation and takes him for a wild ride through
the surf one night. This rash act results in the creation of a local legend, the
ghostly Midnight Rider, and a friendship between Charlie and the softening Mr.
Grimm. The story is marred by predictability and by a distracting framework-
it's told retroactively, as a local warns of the Rider's appearance. The happy end-
ing is gratifying, however, and the poetic pleasure of the young girl's stolen ride
("Charlie and the horse seemed to be a part of the waves, the sand, and the sea,
alone on the beach") is seductive, particularly when coupled with Heyne's starlit
watercolors, similar to those of Alan Marks but possessing a sculpted specificity of
their own, which show an ethereally lovely horse and a stubborn and credible
young rider. Young horse-lovers who like a tinge of magic to their equine dreams
will appreciate Charlie's nighttime revel. DS
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Dog Heaven; written and illus. by Cynthia Rylant. 
Blue Sky/
Scholastic, 1995 
[34p]
ISBN 0-590-41701-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8yrs
Cynthia Rylant often walks a fine line between the lyrical and the sentimental;
68 
* THE BULLETIN
how you feel about her first self-illustrated picture book might depend on how you
feel about dogs and heaven. The Dog Heaven portrayed here is a paradise of fields
to run in, geese to bark at, children to play with, and dog biscuits, "biscuits and
biscuits as far as the eye can see." While not directly answerable to any religion in
particular, this is a heaven with God and His angels, who sometimes take the dogs
down to earth so they can check on former owners. The dogs who were strays in
life are rewarded with a heavenly house peopled by angels, "and each dog is petted
and reminded how good he is, all day long." Ending with a promise that heavenly
dogs wait for "old friends to show up," this-for those already spiritually inclined-
is a comforting if bittersweet meditation. The book is too long, but Rylant main-
tains a plain, conversational tone that resists gooeyness. Large-scale acrylic pictures
paint naive forms with sophisticated hues; suggestive rather than detailed, the paint-
ings allow viewers to imagine their own pets at play in the fields of the Lord. RS
SAUL, CAROL P. 
Someplace Else; illus. by Barry Root. 
Simon, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80273-0 
$15.00 
R 
4 -7 yrs
After living her entire life in "the white house by the apple orchard," snowy-haired
Mrs. Tillby is ready to try living someplace else. She sets off in her old green
pickup truck and visits each of her grown-up children: Les in the big city, Tess by
the seashore, and Jackson in the mountains. She loves each place, but none of
them seems like home and she still longs to go someplace else. A number of other
places don't seem right, either, but a shiny silver trailer solves her problem at the
end, giving her a way to be both home and someplace else at the same time. Each
scene glows enticingly in Root's gouache paintings, and Mrs. Tillby herself has an
erect and dignified carriage, with an open, friendly expression as she tries each new
experience. The text is quiet and thoughtful, the character appealing; it's refresh-
ing to see a picture book about an older person who's more than a grandparent.
The topic is one children will enjoy wondering about themselves, too: if I could
live anywhere, where would I go? SDL
SCIESZKA, JON 
Math Curse; illus. by Lane Smith. 
Viking, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-670-86194-4 
$16.99 
R* Gr. 3-6
Having satisfactorily warped the course of folklore in The Stinky Cheese Man (BCCB
10/92), Scieszka and Smith now take on a more challenging and humor-resistant
subject: math. The result is a story problem gone exponentially berserk. A
mopheaded Smithbeing (labeled a girl on the jacket flap but pretty androgynous)
finds her world incalculably altered when her math teacher tells her how math can
apply to everything in life: "Mrs. Fibonacci has obviously put a Math Curse on
me. Everything I look at or think about has become a math problem." Then
follows, as the narrator tries to make it through her day with the sea of numbers
pursuing her, a sequence of genuine and bizarre math problems ("Estimate how
many M&Ms it would take to measure the length of the Mississippi River"), clas-
sic logic puzzles (Mom and Dad do a duet version of "All Cretans are liars"), sly
allusions (Mrs. Fibonacci appropriately enough counts in a Fibonacci series), and
really smart dumb jokes (a long problem involving the number of kids getting on
and off the school bus finishes up with "True or False: What is the bus driver's
name?") culminating in a goofy pun (the narrator breaks out of her math prison by
using two halves of chalk to make a (w)hole). This isn't coating math with fun to
make it palatable, it's genuine math as genuine fun; kids who count Scieszka and
Smith as a favorite team will relish the book for its own sake, while teachers search-
OCTOBER 1995 
* 69
ing for a way to link the pleasures of game-playing with the skills of math might
use this to invigorate a class. Finishing touches include a panoply of math and
measures charts on the endpapers, a Venn diagram of author and illustrator cred-
its, and a binary-mode price; answers to the problems posed within the text are, I
swear to Euclid, printed upside-down on the book's back cover along with the
inverted bar code. DS
SELZNICK, BRIAN 
The Robot King; written and illus. by Brian Selznick. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 1995 
80p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024494-1 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024493-3 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Lucy and Ezra's mother is dead, and their father is away; Lucy spends her time
telling Ezra stories about her mother and making mechanical things, such as "a
rocket ship that spun and made sparks when you turned the key," out of bits and
pieces. Her greatest creation is the Robot King, who comes alive when Lucy em-
ploys her mother's old music box as his heart. The Robot King wishes to share his
gift, so he animates other inanimate objects wherever he goes (bits of his own
machinery do the trick), and the children follow him through the world Lucy
created in her story where the fairgrounds become a place of magic. This has the
flavor of a Victorian fairy tale, with electricity and technology forces of silent and
incalculable magic and the sensibility more significant than the plotting; the awk-
wardly generous figure of the Robot King is alluring and Selznick occasionally
displays a pretty wit in his prose. Ultimately, however, the aesthetic pleasures need
more narrative support than they receive: the children's experience seems like a
brief and random interlude, and it seems a bit stretched as a book, making better
material for a short story. The pencil illustrations keep to the story's tone of grave
gentleness but tend to be overly muted. Some young readers will wait in vain for
the physical humor to turn into slapstick, but kids of a more old-fashioned turn of
mind will appreciate this journey into a different kind of world. DS
SEWALL, MARCIA 
Thunder from the Clear Sky; written and illus. by Marcia
Sewall. 
Atheneum, 1995 
[56p]
ISBN 0-689-31775-1 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3 -5
In an entry closely related to her previous works People ofthe Breaking Day and The
Pilgrims ofPlimoth, Sewall takes an episode generally relegated to a few textbook
paragraphs, King Philip's War, and presents it as a compelling exercise in historical
investigation. In alternating "witness" voices, Wampanoags and Pilgrims air their
disparate views of the intrigues, alliances, and betrayals that fueled a year of bloody
attacks and reprisals among tribes and settlers. As hostilities erupt into open war-
fare and the pace of the opposing narratives accelerates, readers can observe how
threads of identical evidence are woven into different patterns according to the
speaker's sympathies. Visual and verbal images remain understated; scenes of bru-
tality, shocking in their flat, stylized naivete, accompany spare observations: "Our
lives hung in snares made by Englishmen and we could not escape"; "We have
found him [King Philip] to be like quicksand. We trust him not." Although this
title easily stands alone, readers familiar with Sewall's earlier works will better com-
prehend how European and Indian relations deteriorated in the few brief decades
following the initial encounter. EB
70 
* THE BULLETIN
SIERRA, JUDY 
The House that Drac Built; illus. by Will Hillenbrand. 
Gulliver/
Harcourt, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200015-1 
$14.00 
R 
6-8 yrs
This is, as the title would lead you to expect, a spooky Halloweenish version of the
old cumulative rhyme about Jack and his abode. Here Drac's house has a cat and
a bat, a werewolf, a monster, a mummy in a coffin, a zombie, and a fiend-all of
whom are set in tidy order when trick-or-treating children come to the door. The
rhyme is imaginative and rhythmic, although the end is somewhat anticlimactic.
Hillenbrand, however, is ever a master of twilight imagery, and his eerie old house,
elaborate mythical creatures, and panoply of costumed children are touched with
humor but are also genuinely creepy in a way that makes it truly satisfying when
the monsters are tamed and routed. Beneath the familiarity of yet another twist on
the traditional rhyme, this is a sly and entertaining look at the demon-defeating
that Halloween is really about. DS
SLEATOR, WILLIAM 
Dangerous Wishes. 
Dutton, 1995 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-525-45283-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Big trouble was foretold in the last sentence of The Spirit House (BCCB 10/91)
and here it is. Dom and his parents have come to Bangkok for a two-month stay
(leaving behind big sister Julie, whose own trip to Thailand three years before was
a disaster). Everything immediately goes wrong-Dom's laptop computer shuts
down, a chandelier falls on his mother-and Dom suspects that the jade carving
Julie was supposed to deliver to a temple but lost on the plane is the cause of the
trouble. Dom meets Lek, a Thai boy with a complex relationship to the lost
carving, and the two teens soon find themselves pushed around by Fate and spirits
as they try to find the charm and lay some ghosts to rest. In this age of multicul-
turalism, foreign countries aren't supposed to seem this sinister, but Sleator plays
up the evil mysticism of the East for all it's worth-whatever isn't scary here is at
least squalid. This book is more overtly supernatural than The Spirit House, and
narrative coincidences that would be trite in realistic fiction here have an other-
worldly eeriness that makes them convincing. The Spirit House is more or less
efficiently summarized in this sequel's opening chapters, but reading the first book
first will make the second more plausible and exciting. RS
SNYDER, ZILPHA KEATLEY 
The Trespassers. Delacorte, 1995 
[208p]
ISBN 0-385-31055-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Sixth-grader Neely and her little brother, Grub, spend much of their free time
roaming through the grounds of Halcyon House, a nearby abandoned mansion.
One day they find a way into the house, and they become regular visitors, particu-
larly fond of playing in the well-stocked nursery, until the house is inhabited again
by descendents of the original residents. Neely and Grub continue to visit the
house, befriending Neely's classmate Curtis Hutchinson despite his peculiar ways
and somewhat bewildering parents, until Curtis' oddness becomes murderous and
Neely must save her little brother from him. This story has hints of Snyder's The
Velvet Room (BCCB 5/65), with its depiction of an illicit special nook in an empty
mansion; additional merits here are Neely's tender relationship with her little brother
and the recurring implication that the ghost of Monica, a Hutchinson girl possibly
OCTOBER 1995 
* 
71
murdered years ago, welcomes and protects Grub and Neely. Snyder's strong,
solid writing anchors another involving and readable yarn. DS
STEVENSON, JAMES 
I Had a Lot of Wishes; written and illus. by James
Stevenson. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
[3 2 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13706-7 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13705-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
As he did in Fun, No Fun (BCCB 5/94), Stevenson revisits his memories of child-
hood, only this time they're just not quite as much, well, fun. Listeners will again
empathize with many wishes that have a familiar ring: "I wished they didn't give
us what they gave us at school for lunch"; "When Aunt Marjorie brought a box of
candy ... I wished I'd get the kind I liked." The litany eventually shifts to a story
of one particular wish-to go to summer camp. However, it is difficult to fathom
whether Stevenson considers this wish come true as an object lesson on being
careful what you ask for (camp started out dismally) or a joyous fulfillment ("A
counselor told us ghost stories. It was great"). He bounds from his camper's
homecoming into a closing reflection made from the porch swing while watching
his grandchildren play, "But a lot of wishes I made a long time ago are coming
true"-a remark rather remote from his audience's experience. Barely-there wa-
tercolor sketches, craftily composed of blotches and white space, freshen the text
and make this an agreeable, if slight, choice for adult-child sharing. EB
STRETE, CRAIG KEE 
The Worldin Grandfather'sHands. Clarion, 1995 
[128p]
ISBN 0-395-72102-4 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
After his father's death, eleven-year-old Jimmy and his mother leave their pueblo
home to live with Grandfather Whitefeather in the city, fulfilling a promise Jimmy's
mother made to her husband when Jimmy was born. Jimmy and his mother hate
the city, Grandfather's rundown house in a bad neighborhood, and their reliance
on the meager income Mother brings working as a dishwasher; it is only
Grandfather's dreams and spirit that keep them going. Despite some tense and
tough scenes between Jimmy and his mother--especially when she tells him of her
forced sterilization following his birth-this novel only occasionally has the fic-
tional crafting needed to support its heavy messages. We don't know where or
when the story takes place, and what little plot there is only serves as a springboard
for some more of Grandfather's wisdom or Mother's lectures: "You must be the
defender of the brothers and sisters you never had! You must be their voice!" One
character, a neighbor girl, seems only introduced so that Jimmy can learn the exist-
ence of racism ("What's a nigger?"). And, while his mother tells him that he must
learn the good things about urban life, the book offers nothing to recommend that
life, particularly set as it is against the idyllic vision of the pueblo. RS
TUCKER, TOM 
Brainstorm!: The Stories of Twenty American Kid Inventors; illus.
by Richard Loehle. 
Farrar, 1995 
14 8p
ISBN 0-374-30944-2 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Stories of twenty child inventors and their contraptions are detailed here, from
Benjamin Franklin's 1718 creation of swim flippers to Vanessa Hess's 1991 inspi-
ration of colored car wax. In several cases, the brainstorms came in childhood, but
72 
* THE BULLETIN
were not carried through until adulthood, as in Philo T. Farnsworth's conception
of an "electronic television system" using electrons instead of moving parts. Some
of the inventions were commercial successes, such as Popsicles and water skis,
while others, such as Franklin's, were significant not in themselves but as harbin-
gers of the great inventions to follow. Tucker fudges a little to get his total up to
twenty: Thomas Edison is included for using a telegraph in a new way, Robert
Goddard's experiments in childhood all failed, and one inventor was eighteen.
The chapter order seems random and the writing occasionally becomes mired in
technical detail. However, the theme is consistently conveyed, the glossary and
patent information are useful, and the inclusion of girls and African Americans
redresses stereotypes. The result is one that may inspire brainstorms in Tucker's
young readers. SDL
TURNBULL, ANN 
No Friend ofMine. 
Candlewick, 1995 
[128p]
ISBN 1-56402-565-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Lennie is a coal-miner's son in the north of England, and it's the late 1930s and
times are hard. His father's lungs are so damaged by coal dust that he can't work,
but the mine owner is balking at paying compensation; Lennie is therefore reluc-
tant to share with his father the trouble he's been having with bullies at school.
Lennie is thrilled to find a friend in Ralph, although he's uneasy about Ralph's
posh ways and his attendance at a faraway public school instead of the local gram-
mar school. It turns out, in fact, that Ralph is the mine owner's son; Ralph desper-
ately wishes to be friends with Lennie and he's prepared to go to dishonest lengths
to achieve this goal (stealing money and household goods), but his fear of his
magnate father leads him to allow Lennie, of whom his family disapproves, to be
accused as the culprit when the losses are detected. The "poor little rich kid"
concept isn't particularly original, but Turnbull, who wrote about Lennie's family
before in Speedwell (BCCB 11/92), has a clear and lively style that makes the situ-
ation fresh, the characters individual, and the ambivalences of both boys under-
standable. While the book's atmosphere is true to its time, its perennially relevant
themes of relations between the haves and have-nots and the difficulties of flawed
friendship make it appealing to fans of contemporary dramas as well as historical
fiction. DS
TURNER, MEGAN WHALEN 
Instead of Three Wishes. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
132p
ISBN 0-688-13922-1 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-7
Seven short stories play upon varying themes of magic and its intrusion into every-
day contemporary life: a bullying boy gets what he asks for when he tells an old
lady to give him whatever she's got; a capable girl drives an elf king to distraction
by refusing his gifts; an African-American boy becomes a hero in prehistoric Swe-
den. The most intriguing and ambitious story, "Aunt Charlotte and the NGA
Portraits," has enough material for a couple of novels, but succeeds as a kind of
fantastic spin on Konigsburg's From the Mixed-up Files ofMrs. BasilE. Frankweiler.
Turner employs an assortment of folk- and fairytale elements with freshness and
ease, avoiding the cuteness that has plagued the post-Stinky Cheese era; her de-
ployment of fantastic elements into realistic settings has a bracing matter-of-factness.
Zippy dialogue makes the collection a natural readaloud; fans of Joan Aiken and
Anne Lindbergh will enjoy the twists and turns. RS
OCTOBER 1995 
* 
73
VANDE VELDE, VIVIAN 
Talesfrom the Brothers Grimm and the Sisters Weird. 
Yolen/
Harcourt, 1995 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-15-200220-0 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
As the title suggests, these are alternative versions of fairy tales; most-ten-are
short stories, three are poems. This time, for instance, the maiden helped by
Rumpelstiltskin to spin straw into gold realizes that a kingly spouse may not be as
golden as a faithful friend; Granny's dear friend, the wolf, tries to help her avoid
her pestiferous granddaughter; Hansel and Gretel's new stepmother tries to earn
the children's affection but begins to wonder what happened to the nice lady next
door ... The twists are sometimes unsubtle and the endings don't quite offer the
satisfactory finality of the original tales, but these are entertaining and relatively
light-hearted explorations accessible to kids not yet ready for Napoli's Prince ofthe
Pond, let alone The Magic Circle. DS
VAN LEEUWEN, JEAN 
Across the Wide Dark Sea: The Mayflower Journey; illus. by
Thomas B. Allen. 
Dial, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1167-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1166-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
Love Brewster, a nine-year-old Mayflower passenger identified only in a conclud-
ing author's note, tells of his family's passage and their first months in the New
World. True to his child-view, events such as the near-drowning of a ship's hand
and the persistent, unsubstantiated fear of Indians loom large; in this ingenuous
account, however, he fails to mention the name of their settlement, the names of
their Indian contacts, the births of the Mayflower babies, and other such details
that have become integral to the Plymouth tale. Allen's charcoal and pastel pic-
tures cast an aura of hazy comfort over scenes of illness, laundering, land-sighting,
and planting, imbuing them all with an even intensity. Shipboard spreads contra-
dict the text, showing ample headroom where "we were crowded... in a space so
low my father could barely stand upright," and omitting all signs of cargo, where
the narrator specifically inventories the tight-packed items. EB
VILLOLDO, ALBERTO 
Skeleton Woman; illus. by Yoshi. 
Simon, 1995 
33p
ISBN 0-689-80279-X 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Although jacket copy ("borrowing from Aleutian culture ... ") and endnote ("An
Alaskan medicine woman from the Aleutian Islands told me the story ... ") differ
as to the degree of cultural authenticity of this story, there's no doubt that Villoldo
and Yoshi fulfill an even more basic criterion: tell us a scary story. When Annuk
is drowned in a tsunami, her fellow villagers set her sled dogs free and then leave
their inlet for a more auspicious neighborhood. "Many winters later" a fisherman
is at work in the now deserted and spooky inlet; he thinks he has caught a mighty
fish only to discover that he has snagged Annuk's skeleton, which "chases" him
back to his shelter. Even the redemptive ending, in which the fisherman's care of
and pity for the skeleton transform it back into the woman, maintains the slightly
macabre atmosphere-neither ghoulish nor romantic listeners will come away dis-
satisfied. Yoshi's watercolors give equal attention to the characters and the Aleu-
tian setting--even turning one into the other in a double spread of a menacing
74 
* THE BULLETIN
anthropomorphized landscape-and the three-spread sequence of the skeleton chase
is as excitingly paced in the pictures as it is in the text. RS
VIORST, JUDITH 
Alexander, Who's Not (Do You Hear Me? I Mean It!) Going to
Move; illus. by Robin Preiss Glasser in the style of Ray Cruz. 
Atheneum,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31958-4 
$14.00 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Alexander once again vacillates between bemoaning his troubles and plotting retri-
bution against family members. His current woe is the upcoming move necessi-
tated by his dad's job relocation. Alexander's worries and schemes are authentic
but predictable (he'll lose his best friend; he'll stay and live with sympathetic neigh-
bors) and his parents' solutions are equally mundane (he can have a dog; he can
make long distance calls). The Jobian laments are delivered in the sing-song for-
mat listeners may recognize from Alexander's previous monologues, Alexander,
Who Used to Be Rich Last Sunday (BCCB 6/78), et al. Glasser's ink sketches,
emulating the style of Viorst's former illustrator Ray Cruz, supply droll, literal
visual interpretations for Alexander's deadpan musings; the boy's fantasies of es-
cape are particularly witty. Readers who are just meeting Alexander will doubtless
empathize with and even admire his candid grousing; older acquaintances may
suspect it's time he grew up. EB
WAHL, JAN 
Cats and Robbers; illus. by Dolores Avendafio. 
Tambourine,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-688-13042-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
"Squeakings and rustles, eeking and bustles" of mice disturb Mrs. Mudge's sleep,
so she invites cats in to drive these pests away. The remedy is worse than the
problem as the cats take over the house, followed by a band of housebreakers.
Broom in hand, Mrs. Mudge ousts the invaders and reclaims her turf, only to
discover she can't sleep without the familiar nocturnal rustlings. The verse sports
more rhyme than rhythm, and the adult reader might want to try a dry run before
attempting "Mrs. Mudge peeked/ and saw it was nice./ 'Mice need traps./ Traps
that snap./ Mice are not nice.'" Avendafio's delicately blended acrylic paintings
supply visual tension, with eerily distorted household furnishings captured at diz-
zying angles and armies of mice and cats on the march or poised to spring. Hu-
man figures are less successfully rendered-not quite menacing, not quite comical.
EB
WHITMAN, CANDACE 
The Night Is Like an Animal; written and illus. by Candace
Whitman. 
Farrar, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-374-35521-5 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
Whitman pictures night as an enormous brown bear, who "nibbles on the day./
Everywhere it takes a bite the sky turns dark and gray." After a drink from the
Milky Way, Night curls up around the children as they sleep, slipping out before
dawn, but leaving "its paw prints hid in shadows upon the morning lawn." The
quietly lyrical text is enhanced with pictures made from paper torn into shapes, the
soft edging giving a strokeable feel to the richly saturated colors. The bear himself
is a goofily fuzzy fellow, with round ears and nose and a sweetly quizzical face. The
bear's size changes as he peeks around houses, snoozes with children in bed, and in
OCTOBER 1995 
* 
75
one particularly appealing scene, drapes himself awkwardly around half the earth.
Like Chris Raschka's Can't Sleep, reviewed above, this is a cozy and mysterious
bedtime book that promises a night of cozy and mysterious dreams. SDL
WILLNER-PARDO, GINA 
When Jane-Marie Told My Secret; illus. by Nancy
Poydar. 
Clarion, 1995 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-395-66382-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Carolyn and Jane-Marie are best friends until Carolyn discovers that Jane-Marie
has told someone Carolyn's deepest secret: that she wants popular Katie Kempo
to like her. Carolyn is furious and calls a halt to the friendship, and Jane-Marie
says that's fine with her. Carolyn misses Jane-Marie but finds that she enjoys the
company of another girl, Eleanor, and even of Katie Kempo, with whom it turns
out she has much in common. Finally she and Jane-Marie make up, happy to
share all their old jokes again, but Carolyn refuses to return to the old exclusivity:
"I like eating lunch with different people every day... I like laughing at different
people's jokes." This early chapter-book offers an interesting twist on the usual
interrupted-friendship story, since things don't go back to the old way after the
rapprochement. The writing is a little bland but the emotions, particularly the
humiliation and the hurt pride, ring true and will be readily recognizable to the
grade-school set. Cheerful watercolor illustrations leaven each spread, making
reading a piece of cake. DS
WINTER, JEANETTE 
Cowboy Charlie: The Story of Charles M. Russell; written and
illus. by Jeanette Winter. 
Harcourt, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200857-8 
$15.00 
R* 
Gr. 2-4
Cowboys may drift in and out of fashion but they endure, and with cowboy cul-
ture enjoying a spurt of popularity right now it's appropriate that Charles M.
Russell, the quintessential painter of the Old West, get his picture-book due. Re-
strained but descriptive text tells of Russell's youth in St. Louis, where he was born
in 1864, his dreams of cowboying, his travel as a teen to Montana, his early days of
riding the range, his friendship with the Blood Indians, and his constant recording
in paint of the West that was changing before his eyes. Most important here are
the illustrations: kids will have to look elsewhere for an example of Russell's own
art, but Winter's characteristic acrylics in vibrant, unconventional colors depict an
open-skied West well worth dreaming about. The appropriate emphasis on im-
ages is underscored by a fold-out that results in a wordless triple-page spread of a
West where the buffalo roam and the antelope play, and by the final double spread
where Russell adds brushstrokes to a painting which expands beyond his canvas to
become a direct view into the plains. A brief biographical note gives a few further
facts but mentions no sources and unfortunately doesn't include Russell's birth
year. No great matter; this is a book less intent on conveying facts than on depict-
ing American dreams and American history and recording them both, and it does
that superbly. DS
WYNNE-JONES, TIM 
The Book of Changes. Kroupa/Orchard, 1995 
14 3p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08789-1 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09489-8 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Close on the heels-at least in the U.S.--of Canadian Wynne-Jones' first short-
76 
* THE BULLETIN
story collection, Some ofthe Kinder Planets (BCCB 5/95), his second demonstrates
the same knack for fluid yet matter-of-fact prose and inventive situations. In "The
Clark Beans Man" a boy finds an creative way to deal with the local bully; "The
Ghost of Eddy Longo" haunts his grandson's awestruck classmates; and in "Dawn,"
the best story in the collection, a boy becomes friendly with an adventurous young
woman while on a long-distance bus ride. These are stories more about serendip-
ity than reality, so there's a pleasantly unlikely flavor to most of them, but they're
generally fresh and unforced. Kids who enjoyed the last collection will appreciate
running into a few familiar characters here, and they'll surely enjoy this new array
of adventures. DS
YOLEN, JANE 
A Sip of Aesop; illus. by Karen Barbour. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-47895-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Thirteen poems each encapsulate one of Aesop's fables, including such favorites as
"The Hare and the Tortoise," "The Fox and the Grapes," and "The Boy Who
Cried Wolf." The verses, appearing on the left of each spread with the moral on
the right, are not quite as nifty as those in Yolen's AnimalFare (BCCB 7/94), since
there are a few hiccups in the scansion and some syntactically forced rhymes, but
they're still entertainingly rhythmic and neatly apt, with several phrases of win-
ning felicity (the girl who counted her chickens before they were hatched "stumbled
and fell,/ And all of her chickens/ Leaked out of the shell"). Karen Barbour's art
renders the animal cast and its landscape in glowing Mediterranean colors and a
slightly fantastical air; while the overall look is flattened and stylized, some spreads
are downright carnivalesque in their multitude of rainbow-hued components. The
stories are told clearly enough to get the point across to kids who have never en-
countered the ubiquitous fables before but the poems are clever enough to enter-
tain those who have. You might have problems convincing kids to read prose
Aesop after they've encountered these bouncy rhymes, but it's a risk worth taking.
A note about Aesop is included. DS
OCTOBER 1995 
* 77
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Kuznets, Lois Rostow. When Toys ComeAlive: Narratives ofAnimation, Metamor-
phosis, and Development. Yale University Press, 1995. 257p. illus. with photo-
graphs. ISBN 0-300-05645-1. $32.50.
Toys are a prominent icon of childhood and appear frequently in children's litera-
ture, but their literary role has rarely received sustained scholarly scrutiny. Kuznets
fills that gap with a detailed investigation of the meanings and uses to which toys
have been put in print. Her approach is informed by a variety of theoretical view-
points but emphasizes the psychoanalytic and the feminist; her subjects of discus-
sion include Pinocchio, Winnie the Pooh, The Velveteen Rabbit, The Mouse and His
Child, Calvin and Hobbes, and a host of other sagas of animated toys from the
nineteenth century to the present day. This is a thoughtful and stimulating analy-
sis of a culturally laden subject. Extensive notes, bibliographies of fiction dis-
cussed and of secondary sources, and an index are included. DS
Annual '95: Fiction; paper ed. ISBN 1-55858-439-0; 150p. Annual '95: Non
Fiction; paper ed. ISBN 1-558-368-8; 190p. Each book: Neugebauer/North-
South, 1995. $39.95. illus.
The annual Annual of the juried Illustrator's Exhibit at Bologna appears now in
two separate volumes, one each for fiction and non-fiction. As always, there's
pleasure in roaming through the glossy pages encountering the work of illustrators
familiar and unfamiliar (Chris Raschka and Stephen Biesty probably being the
names best known to American readers); the separation of non-fiction illustration
into its own volume means that an array of natural history and scientific drawing
gets its due attention. Interviews with the jury members appear in the non-fiction
volume. DS
Stein, Barbara L., ed. Children's Media Market Place. Fourth edition. Neal-
Schuman, 1995. 28 4 p. Paper ed. ISBN 1-55570-190-6. $49.95.
This is just the thing for finding those crucial but not readily available phone
numbers and contact names in thousands of different places in the children's-
media world. The book is divided into twenty-one sections (some are Publishers,
Computer Software Producers & Distributors, Book Clubs, Periodicals for Chil-
dren, Cultural Diversity Resources, Associations, and Federal Grants for Children's
Programs); each section contains a multiplicity of entries including a phone num-
ber, an address, and various other essential information in a thumbnail sketch for
each source, company, or location. There are a few accuracy glitches in the ad-
dresses and the Internet section doesn't provide full internet addresses for most of
the listservs, but the comprehensiveness of this resource overcomes these shortfalls.
DS
78 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African Americans: Chu
African Americans-fiction: Koller
African Americans-stories:
Flournoy; Havill
Agriculture: Bial; Brown, C.;
Geisert
American Indians: Sewall
American Indians-fiction: Keehn;
Strete
American Indians-stories: Villoldo
Archeology: Deem
Armadillos-stories: Brett
Art and artists: Winter
Art: Cummings
BEDTIME STORIES: Arnold;
Raschka; Whitman
BIOGRAPHIES: Alicea; Fritz;
Winter
Birthdays-fiction: Hoff
Books and reading: Cummings
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Fleischman; Hurwitz; Koller;
Selznick; Snyder
California-fiction: Gregory;
Hobbs; London
Catholics-fiction: Fiedler; Lynch
Cats-stories: Wahl
Circuses-stories: Prater
Civil War: Bolotin
Colonial life: Van Leeuwen
CONCEPT BOOKS: Brown, M.;
Morris
Cows-stories: Clements
Coyotes-fiction: Lehne
Death: Alicea
Death-fiction: Hurwin; Napoli;
Selznick
Death-stories: Villoldo
Dinosaurs-fiction: Hoff
Dogs-fiction: McKay
Dogs-stories: Erlbruch; Pilkey;
Rathmann; Rylant
Dragons-fiction: Gray
Drug abuse: Alicea
Ecology: Goodman; Hughes, T.
England-fiction: Turnbull
Ethics and values: Paulsen;
Rubinstein
FABLES: Yolen
Family life-fiction: Duffey
FANTASY: Fleischman; Gray;
Hughes, T.; Selznick; Sleator;
Turner; Vande Velde
Farm life: Bial; Brown, C.
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Hobbs
Fathers and sons-fiction: Block;
Hughes, M.; London
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Villoldo
Food and eating-stories: Ernst
Friends-fiction: Hopper; Hurwin;
Lynch; McKay; Turnbull;
Willner-Pardo
FUNNY STORIES: Duffey;
McKay
Gangs: Alicea
Ghosts-fiction: Snyder
Grandfathers-fiction: Strete
Grandmothers-stories: Ernst
Guns-fiction: Paulsen
Halloween-stories: Pilkey; Sierra
OCTOBER 1995 
* 79
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Armstrong; Gregory; Hobbs;
Keehn; Turnbull
History, American: Sewall; Van
Leeuwen
History, U.S.: Armstrong;
Bolotin; Chu; Fritz; Keehn;
Levine; Winter
Holocaust, the: Rochman
Homelessness-fiction: Koller;
Lehne; London
Homosexuality-fiction: Block
Horses-fiction: Ruepp
Illness-stories: Egielski
Inventors: Tucker
Jews: Rochman
King Philip's War: Sewall
Literature, children's: Cummings
Los Angeles-fiction: Block
LOVE STORIES: Cooney;
Fiedler; Hobbs
Mathematics: Scieszka
Mice-stories: Wahl
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Gray
Mothers and sons-fiction: Strete
Moving-stories: Havill; Viorst
Mummies: Deem
Muppets-fiction: Hunt; Muntean
Nature study: Goodman; Levine
New York City: Alicea
Night-stories: Raschka; Whitman
Peru: Goodman
Pets-fiction: Napoli
Photography: Myers
Pigs-stories: Meddaugh
Pirates: Lincoln
Pirates-fiction: Gregory; McCully
POETRY: Adoff; Myers; Yolen
Police officers-stories: Rathmann
Rain forests: Goodman
Reading aloud: Turner; Vande
Velde; Yolen
Reading, beginning: Hoff;
Hunter; Muntean
Reading, easy: Hurwitz; Ruepp;
Willner-Pardo
Reading, family: Brown, M.;
Flournoy; Myers; Saul; Steven-
son; Viorst
Reading, reluctant: Adoff; Alicea;
Cole; Deem; Fiedler; Koller;
Lincoln; Paulsen; Scieszka;
Sleator
Religious education: Rylant
Revolutionary War-fiction: Keehn
Safety education: Rathmann
SCARY STORIES: Sleator;
Snyder
School-fiction: Fiedler; Hopper
School-stories: Brown, M.; Havill
SCIENCE FICTION: Hughes,
M.; Rubinstein
Shoes: Morris
SHORT STORIES: Turner;
Vande Velde; Wynne-Jones
SPORTS STORIES: Lynch
Story hour: Arnold; Brett;
Clements; Egielski; Erlbruch;
Ernst; Flournoy; Havill;
McCully; Meddaugh; Pilkey;
Prater; Raschka; Rathmann;
Rylant; Saul; Scieszka; Sierra;
Villoldo; Viorst; Wahl; Yolen
Storytelling-stories: Meddaugh
Summer camp-fiction: Lynch
Summer camp-stories: Stevenson
Texas-stories: Levine
Thailand-fiction: Sleator
Thanksgiving: Van Leeuwen
Time travel-fiction: Cooney;
Fleischman
Trees-stories: Levine
Voyages and travel-stories: Saul
Weather: Cole
Weddings: Morris
West, the: Armstrong; Chu;
Winter
Wishing-stories: Stevenson
Women's studies: Fritz
Writing-fiction: Duffey
<re
.Duhl;, .
iries of
Judith i
I and trauma, delights
urban adolescence are
to life in this collection of
and emotionally varied
Jersey].. .
growing t.
-
School
* "c
sharp short
L'_ 
i_
?kly, starred
laneously serious,
d extremely lyrical."
s, pointer review
TR $15.95 0-531-06897-8
RIB $15.99 0-531-08747-6
Orchard Books
A Grolier C•pany
rc a r 
' 
*.. 'w.ir
A Mountain
.~v Bound 
I 
f
I
or more than 75 years, BTSB
has been helping young peop
attain new heights in reader
enjoyment. Now more than ever, w4
providing the books to continue th
tradition and make your job easier..
beginning with our General Catalo
offering over 15,000 published and
1,200 Fall 1995 titles, each listed alp
betically by author, title, and subjec
matter including ISBN and Dewey
Classification numbers.
And this fall we'll also be publishing
new catalog of CD-ROM titles to he
you keep pace with the new techno
gies available to you and your
young readers.
In addition to our two catalogs, we ofi
complete range of special services:
Bound To Stay Bound Books,
1880 West Morton,Jacksonville, IL 6265
Toll Free: 800-637-6586; Fax: 800-747-28
JA 1AVVA/A
for
Young
Readers.
* Complete book processing, kits,
le 
cards and laminated jackets
* Free bar codes and disks for
e're 
automated systems
is
* Discount prices for quantity purchases
g 
* Free pre-order lists of your
selected titles
ha- 
* Customized "new library" collections
t
* Free selection and ordering software
Discover the many ways BTSB can help
you operate at peak efficiency while
ga 
expanding your children's collection.
lp 
Send today for complete information
lo- 
and free copies of our new 1995-96
General and CD-ROM Catalogs.
er a
Inc
10
72
27 
Starred in The Horn Book and SLJ
SCflLL ME[
BY 
FULL-COLOR PICTURES BY
PAM CONRAD RICHARD EGIELSKI
"In 1894, Robert Peary's explorers discovered a car-sized meteorite
in Greenland and hauled it off to New York's [American Museum of
Natural History]. An intriguing story if conventionally told, Conrad
makes it unforgettable by choosing the meteorite itself to be the
narrator. [A] wonderfully fresh, energetic tale [with art that captures]
the era's look and flavor expertly." -
School Library Journal.
"No one who has read Ahnighito's story will ever look at
a meteorite with dispassion again." -
The Horn Book
Ages 6-9. $14.95TR (0-06-023322-2); $14.89LB (0-06-023323-0)
A Laura Geringer Book
tLO 
.m- 
J...- 
I-L 
y 
L.S. 
ln__ l.- 
.
n 
n 
L E7b 
R
-
vru J 
coolvwr pl 
0tr 
uurve 
uy rum ounrau anu nRichard Esre•skm
THE LOST SAILOR 
THE TUB GRANDFATHER
A Laura Geringer Book 
A Laura Geringer Book
Ages 4-8. $14.89LB (0-06-0216964) 
Ages 4-8. $15.00TR (0-06-022895-4)
$14.89LB (0-06-022896-2)
THE TUB PEOPLE
1989 ALA Notable Children's Book
A Laura Geringer Book
Ages 4-8. $15.00TR (0-06-021340-X)
$14.89LB (0-06-021341-8); $4.95PB (0-06-443306-4)
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
I
1995 LAURA INGALLS WILDER MEDALIST
VIRGINIA HAMILTON
A sumptuous and dramatic "herstory" of
African American women-both real and imaginary-told through
19 compelling tales and illustrations by two-time
Caldecott Medalists Leo and Diane Dillon.
A CHILDREN'S BOOK-OF-THE-MONTH CLUB MAIN SELECTION
Ages 6-up * 0-590-47370-0 * $19.95 * 128 pages
ALo available: Her Stories Limited Edition, 150 numbered copies, signed by
Virginia Hamilton and Leo & Diane Dillon,
Slipcased and shrinkwrapped.
0-590-56603-2 * $75.00
THE 
BLUE 
SKY 
PRESS
An Imprint of Scholastic Inc.
H
(
dr
t
The voices are authentic; the characters deal with powerful emotions
that are balanced with a healthy dose of humor. A tightly written novel
about give and take, and knowing when to let go."--Kirkus Reviews
Ages 11-14. $14.95TR (0-06-024675-8); $14.89LB (0-06-024676-6)
l41_A 
_ b 
H 
n 
» 
r•
so 
y -u 
eow 
wec 
ver
FIRST WEDDING, ONCE REMOVED
Ages 10-14. $4.95PB (0-06-440402-1) A Charlotte Zolotow Book
SAY GOODNIGHT, GRACIE
Ages 12 up. $14.89LB (0-06-021419-8); $3.95PB (0-06-447007-5)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
YOU BET YOUR LIFE
Ages 12 up. $15.00TR (0-06-021516-X); $14.89LB (0-06-021517-8)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
I,
y'~~ ~'~ ~·"'d ld~~~'·~~"~~
~ 
by ~Ane Shelby
illutatos bjy
Wendy Anderson Halperin
*t A "rich pictoria history of a home that six generation
of a famly havre inhaited. 
The custom's and domestic
detals of each era 
- from 1810 to 1995 -- are portrayd
imnpeccabyin 
Haperin's wodrously busy watercolor-
and-penil ar."' - Pulshr Weekly, strrd review
* As it portay slices oflife thog the generations.
Itrnplce 
4revas 
th stability and cntinuity that is
possible throug famly ties, even whie th outside word
is chianging."( - School tLbrar Journlstarre reie
Ags 4-7 * TR $15.95 O-531-0682-
RLB $1.99 0.531-0872-8
O~rchard Bookrs
A (roier Comp~any
lsiO 
~/ 
165 
1 
0 
160 
1±.190 
9.
II 
_. 
.
_ 
_.. II
D
L (
) THE
OUND
Marc G
)r Thon
Iolines.
* "Intelligent and respectful-and relevant to today's kids."
-Publishers Weekly (starred review)
"Extraordinary... It deserves to earn its authors a star in
their heavenly crowns." -
School Library Journal*
"The authors don't segregate each religion into its own
chapter. Rather, they show how the various religions...
deal with the soul-searching questions central to all
people." -ALA 
Booklist (boxed review)
"The volume digs deeper into the fundamental beliefs
of world religions than many of its cousins on the 200s
shelf." -The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
Ages 10 up 224 pp. RTE $15.00/0-688-13041-0
Morrow Junior Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
I
ai 
ntl 
imo
1*
y 
r
Suzy Kline
knowsr 
exarcti j how to hook seconodgraders.
(Because sheteahes thn)
LI 
,- 
-- ~ 
-,-
I aere s exciung news ror nune s 
-
Horrible Harry fan: Hany' Koen
American classmrate-·smart, sweet, shy 
*
Son Le-i no the star of an easy-
to-read series all her own!r
"Sold read. for the beglanlag chapter.
hook et;....Kln has an exetoa
talent for capturing the laguge huor
an gru daics of a prmr-rd
classroom.
"The scoo setting kms great apel
an the faila 2B kids deliver lots
of funny moments."-Bols
~W LE INR(f2
WinJyIa@*
~tSViking .
ilre' 
Fav~orites Since 1935?
JI4Wam
N*M4W1~MI
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, 1L 61820
U.SA.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
NEW i
By the author of
Someone Was Watching,
on Master Reading Lists in
Texas, Illinois and Nebraska.
Dark Starry Morning
Stories of this world and beyond
by David Patneaude
Doors open for the young people in these six
stories. The only trouble Is, those doors lead into
the unknown ....
Ages 11-14 * ISBN 0-8075-1474-8 * $13.95
"Readers too young for Stephen King will find satis-
faction In these six tales In which the encounters with
the unknown are beneficent yet still mildly
eerie....Patneaude keeps his action tight and quickly
establishes character to provide young readers with
interesting, short, vicarious adventures into the mys-
teries of this world and beyond." Booklist
"...Charming stories, these have the spooky premises
to grab horror fans, and will hold them with the
promise of something better than blood and gore."
Kirkus Reviews
Albert Whitman & Company
6340 Oakton Street * Morton Grove, Illinois 60053-2723
-i~· 
.J
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
--
~ 
--- 
-- 
--- 
-· 
·---· ·-
~_ I
i"' 
, 
1· :
· il
I
^Jtoe
