I LLIN 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
I
i 
I.·tv·i··;~cI.· 
tRs"r:ii· igi
-"
a*i 
A ,
+"A top-notch author
at full strength."*
E.L.
KONIGSBURG
T-Backs, T-Shirts,
COAT, and Suit
ped unusual characters who reveal their
tory unfolds....The plot is carefully
rous dialogue will engage readers....
discussion-starter on the importance of
comnutment ana personal values.
-Starred, Schobl Library Journal
*"The author's forthright, staccato style and witty descriptions are
marvelous....Ofbeat, comic, thought-provoking."
-- Pointer, Kirkus Reviews
"The relationship between aunt and niece is beautifully drawn....
The conflicts about conformity and freedom of expression are of
crucial interest to Chloo and many young people."
-Focus review, Booklist
* "The issues are as comp
the characters; teenagers a
target audience will enjoy
-Starred, Publishen
'The portrait of Bernadett
of [Konigsburg'sJ best. Ki
want to meet her."
-Bulletin of the Ce
for Children's Boo
$13.95 SBE/089-3185-3/Ages 9
SBE ndcas a reinforced hardcover edith
A 
ATHENEUM
An imprint of the Mamillan
Children' Book Group
866 Thrd Avenue, New York, N'
- - -- - - -----
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
January 1994
Vol. 47 No. 5
A LOOK INSIDE
145 THE BIG PICTURE
From Sea to Shining Sea compiled by Amy L. Cohn
146 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
146 * Life Doesn't Frighten Me by Maya Angelou; illustrated by Jean-Michel
Basquiat
153 * Once Upon a Time ... by Alan Garner; illustrated by Norman
Messenger
162 * The Oxford Book of Children s Stories compiled by Jan Mark
164 * Harris and Me by Gary Paulsen
169 * Black Ships before Troy: The Story of The Iliad adapted by Rosemary
Sutcliff; illustrated by Alan Lee
173 
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1993
175 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Carol Fox, Reviewer (CF)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1994 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by David Wiesner, from From Sea to Shining Sea ©1993 by David Wiesner and
used by permission of Scholastic Inc.
JANUARY 1994 
* 
145
THE BIG PICTURE
From Sea to Shining Sea
compiled by Amy L. Cohn
It's gratifying when an author has the experience, knowledge, and standards to get
it right, especially when the book is a big, lavish production that needs sturdy
underpinnings to justify its expense. Cohn's compilation promises to be one of
those family or classroom classics that covers enough ground to satisfy many tastes
and uses. More than a hundred and forty stories, songs, and historical essays are
organized into fifteen sections that range from Native American creation myths to
twentieth-century highlights such as Martin Luther King's "I Have a Dream" speech.
In between comes literature reflecting experiences of immigration, the Revolution,
Appalachian settlement, seafaring, slavery, building railroads, and pioneering. Other
sections are genre- rather than subject-oriented: trickster tales, nonsense, animal
stories, tall tales, baseball lore, and ghost stories.
Illustrating the various segments is a lineup of superstars whose styles mesh
amazingly well because of the spacious book design and carefully orchestrated flow
of material from page to page and section to section. Fourteen Caldecott Award or
Honor artists ranging from Molly Bang to Ed Young are well matched to corre-
sponding texts: Trina Schart Hyman, for instance, exercises her mischievous ten-
dency in the trickster tales while Jerry Pinkney takes on the African-American
section, John Schoenherr is a natural for the animal stories, Richard Egielski in-
jects humor into the immigration section (as does Anita Lobel into the Revolu-
tion), the Dillons stylize some stunning graphics for the Native American myths,
and David Wiesner shows dramatic versatility with railroad stories (see this month's
Bulletin cover).
There's obviously lots to pore over here, with a balance of familiar pieces ("Take
Me Out to the Ball Game") and unfamiliar ones ("The Mezcla Man"); folklore
("Brer Possum's Dilemma") and children's literature ("Dakota Dugout"); famous
writers (Zora Neale Hurston) and those whose creations have superseded their
reputations (James Stephens, who originated Paul Bunyan); funny legends ("The
Debate in Sign Language") and sad ones ("La Llorona, the Weeping Woman");
surprising bits ("The First Woman to Vote in the State of California") and dra-
matic ones ("Strong as Annie Christmas"). There's also a consciously balanced
ethnic distribution, a full quota of strong women as well as men, and a fearless
embrace of the elements children crave and adults worry about-the controversial,
the supernatural, and the downright scary.
So, as the lawyer says to the devil promising partnership in exchange for a few
souls, what's the catch? There really isn't much of one except for an occasional
case of "traditional" material that isn't attributed to any printed or oral source-
"The Tory's Conversion," for instance, or "The Travels of a Fox." Some of the
146 
* THE BULLETIN
selections list an adaptor but no sources from which the story or legend was retold;
others, however, are meticulous, as in Ashley Bryan's "The Cat's Purr," cited to
the early twentieth-century collector Elsie Clews Parsons. For the most part, Cohn's
notes and acknowledgments give exemplary background, along with thoughtful
suggestions for further reading or listening and a paragraph of information about
each illustrator.
What particularly distinguishes this collection is not its usefulness and beauty,
both of which are undeniable assets, but its character, which is an elusive quality
shaped by the selection and editing process. Every anthologist, in trying to define
her subject, defines her own understanding of it, and Cohn has revealed a distinc-
tive perception of American story in its broadest forms and formats.
Betsy Hearne, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANGELOU, MAYA 
Life Doesn't Frighten Me; illus. by Jean-Michel Basquiat; ed. by
Sara Jane Boyers. 
Stewart, Tabori & Chang, 1993 
32p
ISBN 1-55670-288-4 
$14.95 
R 6-9 yrs
The presence of an editorial credit on the title page seems to indicate that Boyers is
responsible for this melding ofAngelou's poem, originally published in 1978, and
Basquiat's paintings, created throughout the early 1980s. It's an apt if arresting
synthesis, far more effective than most of the artsy picture books that have been
regularly coming down the pike. "Panthers in the park/ Strangers in the dark"-
Angelou's poem, really a chant, catalogs a host of spooky possibilities and banishes
them with the iterated affirmation, "Life doesn't frighten me at all." It does, though,
and that's why we need the poem. Basquiat's images capture this same contradic-
tion: they're both scary and intensely vulnerable, with childlike scratches and
scrawls and totemic stick-figures facing a dangerous world. The poem is firmly
rooted in childhood; the art is New York street-sophisticated and sometimes sadly
crazy, but kids will recognize their own drawings and imaginings in these pictures
and should be able to see the bravery that drives the images. RS
ATLAN, LILIANE 
The Passersby; tr. by Rochelle Owens; illus. by Lisa
Desimini. 
Holt, 1993 
86p
ISBN 0-8050-3054-9 
$13.95 
M 
Gr. 9 up
Obscure, introverted, and trs French, this meditation on the legacy of the Holo-
caust has a Kabbalistic basis, according to a prefatory note by the author and the
translator. The book is divided into ten "doors and praises"; throughout, an ado-
lescent girl, No, struggles with anorexia in postwar France, as well as with the
expectations of her mother, I'm dying, and father, God does a badjob, I'll take over.
(The family's last name is But I'll get out of it.) A similar parallel between self-
starvation and the Holocaust was drawn in Hautzig's Second Star to the Right (BCCB
9/81), but Atlan's book more closely resembles in its ritualism the darker reaches
JANUARY 1994 
* 
147
of Hannah Green's INever Promised You a Rose Garden. Unfortunately, The Pass-
ersby, while brief, is essentially plotless, crowded with label-names, and themati-
cally tough going. The writing has occasional vividness, but it sometimes verges
on self-parody, with a lot of single-sentence paragraphing: "No has received her
bachelor's degree and has had a relapse. JDr. Out ofcontrol no longer hesitates.
ITo the insulin. ¶It is in a room where neither the door nor the window has a
handle that she writes her first poem, and it is called 'Rage.'" C'est la guerre. RS
BARNES, JOYCE ANNETTE 
The Baby Grand, the Moon in July, and Me. Dial,
1994 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1600-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1586-2 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Annie is ten, thrilled to death about the upcoming Apollo mission, and eager to
see Neil Armstrong (whose last name is the same as hers) be the first person to set
foot on the moon. While she dreams of being an astronaut, her brother Matty
wants to be a jazz musician, and to this end he purchases an expensive piano on the
installment plan and has it delivered to the Armstrong home. This action causes a
rift between Matty and his father that seems unbreachable, but Anhie, with the
help of a reclusive old man in the neighborhood, manages to present Matty's love
of music to her father in a way that makes him finally understand the power of his
son's dreams. The dream-deferred theme is softened here by the loving, some-
times nostalgic, portrait of a close African-American family, with narrator Annie
an energetic and credible force for good. The lunar metaphor is a bit belabored,
but kids won't mind; the drama of family tensions, love of music, and sibling
loyalty will keep them engaged. DS
BAUER, MARION DANE 
A Taste ofSmoke. 
Clarion, 1993 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-395-64341-4 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Caitlin's been looking forward to her annual camping trip with her college-aged
sister Pamela, but she soon gets a disappointed feeling that this trip is going to be
different: all Pamela can talk about is some boy she's met at school and worse, it
turns out that the boy, Alex, will be hanging around during what was supposed to
be their private, sisters-only vacation. So Caitlin is pleased to discover a boy of her
own at the state park... until she realizes that he's a ghost. The chief attraction of
this romance/ghost story is that it never goes quite where you think it's going to.
Frank, the ghost of a boy killed in a terrible fire a century before, at first seems a
friend to Caitlin, but it gradually--and scarily-becomes clear that he is also a
threat. Alex, too, can see Frank, but he won't admit it to Pamela and leaves Caitlin
and her "crazy" stories to hang in her sister's disbelieving scorn. With tensions
both supernatural and familial, the novel is expertly menacing and surely paced.
RS
BOULTON, ALEXANDER O. 
Frank Lloyd Wright: Architect; An Illustrated
Biography. Rizzoli, 1993 
128p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8478-1683-4 $24.95 
Ad Gr. 9up
Called in the preface "the greatest American architect of all time," Frank Lloyd
Wright created architectural triumphs such as the Robie House in Chicago, the
148 
* THE BULLETIN
Imperial Hotel in Japan, Fallingwater in Pennsylvania, and the Guggenheim Mu-
seum in New York. Wright also lived through personal scandal from his marriage
and affairs, and he refused to restrain his frequent arrogance about his own abili-
ties. The account of Wright's life and accomplishments is rather sophisticated for
most young readers, with occasionally convoluted sentences: "But to Baptists who
generally believe in the necessity of personal redemption to release oneself from the
turbulence of a sinful world, and to Unitarians, who presume an essential harmony
between spiritual and earthly realms, the differences between their faiths can be
stark indeed." It's also a bit elliptical, with no straightforward statement that Wright's
father and mother divorced or that Wright himself stopped seeing his children
from his first marriage. The illustrations, ranging from fascinating planning sketches
to photos of completed projects and pages from Wright's own books, generally
seem placed more for visual effect than conceptual relevance, but are enriching
nonetheless. Ultimately a rather adult look at Wright, this is still a useful refer-
ence, and the high picture-to-words ratio and attractively open format make it a
pleasure (if a pricey one) to leaf through. Source notes (on the copyright page),
glossary, bibliography, and index are included. DS
BROOKE, 
WILLIAM 
J. 
A 
Brush with Magic; illus. 
by Michael
Koelsch. 
HarperCollins, 1993 
137p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022974-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022973-X 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-7
In this fantasy set in ancient China, a peasant finds a baby floating downriver in a
basket and, lacking milk to feed the child, discovers that a goat has magically ap-
peared. It is years before Liang's adopted father will admit that the magic that
happens around them comes from the pictures young Liang paints with his brush,
his only possession. When one day a court painter comes to Liang's small village,
the boy is tempted to look at the great man's paintings, and he discovers the irony
that art is the "ability to look at something and then paint it in a way that looks
nothing like it." The villagers finally admit that Liang has a magical gift when he
paints fireworks that become real enough to knock down part of a mountain, thereby
stopping a flood that is threatening the village. Liang's gift is discovered by the
emperor, who wants to keep the boy busy painting gold coins that drop off the
paper into the delighted ruler's hand. This simple satire on greed is also a story of
Liang's struggle to grow up and accept his magical talent as part of himself ("It is
your gift. Use it well"). Brooke's style is clear and focused, and the plot moves
quickly. Unfortunately, the author gets in the way when he adds a heavy-handed
addendum ("Our task, our joy is to recognize our seed of magic and to nurture
it.... "). 
If readers can ignore the final lecture, they will revel in the unique
fantasy based on a familiar Asian folktale motif. KJ
BROOKS, BRUCE 
Making Sense: Animal Perception and Communication. Farrar,
1993 
74p 
illus. with photographs 
(Knowing Nature)
ISBN 0-374-34742-5 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 5 up
Third in Brooks' Knowing Nature series (see also Nature by Design and Predator!,
BCCB 1/92), MakingSense explores, in animals, the traditionally categorized senses
of sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch, but cautions that senses are slippery and
simultaneous and add up to another sense that is generally only attributed to hu-
mans: knowing. As in the previous Knowing Nature books, concepts come before
JANUARY 1994 
* 
149
categories, a real departure in nature study books for children. Instead of a Noah-
like parade of animals, each described in the sum of its senses, Brooks looks at
"Seeing," for example, and gracefully bounces from blue jays to terrapins to man-
drills in a discussion of color and reproduction. 
Elsewhere, an explanation of
echolocation in dolphins, whales, and bats will extend readers' understanding of
the topic to principles of animal behavior in general and the physics of sound
waves in particular. Packed with surprising examples, the book has a vibrantly
synthesizing approach, matched by the clarity and wit of the writing and ennobled
with generous conclusions: "The message 'Here I am' is always answered by the
environment, which pins an alert animal in a cross fire of scents and breezes and
sounds and sights and thus replies immediately by saying, 'Yes, here you are."'
Color photos (with pungent captions: "There's not much doubt about what this
gray wolf is feeling, or what it wants you to feel") add detail; a glossary and index
are appended. RS
COHN, AMY L., comp. 
From Sea To Shining Sea: A Treasury ofAmerican Folklore
andFolk Songs. 
Scholastic, 1993 
4 0 0p 
illus.
ISBN 0-590-42868-3 
$29.95 
R* 
All ages
See this month's Big Picture, p. 145.
COIL, SUZANNE M. 
Mardi Gras!; illus. with photographs by Mitchel
Osborne. 
Macmillan, 1994 
48p
ISBN 0-02-722805-3 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-5
Mardi Gras, says Suzanne Coil, is "not just something to watch, but something to
be a part of," and this book's full-bleed photographs of otherworldly costumes,
multicolored exotic floats, and alluringly dangerous night scenes will invite readers
to do just that. The text talks about the history of Mardi Gras, its contemporary
traditions, and the massive organization necessary to pull it off (including the cleanup
brigades), and it includes saucy details such as the origin of the official Mardi Gras
song "If Ever I Cease to Love" (it had been the favorite, for romantic reasons, of a
visiting Romanoff grand duke). The real story lies in the glittering images from
veteran Mardi Gras photographer Osborne, as joyous pagan abandon, spiced with
a little bit of scariness, seizes young and old and dances them through the streets in
"the most fabulous party on earth." Aside from being a seductive look at an un-
usual holiday, this'll up the ante for school carnivals. DS
COMAN, CAROLYN 
TellMe Everything. Farrar, 1993 
156p
ISBN 0-374-37390-6 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
"Suspended was how she often felt, though she hadn't, until then, had a name for
it." Ever since her mother was killed while rescuing a boy in a mountain accident,
Roz has felt detached, her only real emotion tied to her uncle Mike with whom she
now lives, and to Nate, the rescued boy, to whom she makes silent and anonymous
phone calls. But when Roz is suspended for hitting a classmate, when Nate's
phone is disconnected, when she gets her period-Roz decides that all these are
signs and decides to journey from her Cape Cod home to New Jersey and talk to
Nate in person. There are points in the novel that seem self-conscious, with the
fact that Roz was conceived in a rape being unnecessary freight, and the detailed
and introspective prose has the feel of adult fiction, with many motifs recalling
150 
* THE BULLETIN
Bobbie Ann Mason's In Country. As with that book, the heart of this one is the
love between niece and uncle united in loss, both scared to admit their mutual
vulnerabilities. Their memories of Ellie, Roz's mother and Mike's sister, are an
angelic, if sometimes fuzzy, presence; while we never really get to know her, we do
see how that presence helps Roz and Mike to come to understand each other.
Even though she does seem older than the twelve years specified here, Roz is a
thorny, compelling protagonist whose attempt to find peace is both obsessive and
quite moving. RS
DENIM, SUE 
The Dumb Bunnies; illus. by Dav Pilkey. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-47708-0 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Let's hope the book's dedication to the late James Marshall means that author
"Sue Denim" and illustrator Pilkey (a team la Edward and James Marshall, per-
haps?) intend it as an hommage rather than a rip-off; the Dumb Bunnies are the
Stupids in pink fur. With prose that mimics Harry Allard's cadences for the Stupids,
and pictures that resemble Marshall's more than they do anything else Pilkey has
illustrated, this is the story of the Bunny family, who are really stupid, I mean,
dumb: "Momma Bunny's porridge was too cold, so she blew on it. Poppa Bunny's
porridge was too hot, so he put it in the oven. But Baby Bunny's porridge was just
right, so he poured it down his pants." Kids will love the dumb jokes, but the
silliness is more forced than inspired, and the Bunnies' encounter with Little Red
Goldilocks is shamelessly inane: "Poppa Bunny loved her so much, he danced a
merry dance. Momma Bunny loved her so much, she sang a merry song. And
Baby Bunny loved her so much ... he flushed her down the merry toilet." "Toi-
let" will always get you a laugh, of course, that's easy. What's hard is what Allard
and Marshall managed that this book does not: they made us laugh at and love the
Stupids in equal measure. RS
DONNELLY, JUDY 
Survive! Could You?; written by Judy Donnelly and S. A. Kramer;
illus. by Gonzales Vicente. 
Random House, 1993 
95p 
(Read It To Believe
It!)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-94363-3 
$9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-84363-9 
$2.99 
R Gr. 3-6
In this choose-your-own disaster guide, readers are confronted with a series of
scary scenarios: avalanche, shark attack, tornado, quicksand, tidal wave, earth-
quake, and shipwreck. Each chapter, written in the second-person present tense
("Above you, a huge sheet of snow is beginning to slide down the mountain"),
outlines the conditions for disaster, describes the hazards to be faced, and, through
a series of multiple choice questions, asks readers how they would handle the crisis.
" What do you do ifyou can 'tget awayfrom a shark? A. Face it and stare into its eyes.
B. Put your head under water and blow bubbles. C. Hit it on its nose, its gill, or
its eye. D. All of the above." Kids will be vicariously thrilled to discover that D is
the correct answer, so thrilled that they'll stick around for the next paragraphs
which tell them how not to get into such a situation to begin with. The writing is
easy and immediate, the advice is sound, and both new-ish and reluctant readers
will take the bait. A note from the publisher indicates that a different version of
the book was published by Weekly Reader in 1988. RS
JANUARY 1994 
* 
151
DORROS, ARTHUR 
Radio Man: A Story in English and Spanish; written and illus.
by Arthur Dorros; 
Spanish 
translation 
by Sandra 
Marulanda
Dorros. 
HarperCollins, 1993 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021548-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021547-X 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
A young boy, Diego, travels with his family, itinerant farm workers following the
western harvests from Texas to Washington state. His friend David calls him
"Radio Man" because he is always listening to the radio. Time and again, Diego
leaves and meets his friends and relatives (David and he part the day after the story
begins) as his family takes a job, completes it, and then moves on to look for other
work. Diego's family's life is hard, but they share their fortune. For the whole
family in the field, the radio provides music for pleasure and diversion in the truck
at the end of the day, and for celebrating the end of a season. The radio supplies
continuity and constancy for Diego, for his relatives, and for the story, and it
unites Diego and his friend David at the end. Written in English at the top of the
page and translated into Spanish at the bottom, the story has a short concluding
Spanish-to-English glossary. The illustrations, done in brilliant acrylics on alter-
nate pages to the text, are deceptively simple; at first glance they look primitive,
with childlike drafting and stiff, flat characters fixed in mid-movement, but more
careful observation reveals that composition, expression, and color are all chosen
to create an authentic atmosphere. The bright colors warm the story as the radio
warms the lives of the characters. CF
DUFFY, JAMES 
RadicalRed. Scribner's, 1993 
152p
ISBN 0-684-19533-X 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
It's 1894, and twelve-year-old Connor O'Shea is intrigued by the suffragists who
are campaigning in Albany for their right to vote in New York state. Connor's
father, a sergeant in the capitol police and a pawn of the local senator, is displeased
by the "crazy women" and tries to keep his daughter away from them, but as he
falls deeper into drinking and abuse of his wife both Connor and her mother
become involved in the cause. Although the story is somewhat predictable, Duffy
includes important historical details that slighter books about suffrage ignore: that
the struggle involved women from classes other than the middle, that many men
were unable to vote as well, that politics was a matter of influence as much as
franchise, and that many Americans had grown up in countries where they could
never have dreamed of voting. The characters are simple rather than deep, with
Susan B. Anthony and some of the local suffragists more heroic than human, but
Connor is still a plucky and engaging young lass, and her story of courage makes
for a good read. DS
DURELL, ANN, ed. 
The Big Bookfor Our Planet; ed. by Ann Durell, Jean Craighead
George, and Katherine Paterson. 
Dutton, 1993 
136p 
illus.
ISBN 0-525-45119-6 
$17.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Like The Big Bookfor Peace (BCCB 10/90), this is a children's-book-world version
of a Live-Aid concert, with numerous luminaries contributing their talents to a
good cause and their proceeds to a selection of conservationist organizations. It's
a worthy project to be sure, but the submissions, all newly solicited, vary in appeal
and quality, with a few having a desultory air, others being preachy, and some,
especially among the nonfiction and the poetry, rising above the written-to-order
genesis. Seymour Simon contributes a fine piece on the importance of wetlands,
152 
* THE BULLETIN
and H. M. Hoover's "The Mushroom" is a lyrical meditation on the giant mush-
room that spread across underground acres for centuries, finally destroying a new
mall and exacting ecological retribution for the havoc humans had wreaked above.
X. J. Kennedy's earthworm limerick ("Said an earthworm to me, 'Beg your par-
don,/ May I bore a few holes in your garden?/ It may seem to you odd/ That I'd
chew through a clod./ But I don't want our planet to harden'") is a fresh comple-
ment to more sober contributions by Jane Yolen and Myra Cohn Livingston.
Rosemary Wells' "The Deep Green Gift" is an illustrated sermonette that does
justice to neither its subject nor its audience, while William Sleator's "Traffic" is
an effective enough science fiction story that seems for older readers than does the
rest of the collection. In short, an attractively illustrated, cleanly designed grab-
bag, probably of more interest as a souvenir for children's librarians than as a
cohesive anthology for children themselves. RS
FARENTINOS, ROBERT C. 
Winter's Orphans: The Search for a Family ofMountain
Lion Cubs: A True Story; illus. by Shannon Keegan. 
Roberts Rinehart, 1993 
64p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-879373-40-8 
$19.95
Papered. ISBN 1-879373-53-X 
$13.95 
R Gr. 3-7
A wildlife biologist tells the true story of the rescue of a litter of mountain lion cubs
after their mother is killed by a local resident on the Colorado Front Range. In a
fluid, somewhat verbose, first-person narrative the author recounts the story of
setting traps, watching for the animals, and capturing them for placement in a
rehabilitation center. The story is sympathetic to the plight of the cubs and drives
home the point that humans must learn to live with the other animals that inhabit
their environment. About mid-book, the storyteller has a dream in which he is
able to imagine the experiences of the largest cub from the time its mother is killed
to an encounter with a very unfriendly male mountain lion. The segment is prob-
ably intended to make the story more meaningful by telling it from the cub's point
of view, but as with many attempts to get inside another species' head, this crosses
into anthropomorphic territory: "Lanthito began to dream of waking up in the
morning to a big breakfast of redbird served up by his mother." Realistic pencil
drawings amplify the text with pictures of the storyteller, his cabin, and his appeal-
ing dog Tiki, not to mention the cubs. The dream sequence is illustrated with
watercolor paintings of the cubs and their habitat, and throughout the book, the
drawings of the animals capture their expressions and movements with precision
and empathy. CF
FEELINGS, TOM, comp. 
Soul Looks Back in Wonder; comp. and illus. by Tom
Feelings. 
Dial, 1993 
34p
ISBN 0-8037-1001-1 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Margaret Walker's opening "Mother of Brown-Ness" sets the tone for subsequent
selections by a dozen poets, including Maya Angelou, Lucille Clifton, Alexis De
Veaux, Langston Hughes, and Walter Dean Myers. These are consciously tailored
to fit Feelings' brown-toned art, which is spiced with occasional geometric flashes
of color and with paper-collage, marbled, or air-brushed effects. Message is the
medium here; the book is intended to celebrate and foster African-American pride
of creativity, and it does so with strong impact despite verbal and graphic cliches.
Kids will enjoy reading these aloud, especially the ones with fresh imagery of the
kind Angelou projects: "Popcorn leaps, popping from the floor/ of a hot black
skillet/ and into my mouth./ Black words leap, snapping from the white/ page ....
JANUARY 1994 * 
153
I love the book and the look of words/ the weight of ideas that popped into my
mind." BH
FLETCHER, SUSAN 
Dragon Kyn. 
Atheneum, 1993 
213p
ISBN 0-689-31880-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
On Kara's world, vermilion fever is deadly. They say she died of it when she was
four winters old, but that a dragon nursed her back to life in her burial cave. Since
then, Kara has had the uncanny ability to call down birds from the sky. Others in
her "steading" (community) despise Kara's gift until King Orrik summons her to
call down dragons for him. Under her king's orders to make him into a dragon-
slaying hero, Kara struggles with her conscience. 
Her dilemma builds as she
gradually remembers her connection to dragons and as the King's pblitical
motivations for heroism become more complex. This is a solid fantasy in a medieval
Scandinavian-like setting, and there's plenty of drama, romance, and knavery to
keep genre fans happy. KJ
FRADON, DANA 
The King's Fool: A Book about Medieval and Renaissance Fools;
written and illus. by Dana Fradon. 
Dutton, 1993 
40p
ISBN 0-525-45074-2 
$14.99 
R Gr. 3-5
Fradon, author of Harold the Herald (BCCB 10/90), here introduces youngsters
to another important character in medieval and renaissance life: the fool. Frambert,
a fictional but typical court jester, tells contemporary students in a museum all
about his confreres-in-folly and their lives. To have a fool, Frambert says, was like
having "your own private comedian to amuse you, cheer you up, and even give
you wise advice," and he explains who could be fools and what they would do
("There were male fools and female fools ... giant fools and dwarf fools ... learned
fools who specialized in clever wordplay"). The account captures well the peculiar
power of the jester's position, where one could speak one's mind freely to the king
when nobody else dared, but where one also slept on the floor with the spaniels.
Fradon also acknowledges that some kinds of humor popular then are no longer
acceptable ("Today, you know it's rude and unjust to ridicule or laugh at people
with disabilities or infirmities") and that fools were sometimes victimizers as well
as victimized. The line-and-wash art, strongly reliant on royal purple, shows cheer-
fully cartooned fools of all sizes, shapes, and costumes capering and wise-mouth-
ing as speech balloons sometimes continue the main text and sometimes offer
contrapuntal opinions (keep an eye out for the dogs, whose thoughts display some
dry common sense); simple footnotes are indicated by colored dots rather than
numbers, which helps pack the pages with vigorous detail. This is a good intro-
duction to one of the more fascinating historical roles, and it's a nice alternative to
jousting lore for those kids likelier to enjoy hey-nonny-no than bloodshed. DS
GARNER, ALAN 
Once Upon a Time, Though It Wasn't in Your Time, and It Wasn't
in My Time, and It Wasn't in Anybody Else's Time; illus. by Norman
Messenger. 
Dorling Kindersley, 1993 
29p
ISBN 1-56458-381-3 
$12.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Catching the rhythms, repetitions, and cumulations of traditional folktales, Gar-
ner tells three stories perhaps more notable for their formal effects than for their
substance, but no less engaging for all that. In "The Fox, the Hare, and the Cock"
a hare's been pushed out of her home by a fox, who responds "When I clump, ta-
ra! When I thump, ta-ra! When I jump, ta-ra-ra! How the fur flies!" whenever
154 
* THE BULLETIN
one of the hare's furry friends tries to get him to leave. But the cock has no fur,
and what's more, is carrying a sickle: "Cock-a-doodle-do! Cock-a-doodle! I've a
sickle on my shoulder! I shall cut the fox in two!" It does the trick. "The Girl and
the Geese" is unmemorable, but the last, "Battibeth," is a surrealistic shaggy dog
story in which a girl goes on her way to grandmother's house to exchange an egg
for a knife, but she trips over a penny, loses the egg, buys a needle with the penny,
has a blacksmith hammer the needle into a steeple, climbs the steeple and sees
"that the egg had hatched into a cockerel and was threshing corn for a farmer in his
barn." And that's just the beginning. The stories are brief and strongly structured,
good for closing a story hour that's been on the strange side, while Messenger's
cool, precise paintings reflect the rhythmic patterns of the narrative and echo the
surrealism with a straight face. RS
GREENFELD, 
HOWARD 
The Hidden Children. Ticknor & Fields,
1993 
[118p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-66074-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
"I realized at the time that our level of existence was worse than an animal. They
had some protection, there were only certain months you could shoot them," says
Jack Goldstein, one of more than fifteen Jewish Holocaust survivors Greenfeld
interviewed for this book. All of them experienced World War II as hidden chil-
dren: considered lucky not to have been killed or sent to concentration camps,
conditioned almost reflexively to keep quiet, they have been less vocal than others
about the experiences that robbed them of their childhood. Greenfeld laces to-
gether excerpts of autobiographical description with background narrative, orga-
nizing the whole into three sections that deal with the subjects' early exposure to
Nazi persecution, the events of their hiding, and the act and aftermath of libera-
tion. This process risks fragmentation of the subjects' stories but allows historical
patterns to emerge more clearly. The book is carefully formatted to allow space for
italicized quotes alternating with regular print and for photographs from the sub-
jects' past. A reading list contains more adult than children's literature; an index
will give students some access to factual references for specific research. BH
GREENLAW, M. JEAN 
Ranch Dressing: The Story of Western Wear. Lodestar,
1993 
78p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-67432-2 
$15.99 
R Gr. 4-7
Western hats, boots, and, of course, jeans have been around for awhile, and they're
still popular as well as useful in their way. Greenlaw looks at these and other items
of western wear and describes their invention, popularization, and contemporary
role in fashion and work, examining the influences of the Old West, rodeos, and
the movie and TV renditions of cowboy life. The text is occasionally a little exces-
sive in enthusiasm or scope (Is western wear really "the most enduring fashion in
clothing"?), but the cear description of duds and their uses makes for a pleasant
read, and one that might serve to link histories of the West to a more contempo-
rary viewpoint. The textbooky typeface and unimaginative format give the book
an unfortunately stodgy feel. Black-and-white photographs, some archival, some
recent, are liberally scattered through the text, although they're frequently dark; a
color insert gives a better idea of the flashiness possible in this simultaneously
practical and showy style. A list of western museums, a bibliography, and an index
are included. DS
JANUARY 1994 
* 155
GRIFFITH, HELEN V. 
Doll Trouble; illus. by Susan Condie Lamb. 
Greenwillow,
1993 
[12 8p]
ISBN 0-688-12421-6 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
In Caitlin's Holiday (BCCB 10/90), Caitlin adjusted to the pleasures and prob-
lems of having a doll, Holiday, who was really alive; in Doll Trouble, Caitlin and
Holiday, now firm friends, go through some rocky times when it appears that
Holiday is stealing doll clothes from Caitlin's bossy friend Jennifer. It turns out
that Caitlin's beloved former doll Jodi, now Jennifer's and ill-treated, has come
alive too, so finally Holiday tricks Jennifer into giving Jodi back to Caitlin. Some
of the plot twists are a little forced (such as the method by which the dolls come
alive and Holiday's staging of a dream-sequence at Jennifer's house), but the charm
of the secret friendship between girl and doll remains strong. Griffith taps unerr-
ingly into youthful jealousy and possessiveness in a way that kids will identify
with; fans of the first book won't be disappointed. DS
GUIBERSON, BRENDA Z. 
Salmon Story; written and illus. by Brenda Z. Guiberson
and with photographs. 
Holt, 1993 
71p 
(Redfeather Books)
ISBN 0-8050-2754-8 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
"What has happened to the salmon, the fish that is so important to the people of
the Pacific Northwest?" asks Brenda Guiberson. In a well-organized, though oc-
casionally patronizing, narrative Guiberson gives an explanation of the salmon life
cycle followed by a brief history of the importance of the salmon to Native Ameri-
can life. She then details the devastation of salmon habitats and reports on can-
nery and fish hatchery mismanagement over the past century, when the salmon
have been slowly disappearing due to pollution, plunder, ignorance, and waste.
The matter-of-fact discussion is hopeful despite the arresting facts; children will
understand from this account that the salmon is in serious trouble but will also be
aware that environmentalists and many others are using science and common sense
to find ways to save the species. Neat, labeled drawings and effective photos in
color and black-and-white illustrate the text, which is indexed. CF
HASELEY, DENNIS 
Horses with Wings; illus. by Lynn Curlee. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022886-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022885-7 
$16.00 
R 
5-7 yrs
No, it's not a retelling of the Pegasus myth, but it's in the same realm: Leon
Gambetta outsmarted the Prussians in their siege of Paris by going not through the
Prussians, but over them-in a hot air balloon. This is a simple picture-book
account of that pioneering feat, showing young M. Gambetta lofted high above
the city, blowing past a bored gargoyle, and floating south through the beauty and
tranquility of the clouds, the "horses with wings." Haseley is less concerned with
the military importance of the maneuver than with the idea of Gambetta's bal-
looning experience, which makes the book quite serene despite the grim basis for
the excursion. The illustrations are stylized paintings on canvas, flattened and
simplified in a way that echoes the freedom of the balloon but makes some odd
juxtapositions with the text (the soldiers and horses are twice referred to as going
through mud, but the ground seems quite pristine). The gently lyrical moments
of the text are enhanced by the centering of the words on the page, which gives
156 
* 
THE BULLETIN
them a free-verse look. A military anecdote made poetic, this captures a moment
in history that will engage dreamers as well as warriors. DS
HODGES, MARGARET, ad. 
Saint Patrick and the Peddler; illus. by Paul Brett
Johnson. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08639-9 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05489-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In a retelling simpler than Ruth Sawyer's "The Peddler of Ballaghadereen" and
more elaborate than Joseph Jacobs' "Peddler of Swaffham," this is an Irish version
of a story that many will know in its Jewish form, which Uri Shulevitz popularized
in his picture book The Treasure. It's about a poor man who dreams three times
that he must leave his humble cottage and go to a bridge in the city. There he
waits until a prosperous man inquires about his quest and calls him foolish for
following a dream; the prosperous man, after all, would never pay attention to his
own dream about a treasure buried under a humble cottage. Naturally, the poor
man hurries home and unearths the treasure. Saint Patrick's appearing in the
dream makes the book a natural for Irish celebrations, while Johnson's paintings,
though stiffly composed and over-glamorized in the nineteenth-century landscape
mode, do have a lush rusticity that's true to the Irish countryside and even truer to
a nostalgic recollection of it. BH
HOFFMAN, MARY 
The Four-Legged Ghosts; illus. by Laura L. Seeley. 
Dial,
1993 
90p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1645-1 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1466-1 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
"Other boys had younger sisters who were a real pain, but Carrie wasn't." It's not
her fault she's allergic to animals, and no one is happier than Carrie when Alex
finally gets a tiny mouse for his birthday and offers to share it with her. Also, no
one is more conspiratorially reliable when the mouse proves to be magic and starts
summoning ghosts of all the animals who've ever lived in the house. Bats, rabbits,
cats, dogs, a pony, etc., are one thing, but when a rhino, tiger, and angry elephant
materialize from body parts that were stuffed or cut off by a big game hunter, a
magician who boards with the family must intervene to reverse the work of what
turns out to be a sorcerer's apprentice. The situation gets a little farfetched and
more than a little contrived, but it's credibly detailed, with steady focus on a pair
of goodhearted siblings along with their enterprising mouse: "Tomorrow he would
decide what to do to make the children's lives more exciting again. After all, he
knew lots of other spells." First published in Great Britain as The Ghost Menagerie,
this is a pet fantasy with appeal for readers practicing on first chapter books, and
there's that hint of a series in the last sentence. BH
HONEYCUTT, NATALIE 
Lydia Jane and the Baby-Sitter Exchange. 
Bradbury,
1993 
117p
ISBN 0-02-744362-0 
$13.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Lydia Jane is a third-grader with an inquiring mind: she wants to see what hail is
like and discover how bats navigate by sonar and figure out how to patch the hole
in the ozone layer. Unfortunately, she and her sister Gabrielle spend their time
after school at the house of timid Mrs. Humphries, who's alarmed at any childish
activities other than watching television. Lydia Jane proposes various braver care-
taker alternatives (an au pair or Grandma), and she's finally gratified by becoming
JANUARY 1994 
* 
157
the charge of a high-school girl apparently as inquisitive as Lydia Jane herself.
Whether she's taking impressions of raccoon tracks (and there's a nice research
plug for libraries in there) or roller-skating with her increasingly daring friend
Juliet (see Juliet Fisher and the FoolproofPlan), Lydia Jane's doings are spontaneous
and funny; her book is full of warmth and freshness that kids will enjoy. DS
JACQUES, BRIAN 
Martin the Warrior. Philomel, 1994 
[375p]
ISBN 0-399-22670-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Jacques has perfected his formula in this long-awaited book about the legendary
warrior-mouse, Martin. What is disappointing is that Martin-the source of in-
spiration for so many of Jacques' animal heroes-is not bigger than the formula.
Like the other heroes, Martin battles with a truly loathsome villain in order to free
hundreds of innocent animal slaves. This time, the villain is named Badrang, and
he controls a "vermin horde" (rats, stoats, ferrets, and weasels) in a fortress at the
edge of the sea. Martin, who has suffered as one of Badrang's slaves, draws to-
gether an army of loyal followers (rabbits, mice, moles, squirrels, hedgehogs, etc.)
that attacks and eventually defeats Badrang's horde. Surprisingly, Jacques, who
typically describes gruesome deaths with enthusiasm, handles the death of Rose
(Martin's true love) so gingerly that the reader is not certain she has died until she
is buried a few pages later. The moral here: Martin's just another hero who puts
his pants on one leg at a time like the rest of them. Burr, hurr. KJ
KALMAN, 
MAIRA 
Chicken Soup, Boots; written and illus. by Maira
Kalman. 
Viking, 1993 
34 p
ISBN 0-670-85201-5 
$14.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
For short-order cook Barney March, "chicken soup boots" means chicken soup to
go, and he's up at "half a yawn past dawn" to be the "morning greeter, counter-
whizzer, white-apron wearer" at Joe Junior's Coffee Shop. Barney's is just one of
the many jobs Kalman rhapsodizes over in her latest who-is-this-book-for-anyway
picture book, paying visits as well to a world famous doctor ofsmellology, astrono-
mer Venezuela Katz, fire fighter Lois Mingay, and barber Mr. Romeo Valentine
"doing a snip-snap-snip." While the text is too long, rambling, and sometimes
self-indulgent, it's a lot more fun than most career guides, and infectiously enthu-
siastic about vocation, "your job. Your work. Your it. Your you." If not as
straightforward as the author-artist's Sayonara, Mrs. Kackleman (BCCB 11/89),
the book is more authentically childlike than her Max the Dog books, and there's
lots of goofy detail in both words and pictures, with portraits of hardworking
people looking like post-modern icons. RS
KENDALL, Russ 
Russian Girl: Life in an Old Russian Town; written and illus.
with photographs by Russ Kendall. 
Scholastic, 1994 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-45789-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
RAIMONDO, Lois 
The Little Lama of Tibet; written and illus. with photographs
by Lois Raimondo. 
Scholastic, 1994 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-590-46167-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
These two photo-portraits, one of a prototypical child, the other decidedly not,
take young readers to the other side of the world for a look at some very different
158 
* THE BULLETIN
cultures. Kendall's Russian girl is nine-year-old Olga, who lives with her parents
and brother in a town 150 miles east of Moscow. Olga goes to school, visits her
grandmother's farm, does her homework, plays-in short, this is a gende perestroika
picture of how much "they" are like "us," and it's quite well done, with both words
and pictures (Kendall's photos are crisp and sunny) containing the particularizing
details that American nine-year-olds will appreciate. 
The Little Lama is perkily
introduced by the Dalai Lama, who writes "Lois Raimondo has produced a de-
lightful children's book, based on the story of the reincarnation of my late tutor,
Ling Rinpoche." In this incarnation Ling Rinpoche is a six-year-old boy, already
revered as a high lama and studying at the Tibetan Buddhist monastery in
Dharamsala, heart of the Tibetan exile community in northern India. Ling
Rinpoche's story is necessarily more complex than Olga's, and Raimondo focuses
on the daily pattern of his life-studying, playing, blessing pilgrims and offering
"advices"-while underplaying the religious beliefs that shape his destiny and the
nature of the Tibetan exile. (The Dalai Lama's introduction and Raimondo's
afterword will help adults with the context of both concepts.) Raimondo's photos
are somewhat dark (a note explains that they were shot with available light), but
show a bright, alert little boy surrounded by a host of loving monks, stuffed ani-
mals, and Legos. Both books include valuable supplementary material: Kendall's,
some recipes, a Cyrillic alphabet, glossary, and a note to adults; Raimondo's, the
Tibetan alphabet, a letter from Ling Rinpoche to American children, and a map.
RS
KING, SANDRA 
Shannon: An Ojibway Dancer; illus. with photographs by Catherine
Whipple. 
Lerner, 1993 
48p 
(We Are Still Here: Native Americans Today)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8225-2652-2 
$14.96
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8225-9643-1 
$6.95 
Ad Gr. 4-7
ROESSEL, MONTY 
Kinaaldd: A Navajo Girl Grows Up; written and illus. with
photographs by Monty Roessel. 
Lerner, 1993 
48p 
(We Are Still Here: Na-
tive Americans Today)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8225-2655-7 
$14.96
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8225-0641-5-$6.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Two more entries in Lerner's We Are Still Here series of photoessays (see also
Peters' Clambake, BCCB 11/92) focus on two thirteen-year-old girls: Shannon, a
Minnesotan Ojibway who participates in "fancy shawl" dances and competitions
at regional powwows; and Celinda, a Navajo girl living in New Mexico and under-
going her Kinaaldi, a traditional girls' rite-of-passage ceremony. Shannon com-
bines details of the girl's everyday life in Minneapolis' Indian community with her
preparations for dancing; while the book has lots of engaging detail, it's also dis-
organized, and, unlike Ancona's Powwow (BCCB 5/93), never shows the pro-
tagonist performing in the competition for which she prepares. Kinaalid is more
straightforward, following Celinda through the two-day family rituals that prepare
her for womanhood: praying, running to commemorate the first KinaaldA (see
Seymour's The Gift ofChanging Woman, BCCB 11/93), making bread, being blessed
and blessing others in return. Both books have a friendly, informal tone that
emphasizes the fit of old customs into contemporary life; each also has clear color
photos that are candid and unposed, with the pictures in Kinaaldd having both
beauty and drama as the ritual unfolds against the desert landscape. Each book has
a brief glossary and reading list. RS
JANUARY 1994 
* 
159
KIRKLAND, GELSEY 
The Little Ballerina and Her Dancing Horse; written by Gelsey
Kirkland and Greg Lawrence; illus. by Jacqueline Rogers. 
Doubleday,
1993 
120p
ISBN 0-385-46978-0 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 4-7
Rosalie is eleven, and she loves ballet and riding her horse, Sugar; she's finding out,
however, that "if you love to dance and ride as much as I do, it can make you really
crazy. Like if you have to decide which one you love more." That happens when
her ballet teacher tells her that riding interferes with her ballet progress. Her mother,
whose dance career was cut short by a riding injury, also wants Rosie to stop riding;
when she does, both she and Sugar are unhappy, until her uncle Max solves the
problem by bringing her a sidesaddle, in which she can ride without interfering
with her development as a dancer. At the heart of the story is a real dilemma with
which kids may empathize (even as it suggests privilege that they'll envy), but the
style is flat and rambling and the tale more than a little saccharine, with Rosie
writing sentimental poems to her horse and an elfin old farrier telling of Sugar's
great sadness at being ignored ("Why, a horse can die of a broken heart. I've seen
'em do it. They get a sadness inside, and they won't let go of it, and they won't eat
nothin' either"). Undistinguished pencil drawings, some too dark for clarity, ap-
pear throughout. DS
KRAMER, S. A. 
Adventure in Alaska: An Amazing True Story of the World's Long-
est, Toughest, Dog SledRace; illus. by Karen Meyer and with photographs. 
Random
House, 1993 
96p 
(Read It To Believe It!)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-94511-3 
$9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-84511-9 
$2.99 
R Gr. 3-6
Libby Riddles was the first woman to win the grueling Iditarod dogsled race in
Alaska, and this account, taken from Riddles' own adult book Race Across Alaska,
captures all the mile-by-mile danger, excitement, and drudgery. Kramer's present-
tense narration is immediate ("Balanced on the runners, she drops off to sleep.
Bam! She hits a tree branch!") and suspenseful, since readers aren't told in the
beginning that Riddles is going to win. Sentences are short and extroverted, rely-
ing on lots of action verbs and sensory details to convey what's happening to Riddles
right now. Occasional restrained pencil drawings and a few photographs accent
the text without making it look too juvenile; a "Want to Know More?" section
includes a few books and pertinent organizations; there's even an index, rare in
paperback reluctant-reader fare. (For another "Read It to Believe It!" title, see
Donnelly, above.) RS
LAUBER, PATRICIA 
Be a Friend to Trees; illus. by Holly Keller. 
HarperCollins,
1994 [32p] 
(Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021529-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021528-3 
$15.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-445120-8 
$4.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 1-3
"Trees are nice," begins Lauber, recalling Udry and Simont's picture book classic,
and as she amply goes on to point out, trees are useful, both for the things that can
be made out of them, and the things they make, i.e., maple syrup, fruit, nuts,
oxygen. This is a notably comprehensive nature study book for primary graders;
160 
* THE BULLETIN
facts, organization of material, and pen-and-watercolor illustrations are equally
uncluttered. Along with the usefulness of trees to humankind, Lauber also covers
their importance to the food chain, as animal shelter, and in the water cycle. Con-
cepts are explained clearly and succinctly, and throughout, the book encourages
observations, questions, and an ecological way of thinking. It's the kind of book
that makes you want to take the kids for a walk in the park, where you'll both learn
something new. RS
LEVENTHAL, 
DEBRA 
What Is 
Your Language?; illus. by Monica
Wellington. 
Dutton, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45133-1 
$12.99 
M 
4-6 yrs
An easy multicultural lesson for story hour, this song takes a little boy on a quick
trip around the globe, beginning in England, ending in Spain, and making stop-
overs in Germany, France, Russia, the Arctic, Japan, China, the Middle East, and
East Africa. At each stop, the boy asks/sings the same question, "What is your
language? Please tell me now," and the locals respond, "My language is German
[French, Russian, etc.]. This is the way it sounds: jajajajajajajjajaja 
[oui, da,
etc.]. While the kids will like learning the word for "yes" in several languages (also
"no," when the foreign pals tell the boy not to go), the song is pretty vacuous, and
the tune even lacks the catchiness of "It's a Small World After All." The nostalgic,
'fifties-styled art is sweet and simple but trite, with smiley-faced UNICEF children
engaged in "customs" such as dogsledding in the Arctic or flamenco dancing in
Spain. The melody line with guitar chords is appended, along with a note on the
languages; endpapers feature a world map labeling the oceans and continents (and
Greenland) but not the countries mentioned in the book. RS
LISLE, JANET TAYLOR 
Forest. Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
150p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08653-4 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06803-X 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-6
For generations, two towns exist, top by bottom, and no one in either town knows
anything about the inhabitants of the other until Amber, a human child from
Lower Forest, spends the night in a treetop inhabited by mink-tailed squirrels of
the Upper Forest. Considering the child an alien and an invader, the alarmed
squirrels devise a plan to harass Amber. Meanwhile, her family, particularly her
father, try to figure out why she has run away again. "Amber says people have
started to like killing each other. . . . She says she can hardly stand it anymore,"
notes her younger brother Wendell. "That's a wonderful reason to run away at
five-thirty on Sunday morning," answers Mr. Padgett. The town goes out looking
for her, Mr. Padgett notices a lot of squirrels and gets his shotgun, and the battle is
on. The incidents of escalating violence based upon misunderstanding, mistakes,
and misinformation are chronicled in alternating chapters from the point of view
of the peacemakers in each society: young Woodbine of Upper Forest and Amber
and her brother from Lower Forest. The plot careens from event to event and
carries the young peacemakers, the addlepated adults of both societies, and the
reader to an exciting ending. Lisle has created a world of innocence marked with
heartache, truth infused with absurdity, and wisdom relinquished to recklessness-
all in the guise of animal fantasy. CF
JANUARY 1994 
* 
161
LITTLECHILD, GEORGE 
This Land Is My Land; written and illus. by George
Littlechild. 
Children's Book Press, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-89239-119-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-12
Less a picture book than a gallery of paintings, this is a collection of Canadian Cree
artist George Littlechild's images drawing from, commemorating, questioning,
and celebrating his heritage, both personal and tribal. The pictures are ceremoni-
ally iconographic, often overtly political, and include both historical and magical
motifs, as in one called "In Memory of the Sioux Warriors," which shows a brightly
costumed horse-man against an expressionistic night sky spotted with stars and
jewels and little plastic horses. Although the collage elements of the original paint-
ings don't always show up well in the reproductions here, the naive, poster-like
(sometimes awkward) style and bold, eccentric (sometimes jarring) coloring are
confident and immediate. Littlechild discusses each painting in a paragraph or
two; while the notes tend to explain too much ("The red horse is taught that he is
always wrong and whites are always right. That is why the check marks appear on
the white horses"), they are honest and personalizing, linking the rhetoric of the
art to the life history of the artist. RS
LLORENTE, PILAR MOLINA 
The Apprentice; tr. from the Spanish by Robin
Longshaw; illus. by Juan Ram6n Alonso. 
Farrar, 1993 
101p
ISBN 0-374-30389-4 
$13.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Arduino is a young Florentine in the Renaissance, eager to learn the secrets of art
from a master. He soon finds, however, that apprenticeship is not what he dreamed:
he cleans up the workroom, mixes pigments, sleeps on the floor, and never gets a
chance to do anything artistic. He is shocked to discover that the Maestro keeps
his former apprentice Donato chained in the attic, where the young artist has been
for over a year since he displayed talent that rivaled the Maestro's. Fortunately
Arduino saves Donato and the day when an important commission needs more
attention than the sickly Maestro can give it, so Arduino convinces the Maestro to
preserve his good name by freeing Donato to complete the work with Arduino's
assistance. The characterization is slight and the plotting has some problems-the
melodrama of the apprentice-in-the-attic story is excessive, especially since the grave
and measured tone of the prose is unsuited to such high drama. More successful
and appealing is the presentation of apprenticeship as a gritty and lonesome expe-
rience, with young men jealous of one another and yearning for their families.
Readers may not realize just how many hands it took to make an Old Master, and
this is an account that will give them a window into the Renaissance that they
probably won't get in Art Appreciation. Stiffly drafted pencil drawings appear
throughout. DS
MCCAFFERTY, JIM 
Holt and the Cowboys; illus. by Florence S. Davis. 
Pelican,
1993 
40p
ISBN 0-88289-985-6 
$12.95 
NR 
Gr. 2-4
"For a boy who loved the outdoors as much as Holt did, Plum Ridge was a great
place to be." Sounds innocuous enough, but Holt is an African-American slave,
and Plum Ridge is the plantation where he lives. Holt loves his master, and when
he "heard that Colonel Hinds was going off to war, he was heartbroken," so Holt
joins the Confederate Army as a cavalry scout, serves as "one of the bravest men in
162 
* THE BULLETIN
the whole brigade," and then after a while goes back home to the plantation:
"Mississippi is the place for me." Neither Emancipation nor the end of the war is
mentioned, but when Holt's master-his "best friend"-is accidently killed in a
knife fight, Holt leaves to look for work in Texas, where he apparently experiences
racial discrimination for the first time in his life. Here the story gains a slight tang
of realism as Holt outsmarts the bigoted cowboys who set him on an intractable
horse in order to teach Holt a lesson, but Holt tames the horse, gains the respect of
the cowboys, and gets the job. This exercise in kinder, gentler history is suppos-
edly based on true events, but no background notes are included, and the entire
lack of historical context is unconscionable. While the book says that Mr. Hinds
"owned Plum Ridge," it skips over the fact that he also owned Holt; likewise, you
might need to tell young readers something the book forgets to mention: the
South lost the war. RS
MACDONALD, CAROLINE 
Hostilities: Nine Bizarre Stories. Scholastic,
1994 
[228p]
ISBN 0-590- 46063-3 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
"Bizarre" seems the safest blanket term for these stories, since some are supernatu-
ral, others not, but they all deal with creepy and familial events. "The Dam" tells
of a boy who stays with his aunt, discovering buried family secrets-and buried
family. In "The Thief in the Rocks" the protagonist loses her parents to a girl who
successfully impersonates her. "Hostilities," the best of the collection, describes a
pair of stepsiblings who are not blending well at all. The writing is clear and
straightforward ("From this moment, Jasper would have to be grateful to her for as
long as she lived") and the plotlines intriguing, making this a good offering for
reluctant readers; the combination of the supernatural and the all-too-human makes
it a volume that might appeal both to kids who like ghosty stories and to those
who don't. DS
MARK, JAN, comp. 
The OxfordBook ofChildren's Stories. Oxford, 1993 
450p
ISBN 0-19-214228-3 
$25.00 
R Gr. 7 up
This book of forty-four stories is chock-full of famous names in children's literature,
but most contemporary children have never read Thomas Day, Catherine Sinclair,
or perhaps even Kipling or Sandburg. Mark seems to have compiled with freshness
and appeal in mind, however, because there are no old chestnuts here; the authors
may be canonical but the included selections generally aren't, making this lively
reading rather than a potted literary history. The old tales remain as compelling as
ever. Who wouldn't want to know what happens to "The Ill-Natured Boy" of
Thomas Day's, who seats a blind beggar in a dungheap and then attempts to feed
the man morsels from it? Who could remain indifferent to Lucy Lane Clifford's
unnerving "The New Mother," wherein two kids are so bad that they drive their
mother away and receive a new mother with glass eyes and a wooden tail? More
contemporary offerings come from Rosa Guy ("She"), Anne Fine (whose "Fabric
Crafts" is one of the funniest entries), and Jan Mark herself. It's understandably a
largely British/Commonwealth collection, but a few Americans (Louisa May Alcott
and Lucretia Hale, for instance) make it in; interestingly, the newer stories are
likelier than the old to tend toward sentimentality. Mark opens with a substantial
introduction that briefly outlines the history of children's literature, and she finishes
JANUARY 1994 
* 
163
off with source notes and a few further details about each story (although some of
the notes are editorially eccentric) as well as a list of books for further reading and
a few specialized collections, all of which make the volume professionally useful.
Kids may not immediately take to the conservative-anthology look of the volume,
but some of the entries would make for terrific readalouds for various ages, after
which browsers may want to dip into the book on their own. DS
MEYER, CAROLYN 
White Lilacs. Gulliver/Harcourt, 1993 
24 2p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200641-9 
$10.95
Papered. ISBN 0-15-295876-2 
$3.95 
R Gr. 7-10
It's in the midst of a civilized ladies' luncheon that Rose Lee, serving at the table,
first hears about the plan to turn Dillon's black neighborhood, Freedomtown, into
a park, exiling the families that live there to the wasteland at the edge of town.
Loosely basing her novel on an incident that took place in the 1920s in Denton,
Texas, Meyer focuses the history through Rose Lee, a twelve-year-old African-
American girl who works alongside her grandfather for the Bell family, leaders in
the drive to build the park and force out the residents by increasingly violent means.
Rose Lee's recollective narration is understated, with even such events as an attack
by the KKK given the controlled distance of memory. A gifted artist, Rose Lee
gains the attention of Emily Firth, a white Yankee transplant who, in the eyes of
the town, has some mighty dangerous ideas about integration, and who suggests to
Rose Lee that she document the houses and churches of Freedomtown in her
sketchbook before they are destroyed or moved. While Rose Lee is more observer
than principle actor in the drama, she is a distinct presence, with a proud sense of
self nowhere more in evidence than in her complicated friendship with Catherine
Jane, daughter of the Bells. The girls' relationship-which moves from a secret
childhood alliance (with Catherine Jane always retaining the upper hand) to the
dynamics between a pampered daughter-of-the-house and her maid-gives the
book a tension wire that links the sad events to the end, where Catherine Jane, not
without a certain amount of self-congratulation, proves her mettle. RS
MOHLBERGER, RICHARD 
What Makes a Monet a Monet?; Paper ed. ISBN 0-670-
85200-7 WhatMakes a Bruegela Bruegel?; Paper ed. ISBN 0-670-85203-1. 
Each
book: Metropolitan Museum ofArt/Viking, 1993 
Papered. $9.95 
48p 
illus.
with photographs 
(What Makes A... A ... ) 
R Gr. 6-10
Each entry in this attractive series focuses on one famous artist, examining in detail
twelve important paintings and using them to discuss the artist's career. In Monet,
for example, the paintings chosen show Monet's obsession with light, fascination
with water, and interest in the family; in Bruegel the author mentions the artist's
extensive use of detail and spiritual metaphor. Paintings generally appear once in
full-page format and then several times in section or detail, which helps clarify the
specific analysis in the text. The writing is sometimes quite sophisticated, with few
definitions and no glossary, so the illustrations are crucial, but Miihlberger works
through the paintings quietly and carefully and shows a reassuring willingness to
admit that there are some paintings no one has figured out. Unfortunately the
final "What makes a ... 
" section is the weakest, with slapdash, oversimplified
statements that seem to apply mostly to the painting on the endpapers rather than
the artist's work as a whole. The books are helpful, detail-oriented art mono-
graphs rather than the guide to individuality that they promise, but they're good
164 
* THE BULLETIN
companions to Greenberg's The Painter's Eye (BCCB 12/91) or Isaacson's A Short
Walk around the Pyramids (BCCB 10/93), and they'd make excellent pre-museum
trip reading. DS
MURPHY, 
JIM 
Across America on an Emigrant Train. Clarion,
1993 
150p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-63390-7 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
The linchpin of this book is Robert Louis Stevenson's 1879 journey from Scotland
to California to visit the woman he was to marry, but that's just a departure point
for an examination and evocation of the emigrant experience. Stevenson's most
individual response to his near-steerage ocean crossing and exhausting train jour-
ney across the country serves to convey that of millions, as Murphy adds to the
writer's account with historical facts and other travelers' anecdotes, telling of awful
meals and kind fellow passengers, train wrecks and emigrant fates in the New
World. The combination of personal account and history, liberally seasoned with
archival photographs and engravings, covers some well-trodden territory but takes
a fresh look at it, bringing home how uncomfortable, frightening, and exciting the
cross-continental journey was and how much labor it took from everyone to make
it possible. This is a sound and vivid volume that makes for an appealing approach
to U.S. history. There are no notes, but an extensive bibliography is included, as is
an index and a detailed journey map. DS
OBERMAN, SHELDON 
TheAlways Prayer Shawl; illus. by Ted Lewin. 
Boyds Mills,
1994 
34 p
ISBN 1-878093-22-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
This personal history in picture book format is dominated by the emblematic
prayer shawl that Adam receives from his grandfather before he and his parents sail
across the sea from Russia to "a new country where everyone spoke a different
language"-presumably North America, since the signs are in English. There he
marries, grows old, and eventually passes on to his own grandson (and namesake)
the prayer shawl that he has worn and mended until every part of it has been
replaced except the truth of his grandfather's advice: "Some things change. And
some things don't." It's hard to compress an entire lifetime into such a brief
narrative without sacrificing vivid details. The story begins with specific descrip-
tions about Adam's rural childhood "many years ago" but then telescopes his im-
migration, suburban, and retirement home experiences. Though the central theme
ties it all together, the prose is sometimes choppy, and Lewin's watercolors-haunt-
ing in black and white-make an unexpected change to color without a clear ratio-
nale for the point of change. Nevertheless, the book will have great appeal in
traditional Jewish communities and will offer multicultural primary-grade class-
rooms a reference point for discussion of family heritage. BH
PAULSEN, GARY 
Harris andMe: A Summer Remembered. Harcourt, 1993 
157p
ISBN 0-15-292877-4 
$13.95 
R* 
Gr. 6-8
The story begins as the unnamed hero, a friendless victim of alcoholic and abusive
parents, bounces along in a 1949 pickup that's taking him to live on his uncle's
farm. There, he meets the dirtiest farmhand he has ever seen and a family that
eats, works, and sleeps with the unrefined intensity of backwoods heathens. This
place has the pig poop, cowpies, muck, and acrid smells of which farms are really
JANUARY 1994 
* 
165
made. More than that, it has Harris, a fearless, foolish boy who lures our thought-
ful but still unschooled hero into entanglements with the environment that more
often than not send the boys flying into the air while a bemused and unperturbed
nature waits patiently for them to learn the rules. The boys turn pig pens into
games of "GI Joe," play Tarzan from the hayloft, and emulate Gene Autry in an
incident that leaves Harris with the breath knocked out of him and the reader
breathless with laughter. Through it all, the lonely hero imperceptibly learns about
belonging. Twain wrote ironically about a veneer of civility that covered a thought-
less and evil society of humans; Paulsen has created an opposite world. The farm
life here is cruel, crude, and harsh with no nuances. There are bleating animals,
profane expletives, and descriptions that will turn your stomach. But there is also
hilarity, untamed confidence, genuine concern for others, and a belief in good-
ness-one of the most optimistic fictional worlds to invite young visitors in a long
while. CF
PHILBRICK, RODMAN 
Freak the Mighty. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1993 
169p
ISBN 0-590-47412-X 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Maxwell Kane is triply cursed: he's huge for his age, he's terrible at schoolwork,
and he's the son of "Killer" Kane, who's currently in prison for murder. His life
changes when Freak moves in to the house behind him; Freak, real name Kevin, is
toddler-sized and walks only with braces and crutches but has an intelligence and
arrogance that Max warms to, and together, with Freak riding on Max's shoulders,
they make "Freak the Mighty," nine feet tall and equipped with superior intelli-
gence. Freak's friendship and genius help save Max when his newly released father
kidnaps him, but Max can't save Freak from the early death to which his limited
body dooms him. The book is unsubtle but compelling, with the outrageous
grotesquerie of the partnership conveyed enjoyably in Max's narration. The melo-
dramatic excess of the kidnapping father makes for more plot than necessary, but
the novel is full of unlikely extremes anyway, so involved readers probably won't
mind. Sort of A Separate Peace meets OfMice and Men, it's a sentimental story
written with energy and goofy humor instead of sentimentality; without being put
off by the emotion, kids will be drawn in by the idea and appreciate the story of an
unusual relationship. DS
PLATT, RICHARD 
Stephen Biesty's Incredible Cross-Sections Man-of-War; illus. by
Stephen Biesty. 
Dorling Kindersley, 1993 
32p
ISBN 1-56458-321-X 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
This followup to Incredible Cross-Sections focuses on a man-of-war, a ship modeled
on Admiral Nelson's famous HMS Victory. Each spread takes you through an-
other slice of the ship moving from the stern to the bow; the text not only describes
the points depicted in the illustration but also addresses specific aspects of ship-
board life ("Cooking and Eating," "Battle Stations," "Health at Sea"). The cross-
sections are filled with intriguing details, including a stowaway hiding on board, a
sailor stealing eggs, and decapitated human heads plunging into the depths during
battle. While the drawings and format lack David Macaulay's clarity and some of
the British puns will elude young American readers, the gallimaufry of nautical
niceties (many pleasingly gruesome) is still absorbing as it evokes a rough and self-
contained world from days gone by. An index and glossary are included. DS
166 
* THE BULLETIN
RAIMONDO, Lois 
The Little Lama of Tibet
See Kendall, p. 157, for review.
RANDOM HOUSE BOOK OF EASY-TO-READ STORIES. 
Random House,
1993 
252p 
illus.
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-93438-3 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-83438-9 
$18.00 
M 
4-7 yrs
Where previous Random House anthologies (Prelutsky's Random House Book of
Poetry for Children, BCCB 11/83; Pollack's The Random House Book ofHumor for
Children, 1/89, etc.) cast a wide net for their selections, the sixteen stories found
here all come from various Random House beginning- and easy-to-read series.
Those series have produced some classics (Seuss' Cat in the Hat, Eastman's Are You
My Mother.) that unfortunately aren't found here, with Seuss being represented by
some minor nonsense poems and Eastman's Go, Dog. Go! excerpted into the less-
than-memorable "Dog Party." Other stories, such as Charlotte Doyle's "Freddie's
Spaghetti," seem to be missing some pictures, and Katharine Ross' adaptation of
"The Ugly Duckling" is incomprehensible. Better selections include Annabelle
Prager and Tomie de Paola's "The Birthday Party" and Deborah Hautzig and
Marc Brown's "Little Witch's Big Night," but even the success of these is vitiated
by the collection's run-on format, each poem or story following the last without
much of a visual break. An introduction suggests that parents can share the book
with the pre-literate, who can later read from it themselves, but too many of the
stories are too choppy or oblique for reading either aloud or alone. Besides, the joy
of beginning-to-read books is in their tailored-to-small-hands format. RS
ROESSEL, MONTY 
Kinaaldd: A Navajo Girl Grows Up
See King, p. 158, for review.
RUPERT, RONA 
Straw Sense; illus. by Mike Dooling. 
Simon, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-671-77047-0 
$14.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Beginning rather mysteriously with the three-word sentence "He never spoke" and
moving on to the description of a boy who "lost his voice the night the forest
burned down" and now lives with a woman "who called herself his aunt," this is a
story that could have profited from some kind of scene-setting note. A mute
newcomer to an unidentified village, the boy becomes engrossed by a neighbor's
artistic creation of a scarecrow family to protect the surrounding strawberry fields.
After lending a hand with the straw dolls, the boy eventually speaks: "My name is
Goolam-Habib." There's a subtle drama to Goolam-Habib's development, and
the paintings provide some richly textured background in the form of landscape
and portraiture. From the back-flap bio, we can assume this takes place in con-
temporary rural South Africa, a location of interest to young listeners hooked on
the human interest of the story itself. BH
SAN Souci, ROBERT D. 
The Snow Wife; illus. by Stephen T. Johnson. 
Dial,
1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1410-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1409-2 
$14.99 
R 5-8 yrs
Kids intrigued by yetis will find this retelling of a Japanese legend eerily appealing:
JANUARY 1994 
* 167
it starts when a supernatural woman freezes an old woodcutter but spares his young
companion, Minokichi, who later meets her in human form and marries her. Then
Minokichi breaks a promise not to mention his wintry brush with death, where-
upon he must trek past a threatening Mountain Man and cannibalistic ogress to
win back his wife from the Wind God. The paintings are as coldly spooky as the
story, with awesome demon-figures and impressionistic layers of color overcast by
snowy white. Even the adaptation (no source cited) has a trace of cool wit: "Cir-
cumstances-a white hairy ogress to be exact-forced my disrespectful act," says
Minokichi to the Wind God. Try this for variety at Halloween or any old time
you need a ghost story. BH
SCOTT, ELAINE 
Funny Papers: Behind the Scenes of the Comics; illus., and with
photographs by Margaret Miller. 
Morrow, 1993 
90p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11576-4 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11575-6 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The first half of Funny Papers contains a short history of comics as an original
American art form and a flattering description of the work of Hank Ketcham,
Charles Schultz, and Chic Young, among others. Charles Schultz' ego is healthy:
"Peanuts will stop when he retires. 'No one continued to draw Picasso's pictures
after he died,' Mr. Schultz says." The cartoonists mentioned most often are the
patriarchs of comics, and young readers will be disappointed that their favorites
(such as Gary Larson or Bill Watterson) are barely mentioned. In places, the text
reads like a well-written but under-researched college paper ("The comics can make
us laugh, and laughter is a wonderful thing") and young readers could lose interest
before Scott hits her stride in the book's second half. There she tells how comics
are published, from the initial creation to color separation (although all the photos
are black-and-white) to distribution among thousands of newspapers. This sec-
tion could be used in a school unit on newspaper publishing. Although the book
is not as solid overall as Scott's earlier Look Alive (BCCB 9/92) on puppet anima-
tion, its popular subject exerts appeal. KJ
SEIBOLD, J. Orro 
Mr. Lunch Takes a Plane Ride; written byJ. Otto Seibold and
Vivian Walsh; illus. byJ. Otto Seibold. 
Viking, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-670-84775-5 
$14.99 
R 4-7 yrs
Mr. Lunch, a dog, is an expert bird-chaser, so he's excited when a TV talk show
host invites him-and the bird of his choice-to fly out and be on the show. Mr.
Lunch is even more thrilled about the plane ride than the TV appearance, so he's
disappointed when he and Ambrose (the bird) are put in with the luggage. The
two do get up to some mischief, the results of which only become apparent when
it's TV time, and Mr. Lunch finds several other fellow passengers-whose luggage
he has mixed up-appearing as guests on the show. The jokes are easy to get and
affectionately made; kids who have gotten into the wrong places will know just
how Mr. Lunch feels. While the book has a sophisticated retro look to it, there's
lots of child appeal here, in the story and in the goofy, busy pictures of Mr. Lunch's
friends, his journey, and his eventual TV triumph. It's interesting that even while
a note states that the pictures were made on a Macintosh, they have a lot more
heart and all-around amiability than the art in many of the painstakingly
handpainted but pretentious picture books we've been seeing so much of lately.
The creamy page color and subdued hues help, but most of the credit goes to Mr.
168 
* THE BULLETIN
Lunch himself, happily whizzing about the wacky landscape that Seibold (and
Mac) have created for him. RS
SHANNON, 
GEORGE 
Climbing Kansas Mountains; illus. by Thomas B.
Allen. 
Bradbury, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-02-782181-1 
$15.95 
R Gr. K-3
On a white-hot summer afternoon Sam and his father drive to the edge of their
midwestern town and climb to the top of the grain elevator, a Kansas "mountain,"
to peer down at the flat prairie below. Illustrator Thomas Allen's Kansas has a sky
as blue as a basketful of cornflowers and a shimmering heat that envelops the
buildings on Main Street, the towering grain elevator, and the flat farmland laid
out in perfect squares to the horizon. Well-executed, if nostalgia-charged, char-
coal drawings with pastels of blue and brown and a sheen of white create a breath-
less summer day and breathtaking views of ordinary places. Shannon's story reflects
a cozy summer memory of a bonding experience between a boy and his father. It's
more description than plot, but the tone is warm and intimate with childlike lan-
guage and viewpoint: "All the way through town on one straight street, everything
in the distance always wrinkled from the heat." From the "high quiet view," the
pictures take flight while the words are snug and secure: "There were squares as
smooth as fancy pants and squares plowed up like corduroy .... All held together
like our tablecloth." CF
SIEGEL, BEATRICE 
Murder on the Highway: The Viola Liuzzo Story. 
Four Winds,
1994 
[128p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-02-782632-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Viola Liuzzo found a cause in the Civil Rights movement and almost immediately
lost her life to it. Thus her story is really the story of the protest march from Selma
to Montgomery, and Siegel spends the first four chapters describing the racist
conditions leading up to that climactic event. Liuzzo herself-though obviously a
complex individual with a history of impulsive behavior and some instability along
with her intelligence and warmhearted generosity-seems a pawn of fate. "In the
heat of the final arguments, Mrs. Liuzzo was almost forgotten," says the author
about the murder trial. "It had become a case of white supremacy against the
rights of African Americans." To some extent, then, we never get to know the
white woman gunned down by the Klan, but we clearly see what gave her a place
in history. This is a clean synthesis based on media reports, magazine articles,
personal interviews, and FBI files. The foreword by Rosa Parks, the black-and-
white newspaper photos, the epilogue discussing implications of the legal verdicts
and federal involvement, and the bibliographical essay all enhance a carefully con-
structed account. BH
SOBOL, RICHARD 
Seal Journey; written by Richard and Jonah Sobol; illus. with
photographs by Richard Sobol. 
Cobblehill, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-525-65126-8 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 3-5
A well-known photographer takes his eight-year-old son, Jonah, to observe a seal
colony a hundred miles north of Prince Edward Island. On the ice, they watch a
minutes-old pup, "still wet and yellow from its birth," along with fluffy whitecoats,
one of which Jonah holds briefly before reboarding the helicopter at nightfall.
JANUARY 1994 
* 
169
(Kids could have benefited from a mention that picking up baby wildlife isn't
usually a cool thing to do.) There's quite a bit of information smoothly incorpo-
rated into the descriptions, including facts about harp seals' migration and life
cycles: "The mother seals' milk is ten times richer than either cows' or humans'
milk, and a well-fed pup will grow from twenty pounds at birth to almost eighty
pounds by the time he is weaned at twelve days old." Of course, the book's raison
d'etre is Richard Sobol's color photography, which is crystal clear-and looks ap-
propriately crystal cold. The pictures are appealing enough to doubly reinforce
the book's conservation agenda: "Now protected by laws, for the first time in
hundreds of years this seal nursery is filled only with the cries of the hungry pups
and not the thuds of the hunters' clubs." Young listeners can use a real-life happy
ending now and then. BH
STEARNS, MICHAEL, ed. 
A Wizard's Dozen: Stories of the Fantastic. Yolen/Har-
court, 1993 
[192 p]
ISBN 0-15-200965-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Thirteen new short stories by some of the most original fantasy writers for young
adults comprise a wizard's dozen ("any magical number from eleven to fifteen").
Some are humorous, some are haunting, but the best are both. Alan P. Smale's
"The Breath of Princes" is about a peasant girl who does her best to liven things up
by making herself available to a marauding dragon. Patricia C. Wrede's "The
Sixty-Two Curses of Caliph Arenschadd" is a tale of a ruler who threatens his
subordinates with curses that he never learned how to remove. Dan Bennett's
"The Way of the Prophets" is about a prince who stumbles onto a road filled with
holy men and women ( "the Knights of the Sensible Shoes," "the Sisters of the
Half-Decent Meal"). Expectably, the most contemporary humor comes from Will
Shetterly in "The Princess Who Kicked Butt." Stories with mostly ordinary kids
who find magic in contemporary settings are by Charles de Lint, Tappan King,
and Sherwood Smith. A few authors sacrifice meaning for brevity in, for example,
"Efrum's Marbles" by Joy Oestreicher and "Harlyn's Fairy" by Jane Yolen. How-
ever, there is no meaning lost in the eerie "Lost Soul" by Vivian Vande Velde, in
which a simple man gives up everything for a few hours with a seductive water
sprite. Overall, this is a strong collection, with a pleasing variety of magical motifs.
KJ
SUTCLIFF, ROSEMARY, ad. 
Black Ships Before Troy: The Story of The Iliad; illus.
by Alan Lee. 
Delacorte, 1993 
128p
ISBN 0-385-31069-2 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
With an exceptional blend of modern storytelling and classical epic style, Sutcliff
has recounted the war between Greeks and Trojans, from Aphrodite's arrange-
ment for Paris to meet and run away with Helen, through the long siege, to its
bloody end. The chapters divide the complex story into readable chunks without
sacrificing detail, while Lee's generously formatted watercolor paintings show as
much respect for the strong stuff of gods and heroes as Sutcliffs narrative does.
Consequently, the episodes and images retain their haunting hold as swift action
unfolds the fate of proud Achilles, wily Odysseus, noble Hector, cowardly Paris,
maddened Ajax, brave Penthesilea. Recommend this one to junior high school
teachers coping with restless boys (it's a heavily male cast), or excerpt sections
aloud in a book talk for the Dungeons and Dragons crowd. BH
170 
* THE BULLETIN
TARR, JUDITH 
His Majesty's Elephant. Yolen/Harcourt, 1993 
193p
ISBN 0-15-200737-7 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 7-10
In this fantasy based on an historical anecdote, the emperor Charlemagne receives
two gifts from the Caliph Haroun al-Rashid-an elephant and a golden talisman.
The emperor's daughter, Rowan, knows there is something special about the el-
ephant and its keeper, a prickly Breton boy named Kerrec. When the magic of the
talisman is used by one of Charlemagne's enemies to make the emperor fall seri-
ously ill, Rowan must acknowledge the magic that lies dormant in her to save him.
However, Rowan's magic isn't enough-she needs to join forces with Kerrec and
the elephant to form a powerful threesome. Rowan doesn't want to face her magic
because then she'll be labeled a witch, as her mother was. It turns out that despite
Rowan's Christian-based fear of magic, no one condemns her for using it, not even
her aunt, the abbess. This drains the plot of tension, and since Rowan turns away
from her innate power so much, it's anticlimactic when she finally uses it. The
innovative development of Charlemagne and his elephant as characters does not
cancel out the predictable outcome-Rowan and her partners in magic succeed in
saving the emperor, and Rowan hesitantly admits her affection for Kerrec. Al-
though an evil sorcerer's use of Rowan's sister as a pawn in his strategy is truly
sinister and suspenseful, this is a thin plot spread over a long story. KJ
WHELAN, GLORIA 
Night of the Full Moon; illus. by Leslie Bowman. 
Knopf,
1993 
63p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-94464-8 
$13.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-84464-3 
$13.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Libby is excited at the prospect of visiting the village of her Potawatomi friend
Fawn, so she's disappointed when her father, busy with the impending birth of the
new baby, can't take her as promised. After telling her parents she's going out
berry-picking, she secretly goes to the village, where, dressed in one of Fawn's
outfits, she is mistaken for an Indian and forced by the U. S. Army to leave the
village with the others to be "resettled" far away, across the Mississippi. Set in
southern Michigan in the 1840s, this historical novel is easy to read and dramati-
cally swift, as Libby tries to find a way to get back home to Saginaw before the
Indians are taken too far. The treatment of Potawatomi culture is respectful with-
out being anachronistic, and while the action at times stretches credulity, readers
of the American Girls series and such will find pleasure in the details of pioneer
and Indian life, the friendship between Libby and Fawn, and the exciting plot.
Pencil illustrations are softly well drawn, and the cover painting of the two girls in
the moonlit woods will attract genre fans. RS
WILLARD, NANCY 
The Sorcerer'sApprentice; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. 
Blue
Sky/Scholastic, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-590-47329-8 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
The team that produced Pish, Posh Hieronymus Bosch (BCCB 12/91) has set loose
a mad menagerie of machinery, with Sylvia the sorcerer's apprentice overdoing her
master's magic potion to help her with a sewing job ("Your first task is to make
new clothes/ for all the creatures in my care-/ New caps, new capes, new vests
and hose"). When the machinery starts multiplying, the magician awakes and
breaks the spell; we leave ambitious, red-haired Sylvia on Mount Dragon's Eyes,
learning magic at a more sedate pace. An assortment of strange but amiable crea-
JANUARY 1994 
* 
171
tures surrounds her, "while Sylvia teaches them to say/ the spell she worked out
yesterday/ for turning pencils into pails, and failures into fairy tales." The carefully
controlled verse is vintage Willard, and the carefully controlled art is vintage Dillons.
Both are more smoothly crafted than spontaneous, but the story itself has a certain
intrinsic chaos that overflows the book's gold-bordered formality, asserting a ten-
sion that will assure kids' response to the inventive details of rhyme and illustra-
tion. A note attests to the tale's long history. BH
WOLFSON, EVELYN 
From the Earth to Beyond the Sky: Native American Medicine;
illus. by Jennifer Hewitson. 
Houghton, 1993 
96 p
ISBN 0-395-55009-2 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 5-9
An intriguing subject and a handsome format reach out to readers who may never-
theless be puzzled by several aspects of the treatment. This is a book that cries out
for footnotes to statements such as the second sentence, which claims that Native
Americans "were almost disease-free before the arrival of European missionaries,
explorers, trappers, and settlers .... " How do we know this, and where can we
substantiate it? Organic cures are frequently outlined without comment: "When
snakeroot plants were not available to cure snakebites, Native Americans cut up
the offending snake and placed its flesh over the wound." Which Native Ameri-
cans? Does it work? Should teenagers try it? Have scientists tried it? The fact that
Native Americans used many effective remedies and understood the holistic na-
ture of illness, treating emotional as well as physical manifestations, is a strong
premise that is frequently well substantiated here. But distinctions between past
and present procedures (tenses switch unexpectedly), the relative validity of those
procedures, and even the nature of the procedures themselves are often vague:
"The head of the society took the quartz crystal from the table and looked into the
patient's body to see what made him ill. ... Some members massaged the patient
to get the illness out; others whipped the disease with an eagle feather; still others
sucked it out with a special sucking device." This description raises more ques-
tions that it answers, while another assertion begs many questions: "If no cure
resulted from the chant, the patient understood that it was because some part of
the ritual had been omitted or the chant had been repeated incorrectly by the
Singer." Statements can be sloppily generalized ("Raspberry bushes are easy to
find because their stems have prickles"-but so do many other kinds of berries and
bushes), while occasional passages are compromised simply by confusing gram-
mar: "Native Americans preferred to be partially exposed rather than fully clothed,
inviting the possibility of parasites and disease." From the look of the bibliogra-
phy and the comprehensive scope of the information, Wolfson has done a lot of
research here, but she has not clearly evaluated her findings. Glossary and index
appended. BH
WORMSER, RICHARD L. 
Three Faces of Vietnam. Watts, 1993 
157p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-531-11142-3 
$13.90 
R Gr. 7-12
Wormser's "Three Faces" view the war from three perspectives: the Vietnamese,
the American servicemen and women, and the protesters back home. It's an effec-
tive organization of the material, proceeding chronologically from the 1950s and
France's occupation of Indochina to the end of the war in 1975. The chapters on
the Vietnamese are the most interesting, primarily because they follow the experi-
172 
* THE BULLETIN
ences of a young Viet Cong sympathizer, Le Ly, as she becomes committed to the
revolutionary cause, even after she is accused by her comrades of being a spy and is
forced to leave her village. Chapters on the soldiers and protesters also contain
much personal, anecdotal information, but it's spread over a larger cast and is
consequently less involving. Still, the tone of the book never becomes dry, and
facts about the conflict are always focused or exemplified through the often ter-
rible personal experiences of individuals, making this a strong complement to more
straightforward chronologies. Black-and-white photos, maps, source notes, read-
ing list, and an index are all included. RS
ZEMAN, LUDMILA, ad. 
The Revenge of Ishtar; ad. and illus. by Ludmila
Zeman. 
Tundra, 1993 
24 p
ISBN 0-88776-315-4 
$19.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
As she did in her first picture book adaptation of this epic cycle, Gilgamesh the King
(BCCB 1/93), Zeman compresses an elaborate story into compact episodes, here
the conquest by Gilgamesh and Enkidu of monsters threatening their magnificent
city of Uruk. These episodes center on human vulnerability, for the beloved singer
Shamhat dies during the monster's attack, and Enkidu dies as a result of the god-
dess Ishtar's anger over Gilgamesh' rejection of her marriage proposal. Thus at the
book's end, Gilgamesh sets out for what must be his final conquest (and a sequel to
this volume) over the worst monster in the world, death. The text is kept simple at
both narrative and visual levels, running several lines to every long horizontal page,
above which fiery double spread illustrations portray the battle scenes. These se-
quences find sudden relief in depictions such as the blue-tiled background for
Ishtar's plotting secret revenge after her flying Bull of Heaven has been defeated.
Zeman bases her graphic details on archaeological research and borders the art in
skillfully rendered traditional Babylonian designs; she has also progressed beyond
the slight cuteness of facial expression that sometimes appeared in her first book.
This has a less uncommon story, but it's overall a powerful production that will
prove good company for picture book presentations of Greco-Roman epics-such
as Warwick Hutton's The Trojan Horse (BCCB 4/92)--or the d'Aulaires' collec-
tions of mythology. BH
JANUARY 1994 
* 
173
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1993 
_
A list of bestsellers is easy to compile: count the sales and go figure. The Bulletin
Blue Ribbons list is a little harder to come by. Only the staffs inherent civility
restricts our warfare to codes of chivalry as we read, argue, reread, defend, attack,
and finally agree on a selection of children's books that goes beyond the standard
criteria for excellence exemplified by many of the approximately six thousand
children's books published this year. What characterizes a book for this list are
special qualities of innovation, energy, or craft-the extra element it takes to im-
print a book on three reviewers who have seen too many books in too short a time.
Inherent in the process of selection is our knowledge that three other reviewers
would make different choices. Ideally, every reader makes his or her own list.
Here are some possibilities for yours.
PICTURE BOOKS:
Emberley, Michael. Welcome Back Sun; written and illus. by Michael Emberley.
Little. (October)
Farber, Norma. When It Snowed That Night; illus. by Petra Mathers. Geringer/
HarperCollins. (November)
Goble, Paul, ad. The Lost Children: The Boys Who Were Neglected; ad. and illus. by
Paul Goble. Bradbury. (June)
Johnson, Paul Brett. The Cow Who Wouldn't Come Down; written and illus. by
Paul Brett Johnson. Jackson/Orchard. (July/August)
McDermott, Gerald. Raven: A Trickster Tale from the Pacific Northwest; written
and illus. by Gerald McDermott. Harcourt. (June)
Pomerantz, Charlotte. The Outside Dog; illus. by Jennifer Plecas. HarperCollins.
(October)
Say, Allen. Grandfather's Journey; written and illus. by Allen Say. 
Houghton.
(September)
Sis, Peter. Komodo!; written and illus. by Peter Sis. Greenwillow. (June)
Stevens, Janet, ad. Coyote Steals the Blanket: A Ute Tale; ad. and illus. by Janet
Stevens. Holiday House. (May)
Trivizas, Eugene. The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig; illus. by Helen
Oxenbury. McElderry. (September)
Wolff, Ashley. Stella r Roy; written and illus. by Ashley Wolff. Dutton. (July)
174 
* THE BULLETIN
FICTION:
Alcock, Vivien. Singer to the Sea God. Delacorte. (February)
Anderson, Rachel Paper Faces. Holt. (November)
Hahn, Mary Downing. The Wind Blows Backward. Clarion. (May)
Hodge, Merle. For the Life ofLaetitia. Farrar. (March)
Johnson, Angela. Toning the Sweep. Jackson/Orchard. (June)
Kindl, Patrice. Owl in Love. Houghton. (October)
Mori, Kyoko. Shizuko's Daughter. Holt. (May)
Napoli, Donna Jo. The Magic Circle. Dutton. (April)
Qualey, Marsha. Revolutions ofthe Heart. Houghton. (May)
Sachar, Louis. Marvin Redpost: Why Pick on Me?; illus. by Neal Hughes. Random
House. (February)
Walker, Kate. Peter. Houghton. (June)
Walsh, Jill Paton. Matthew and the Sea Singer; illus. by Alan Marks. Farrar. (May)
Williams, Vera B. Scooter; written and illus. by Vera B. Williams. Greenwillow.
(October)
Wolff, Virginia Euwer. Make Lemonade. Holt. (July)
NONFICTION:
Appelbaum, Diana. Giants in the Land; illus. by Michael McCurdy. Houghton.
(September)
Booth, David. Doctor Knickerbocker and Other Rhymes; illus. by Maryann Kovalski.
Ticknor. (September)
Brandenburg, Jim To the Top ofthe World: Adventures with Arctic Wolves; written
and illus. with photographs by Jim Brandenburg. Walker. (November)
Carrick, Carol. Whaling Days; illus. by David Frampton. Clarion. (July)
Cohn, Amy L., comp. From Sea to Shining Sea: A Treasury ofAmerican Folklore
and Folk Songs. Scholastic. (January 1994)
Freedman, Russell. Eleanor Roosevelt: A Life of Discovery. Clarion. (October)
Gardner, Jane Mylum. Henry Moore: From Bones and Stones to Sketches and Sculp-
tures. Four Winds. (April)
Hamilton, Virginia. Many Thousand Gone: African Americans from Slavery to
Freedom; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. Knopf. (March)
Kuklin, Susan. Speaking Out: Teenagers Take on Race, Sex, and Identity; written
and illus. with photographs by Susan Kuklin. Putnam. (October)
Marrin, Albert. Cowboys, Indians, and Gunfighters: The Story of the Cattle King-
dom. Atheneum. (September)
San Souci, Robert D., ad. Cut From the Same Cloth: American Women ofMyth,
Legend, and Tall Tale; illus. by Brian Pinkney. Philomel. (June)
Turner, Ann. Grass Songs; illus. by Barry Moser. Harcourt. (June)
Van der Rol, Ruud Anne Frank: Beyond the Diary; written by Ruud van der Rol
and Rian Verhoeven. Viking. (November)
Wallace, Karen. Think ofan Eel; illus. by Mike Bostock. Candlewick. (May)
Westray, Kathleen. 
A Color Sampler; written and illus. by Kathleen
Westray. Ticknor. (September)
JANUARY 1994 
* 
175
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African Americans-fiction: Barnes;
McCafferty; Meyer
African Americans-poetry:
Feelings
Alaska: Kramer
Animals: Brooks
Anorexia-fiction: Atlan
Architecture: Boulton
Arctic regions: Sobol
Art and artists-fiction: Brooke;
Llorente
Art: Littlechild; Mdihlberger;
Scott; Seibold
Ballet-fiction: Kirkland
Ballooning: Haseley
BIOGRAPHIES: Boulton; Siegel
Buddhism: Raimondo
Camping-fiction: Bauer
Careers-stories: Kalman
China-fiction: Brooke
Civil rights-fiction: Meyer
Civil rights: Siegel
Clothing and dress: Greenlaw
Comics: Scott
Cousins-fiction: Paulsen
Cowboys-fiction: McCafferty
Death-fiction: Coman
Disabilities-fiction: Philbrick
Disasters: Donnelly
Dogsled racing: Kramer
Dogs-stories: Seibold
Dolls-fiction: Griffith
Dragons-fiction: Fletcher
Ecology: Durell; Guiberson;
Lauber
Elephants-fiction: Tarr
Emotional problems-fiction:
Atlan; Coman
Everyday life-fiction: Honeycutt
FAIRYTALES AND FOLK-
TALES: Cohn; Garner; San
Souci
Families-fiction: Barnes
FANTASY: Brooke; Fletcher;
Griffith; Hoffman; Jacques;
Lisle; Stearns; Tarr
Farm life-fiction: Paulsen
Farm life-stories: Rupert; Shan-
non
Fathers and sons-stories: Shannon
France: Haseley
France-fiction: Atlan
Friends-fiction: Philbrick
Friends-stories: Dorros
FUNNY STORIES: Paulsen
GHOST STORIES: Bauer
Grandfathers-stories: Oberman
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Barnes; Duffy; Llorente; Meyer;
Whelan
History: Fradon; Platt
History, ancient: Sutcliff
History, U.S.: Duffy; Greenlaw;
McCafferty; Meyer; Murphy;
Siegel; Whelan; Wormser
Holidays: Coil
Holocaust: Greenfeld
Holocaust-fiction: Atlan
Horses-fiction: Kirkland
Immigration: Murphy
Ireland-folklore: Hodges
Japan-folklore: San Souci
Jews-stories: Oberman
Latinos-stories: Dorros
Literature, children's: Mark;
Stevenson
176 
* THE BULLETIN
Mardi Gras: Coil
Middle Ages: Fradon
Migrant workers-stories: Dorros
Monsters-stories: Zeman
Mythology: Sutcliff; Zeman
Native Americans: King;
Littlechild; Roessel; Wolfson
Native Americans-fiction: Whelan
Nature study: Brooks; Durell;
Farentinos; Guiberson; Lauber;
Sobol; Wolfson
Pioneer life: Whelan
POETRY: Angelou; Willard
Rabbits-stories: Denim
Railroads: Murphy
Reading aloud: Cohn; Mark;
Sutcliff; Willard
Reading, beginning: Random
Reading, easy: Donnelly;
Hoffman; Honeycutt; Kramer;
Whelan
Reading, family: Cohn; Durell;
Feelings; Random
Reading, reluctant: Donnelly;
Kramer; MacDonald; Paulsen;
Scott
Religious education: Oberman
Russia: Kendall
Safety education: Donnelly
Saints-stories: Hodges
Scarecrows-stories: Rupert
SCARY STORIES: MacDonald
Seals: Sobol
Ships: Platt
SHORT STORIES: MacDonald;
Mark; Stearns
Sisters-fiction: Bauer
Social studies: Dorros; Kendall;
Leventhal; Raimondo
South Africa-stories: Rupert
Story hour: Cohn; Denim;
Dorros; Garner; Hodges;
Kalman; Lauber; Leventhal; San
Souci; Seibold; Shannon;
Zeman
Suffrage-fiction: Duffy
Tibet: Raimondo
Transportation: Haseley
Trees: Lauber
Uncles-fiction: Coman
United States-folklore: Cohn
Vietnam War: Wormser
War: Haseley; Platt
War-fiction: Lisle
West, The: Greenlaw
Witches-fiction: Tarr
Women's studies: Duffy
World War II: Greenfeld
A 
g g' 
*. 
'S 
i*S 
* S
' School Library Journal star
"Block boldly takes on a new and radically different setting.
Angel Juan, the boyfriend of Weetzie Bat's almost-daughter
Witch Baby, moves to New York to make his own music. Witch
Baby, shattered by loneliness and loss, flies off to Manhattan in
search of him and quickly discovers that 'New York is not a
Weetzie-city.'... Like Block's earlier novels, Missing Angel Juan is
an engagingly eccentric mix of fantasy and reality, enhanced-
this time-by mystery and suspense. It is also magical, moving,
mischievous, and-literally-marvelous."-SLJ
Ages 12 up. $14.00 TR (0-06-023004-5); $13.89 LB (0-06-023007-X)
Also by Francesca Lia Block
WEETZIE BAT 
CHEROKEE BAT
1989 ALA Best Book for Young Adults 
AND THE GOAT GUYS
1990 AIA Recommended Books 
1993 Best Books for Young Adults (ALA)
for Reluctant YA Readers 
1993 ALA Recommended Books
Ages 12 up. $12.95 TR (0-06-020534-2) 
for Reluctant YA Readers
$12.89 LB (0-06-020536-9) 
Ages 12 up. $14.00 TR (0-06-020269-6)
Harper Keypoint paper ed. $3.95 (0-06-447068-7) 
$13.89 LB (0-06-020270-X)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book 
Harper Keypoint paper ed. $3.95 (0-06-447095-4)
WITCH BABY 
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
1991 SchoolLibray Joumal Best Books
1992 ALA Recommended Books
for Reluctant YA Readers
Ages 12 up. $14.00 TR (0-06-020547-4)
$13.89 LB (0-06-020548-2)
Harper Keypoint paper ed. $3.95 (0-06-447065-2) 
I HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
A Charlotte Zolotow Book 
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
Kirkus Reviews pointer *
0 HarperCollnsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
"The Wainscott Weasel
continues the cozy tradition of
E. B.White's animal tales."
-The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
* "This well-realized fantasy has
everything a reader could want: ad-
venture, humor, and style... Seidler's
text is enhanced by Marcellino's
beautifully renred color and black &
white illustrations." -Star 
A Booklist
* 'A dry wit ir
izations, which
same time res
natures. Marce
extends the bek
exceptionally e:
* "Seidler's a
fully amusing
Marcellino's s
delicate modi
characterizati
with the enga
qmmwwoý
I
By the 1990 C
scott Medalist
10C
Adapted and illustrated in full color by
ED YOUNQ
"This pourquoi story explains how people came to be,
why the moon waxes and wanes, and why newborn babies cry.
A moving story, simply told... the illustrations are subtle, rich,
highly evocative...."-School Library Journal
"A lovely creation tale... retold with admirable grace and
simplicity. Young's art is vibrant with sumptuous color...the
elemental, cloudlike forms truly bespeak a universal beginning."
.w n__ 
-- (pointer review) Kirkus Reviews
M 
A
SmVIII 
;Tnlll 
QIY
0 
_
*'A delectably amusing look
aT a True
first love"*
S"Henkes's droll,
gentle picture book
is about a toddler's
fierce attachment to his
security blanket...Ther
no condescension or sentimentality... Henkes's story takes
hysical immediacy of a small
S -ALA Booklist (starred review)
'Henkes's...mice [are] depicted
with wonderfully warm humor
and subtlety; their gentle
negotiations and perfectly tuned
dialogue are entirely human."
-*Kirkus Reviews (pointer)
S 
"A great addition to Kevin
tnkes's many endearing characters."
WCI
KEVIN HENKI
Ages 3 up. 24 pp.
TR $14.00/0-688-11449-0; LE $13.93/0-688-1
Greenwillow Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 100
-I he Horn Book
--
M
I
*"lnnovative"'
*"Totally authentic"*
"Upbeat... delightfully engaging, and
beautifully craed."
-K-rus Reviews t (pointer)
"Elana Rose Rosen has just moved to an
apartment in the city, and, on her scooter,
she is excitedly exploring everything she
an.... Rlled with the everyday details of
l urban family life."--ALA Bookllst
"Williams peppers the pages with Ink
drawings that have an...authentic
childlike zest... .The book is vigorous,
i nnocent but not naive, and Immensely
" refreshing."--The Bulletin' (starred review)
Ag 8 up. 160 pp.
TR $15.00/0-68809376O
SLE $14.93/0-6809377-9
!Greenwillow 
Books
A d<fi 
e oon 
t Ame 
Moi. &N 
Co.. Inc.
1350 Aue of th AirratuC New Ibk. NY 10019
AVAILABl FROM
THE UNIVERSTY OF ILLIUNS PRESS * JOURNALS DEPARTMENT
54 BAST GREGORY DRIVE 
CHAMPAIGN, IL 61820
217/333-8935
$18.50
VIA AND MAgRCA 
R 
ACCME
University of llinois Press 
SECOND CUS
54 East Gregory Drive 
PoSTAGe
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHMPAIGN, IL
REURN POSTAGE GARANEED
MULTICULTURAL CHILDREN'S LITERATURE
IN THE UNITED STATES
Edited by Karen Patricia Smith
in LRRY• 
TR7nS (41:3) WiaER 1993
FOCUSIN 
SPECIFICALLY ON MULTICULTURALISM AS IT RELATES TO
LITERATURE FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG ADULTS THIS ISSUE ADDRESSES:
SMULTICULTURAL ETHIC AND CONNECTIONS TO
LITERATURE FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG ADULTS
* 
FRAMIN 
AND REPRAMINO IMAGES AND REALTIES
4 
LEARNERS, LITERARY OPPORTUNTrY, AND ACCESS
4 
SIGNIFICANT AND GROUND-BREAKING ACHIEVEMENTS FROM
ALTERNATIVE PRESSES
